NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A TALE OF POLITICALLY-FAILING SINGLE-CURRENCY AREA
Assaf Razin
Steven Rosefielde
Working Paper 18352
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18352

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Assaf Razin and Steven Rosefielde. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

A Tale of Politically-Failing Single-Currency Area
Assaf Razin and Steven Rosefielde
NBER Working Paper No. 18352
September 2012
JEL No. E00,F10,N0
ABSTRACT
The global financial crisis which erupted in the United States instantaneously swept across Europe.
Like the United States, the European Monetary Union (EMU) was ripe for a crash. It had its own real
estate bubble, specifically in Ireland and Spain, indulged in excessive deficit spending, financially
deregulated, and rapidly expanded credit Policy responses and recovery patterns for key EU members
like Germany and France, within the Eurozone, were similar. However, after the bubble burst and
the crisis began unfolding it became clear that the Eurozone plight differed from America's in one
fundamental respect. There was no exact counterpart of Eurozone GIIPS (Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal,
and Spain) in the United States. Some American states had over-borrowed, but the sovereign debt
crisis didn't place individual states at deflationary risk, or threaten the viability of the federal union.
Not so for some members within the Eurozone. Politicians on both sides of the Atlantic can be uncooperative,
but inter-state disputes are more easily finessed under the American federal system than the Eurozone
politically weakly integrated system. The disparity is traced to the EU's and Eurozone's special form
of governance called "supra-nationality" (a partially sovereign transnational organization) that has
been largely ignored in economic treatises about the costs and benefits of monetary unions. The EZ
members have put themselves in a monetary cage, akin to the gold standard, in which member states
have surrendered control over their monetary and foreign exchange rate policies to the German dominated
European Central Bank (ECB), without supplementary central fiscal, private banking and political
union institutions.

Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and Cornell University
and also NBER
ar256@cornell.edu
Steven Rosefielde
Department of Economics CB 3305
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
stevenr@email.unc.edu

A TALE OF A POLITICALLY-FAILING SINGLE-CURRENCY AREA1
ASSAF RAZIN* AND STEVEN ROSEFIELDE**

1. INTRODUCTION
The global financial crisis which erupted in the United States instantaneously swept across
Europe. Like the United States, the European Monetary Union (EMU) was ripe for a crash.
It had its own real estate bubble, specifically in Ireland and Spain, indulged in excessive
deficit spending, financially deregulated, and rapidly expanded credit (partly through
derivatives).2 Policy responses and recovery patterns for key EU members like Germany,
France (within the Eurozone) and the United Kingdom (outside the Eurozone) were similar.
However, after the bubble burst and the crisis began unfolding it became clear that the
Eurozone plight differed from America's in one fundamental respect. There was no exact
counterpart of Eurozone PIIGS (Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece and Spain) in the United
States. Some American states had over-borrowed, but the sovereign debt crisis didn't place
individual states at deflationary risk, or threaten the viability of the federal union. Not so for
some members within the Eurozone. During the US savings and loans crisis in the 1980s,
the American south-western states received a transfer from the rest of the US states equal to
almost 20 percent of their gross domestic products. But, such a transfer has not been
politically feasible within members of the EMU. The American experience therefore
demonstrates that Europe’s problem is not a pure economically failing single currency area;
the failure is political in an institutional sense. Politicians on both sides of the Atlantic can
be uncooperative, but inter-state disputes are more easily finessed under the American
federal system than the Eurozone politically weakly integrated system.
The disparity is easily traced to the EU's and Eurozone's special form of governance
called "supra-nationality" (a partially sovereign transnational organization) that has been
largely ignored in economic treatises about the costs and benefits of customs unions,
economic communities, and monetary unions. 3 Until now, it has been tacitly assumed either
that supranational governance was as good, or better, than national economic mechanisms;
that any policy regime accessible to nation states could be replicated without dysfunction
by supranational communities.

1

This paper offers a political economy perspective of the situations in the EU and the
EMU. We point out to a failure to be able to take action, not a policy that it is a failure per
se. We therefore refrain from any policy recommendation, or policy judgments.
*

Tel Aviv and Cornell University; Email: razin@post.tau.ac.il.
University of North Carolina. Department of Economics; Email: stevenr@email.unc.edu.
2
European Financial Stability and Integration Report 2010, European Commission, Economic Staff
Working Paper, Brussels, April 11, 2011.
3
Wolfram Kaiser and Peter Starie, eds., Transnational European Union: Towards a Common Political
Space, London: Routledge, 2009.
**

126

2. HISTORICAL TRENDS
Nation states before World War II never voluntarily surrendered their control over fiscal
and monetary policy as part of a package to achieve political goals, even though they
participated in international institutions like the League of Nations. The horrors of WWII,
combined with cold war politics and the welfare state tide, however, propelled Europe
along a novel supranational trajectory with some unintended consequences. On September
19, 1946 Winston Churchill gave a speech in Zurich not only advocating Franco-German
rapproachement, but a kind of United States of Europe, called a European "Third Way." He
also advocated a "Council of Europe". formed thereafter with the assistance of French
Foreign Minister Robert Schuman, mandated to create supranational communities on the
path to a fully democratic, integrated Union. 4 The Schuman Declaration May 9, 1950
reaffirmed the concept in conjunction with the formation of the European Coal and Steel
Community (ESCS). It proclaimed the European Community as the world's first
supranational institution, marking the "birth of modern Europe," and initiating an epoch
where intra-European wars were impossible. The Soviet Bloc formed a rival economic
community, the CMEA (Council for Mutual Economic Cooperation) in 1949, but
Comecon, as it is sometimes called , was more a body for policy exchange, like the OECD
(Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development), rather than a supranational
economic governance mechanism superior to national authorities. 5
Schuman's utopian vision which can be traced back to France's first socialist Claude
Henri de Rouvroy, the Comte de Saint-Simon (1760-1825) [On the Reorganization of
European Industry, 1814] was the prelude to a succession of developments culminating in
today's European Union including the European Economic Community (EEC), known as
the Common Market (1958), the European Community (1967) [together with the European
Commission and the European Council of Ministers], the European Council (1974), the
European Monetary System(1979), the European Parliament (1979), the Schengen
Agreement (1985), The Single Market Act (1986), the Maastricht Treaty (1993) founding
the European Union(EU), and the European Monetary Union (2002), which inaugurated the
euro.
Europeans are broadly pleased with European integration. There has been no intramember war, a common European identity has emerged, members are democratic and
socially progressive, there is free travel, labor and capital mobility within the EU space, the
economy has been liberalized, and living standards have risen. However, EU economic
performance has hardly matched Schuman's idealist claims for supranational
communitarianism. Growth has been anemic, unemployment high, and moral hazard
problems severe. Supranational governors have found it easier to agree on broad principles,
than to implement them and exercise fiscal discipline. Schuman felt sure that
communitarians would be considerate, fair, self-restrained, and altruistic or could be tutored
4
The term supranational community was coined by Jean Monnett, head of France's General Planning
Commission.
5
The members of CMEA were the Soviet Union, Poland, East Germany, Hungary, Czechoslovakia,
Romania, Bulgaria, Cuba, Vietnam and Mongolia.

127

to act responsibly, but this proved to be the triumph of hope over experience. On one hand,
the supranational deck was stacked in favor of over borrowing by the PIIGS and east
Europeans. On the other hand, the PIIGS were misled into prematurely surrendering control
over their monetary and exchange rate policy without receiving fiscal quid pro quos. As a
consequence, the EU finds itself in an idealistically incorrect position, where the gap
between rich and poor members is widening, at a time when supranational institutional
arrangements are forcing the PIIGS to extricate themselves from their predicament with
painful and problematic deflationary tactics necessary to regain their competitive strength;
the so-called internal devaluation.
The contradictory social democratic mandate to bring ever more relatively poor
countries into the fold, boosting their creditworthiness with implicit guarantees, pressuring
them to adopt the euro, and straitjacketing their fiscal options, while undermining fiscal
discipline with sympathetic approval of entitlements and leveling has solutions within a
nation state framework (a true United States of Europe) that could be simulated by a
supranational organization. However, this is extraodinarily difficult to accomplish because
Schuman's communitarian optimism was misplaced. The EU has yet to find a supranational
architecture that reconciles his idealism with workable macroeconomic regulation. 6 It is in
this sense that the 2008 financial crisis's aftermath is more a culturally conditioned
supranational institutional dilemma than a relatively simple matter of conventional
international macroeconomic policy, and as such an overlooked element in the half century
long debate on optimal economic and monetary unions and communities. If the EMU does
eventually go the way of the CMEA, it won't be because economists failed to grasp the
theory of unions and communities, but rather mainly because they didn't endogenize EMU
supranational theory in institutional practice.
The power of this re-conceptualization is best appreciated by contrasting received
wisdom on optimal currency union theory as it pertains to the EMU with the behavior
implied by Schuman's supranational utopian vision.

3. THE EXPERIENCE UNDER A MONETARY UNION
The road to the European monetary unification, the centerpiece of a full European
Economic Community and Union, went through the European Monetary System (EMS)
1979-1998, where eight member countries tried to dampen fluctuations in their foreign
exchange rate parities.7 They effectively pegged their currencies to the Deutsche Mark in an
6
The supranational entitlement and moral hazard problem mirrors domestic disorders often said to cause
Eurosschlerosis, but is potentially more pernicious because governments can borrow more than individuals.
7
Daniel Gros and Niels Thygesen, European Monetary Integration, London: Longman, 1999. After the
demise of the Bretton Woods system in 1971, most EEC members agreed to maintain stable foreign
exchange rate parities. Fluctuations were restrict to no more than 2.25 percent (the European "currency
snake"). The system was replace by the European Monetary System(EMS), and the European Currency
Unit(ECU) was defined. It fixed parities, set an exchange rate mechanism(ERM), extended European credit
facilities, and created a European Monetary Cooperation Fund that allocatd ECU to member centralbanks in
exchange for gold and US dollar deposits. The German Deutsche Mark wass the defacto anchor because of

128

effort to curb inflation and advance towards European Monetary integration. The
experiment failed. In 1992 important members of the EMS chose exit paths. Nonetheless,
eleven members of the European Union upped the ante by choosing a solution that required
more, rather than less cooperation. On Jaunuary 1, 1999 they created a common currency
area (European Monetary Union: EMU) that effectively imposed a fixed exchange rate
among all member countries. Participants surrendered their authority over national
monetary policy and vested it in the supranational hands of the European Central Bank
(ECB), forcing members to rely exclusively on fiscal and regulatory policy to manage
macroeconomic disequilibria. The decision was an act of blind faith because many
members failed to honor their Maastricht pledges to contain inflation and deficit spending
prior to monetary union. Aspirants seeking EMU accession were supposed to hold inflation
to no more than 1.5 percent per annum; to maintain a stable exchange rate with the ERM
without devaluation, to run public sector deficits less than 3 percent of GDP, with a public
debt under 60 percent of GDP. Many established members and aspirants alike flunked the
tests after they joined the EMU, setting a pernicious precedent for future PIIGS.
Was this wise? Few pondered the precedent, focusing instead on first principles, but
here too there were grounds for caution. The theory of optimal currency areas clearly
implied that monetary union was not a one-way-street. Its merit depended on various
tradeoffs. Milton Friedman observed that nations can deal more deftly with disorders if they
have their own currency, allowing them to vary prices and wages, but this requires them to
accept high costs of doing business across national boundaries. Consequently, monetary
unions are attractive where the volume of intra-regional trade and labor mobility is high,
and unattractive otherwise. The supranational fiscal regime likewise is a matter of concern.
If it is strong, and tasked to assist members confronted with deficient aggregate effective
demand, the risk members incur in surrendering the monetary option is partly compensated
by pledges of supranational fiscal aid. If it is weak, nations place all their eggs in the
supranational monetary basket, with no recourse other than accepting painful deflationary
adjustments in order to regain competitiveness.
The United States provides a good example of an optimal currency area. It has a high
volume of intra-national trade (Mckinnon). American labor is mobile (Mundell), and
Washington has the muscle to effectively use fiscal power in alleviating distress in
vulnerable states (Kenen). Also, the Federal Reserve has the authority to act as a "lender of
last resort" if Washington's fiscal policy is insufficient (De Grauwe).8

its relative strength and the country's low-inflation policies. In the early 1990s the EMS was strained by
conflicting macroeconomic policies in Germany and England. Britain and Italy withdrew in 1992.
Speculative attacks on the French Franc led to widening the band to 15 percent August 1993.
8
See: Robert A. Mundell, "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," Am. Econ. Reu., Sept. 1961, 51, 65764. ;Ronald I. McKinnon, "Optimum Currency Areas", The American Economic Review, Vol. 53, No. 4
(Sep., 1963), pp. 717-725; Kenen, Peter B. (1967), “Toward a Supranational Monetary System,” in G.
Pontecorvo, R.P. Shay, and A.G. Hart, eds., Issues in Banking and Monetary Analysis, New York: Holt,
Reinhart, and Winston; and Paul De Grauwe, The Greek crisis and the future of the Eurozone The structural
problem in the Eurozone is created by the fact that the monetary union is not embedded in a political union.
Eurointelligence 11.03.2010. See also Paul De Grauwe, Economics of Monetary Union, New York: Oxford
University Press, 2000.

129

The EMU by contrast is a dubious candidate for an optimal currency area because
although it too trades intensively within the region, national work restrictions greatly impair
intra-European labor mobility, and supranational fiscal power is feeble because rich
members don't want to assume heavy financing burdens during turbulent times. The
obverse also is true. Countries like Sweden and Norway which shunned the euro are
thriving and appear to have benefited by retaining their monetary option.9
Robert Mundell and Marcus Fleming have succinctly formulated the problem
bedeviling optimal currency unions,10 particularly supranational ones in the form of a twonot-three trilemma.11 Countries seeking to form a monetary union can enjoy two, but only
two desirable policy goals: 1) free international capital flows (connected with optimal fiscal
policy), 2) potent monetary policy to stabilize output, employment, inflation and financial
markets, and 3) exchange rate stability. The United States picked free capital mobility and
monetary independence, letting their foreign exchange rate float. China decided to retain its
monetary independence and control its exchange rate, abandoning free capital flows, while
the European Union has selected a third way. It mimicked the United States at the
supranational level, accepting floating exchange rates for the euro, but at the national level
failed to complement the choice with a supportive fiscal regime for distressed economies
and friction free labor mobility, leaving vulnerable nations like the GIIPS in a lurch. When
9

The same argument holds for North America. Canada's economy has performed well without forging a
monetary union with the United States.
10
Robert Mundell, "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange
Rates," Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science, Vol.29, No. 4, 1963, pp.475-85. Marcus
Fleming, "Domestic Financial Policies Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates," IMF Staff Papers 9,
1962, pp.369-79.
11
A tri-lemma is a situation in which someone faces a choice among three options, each of which comes
with some inevitable problems, so that not all the three underlying policy objectives can be simultaneously
accomplished. In international finance, the tri-lemma stems from the fact that, in most nations, economic
policy makers would like to achieve the following goals.
First, make the country’s economy open to international capital flows, because by doing so they let
investors diversify their portfolios overseas and achieve risk sharing. They also benefit from the expertise
brought to the country by foreign investors.
Second, use monetary policy as a tool to help stabilize inflation, output, and the financial sector in the
economy. This is achieved as the central bank can increase the money supply and reduce interest rates when
the economy is depressed, and reduce money growth and raise interest rates when it is overheated.
Moreover, it can serve as a lender of last resort in case of financial panic.
Third, maintain stability in the exchange rate. This is because a volatile exchange rate, at times driven by
speculation, can be a source of broader financial volatility, and makes it harder for households and
businesses to trade in the world economy and for investors to plan for the future.
The problem, however, is that a country can only achieve adequately two of these three goals. By
attempting to maintain a fixed exchange rate and capital mobility, the central bank loses its ability to control
the interest rate or equivalently the monetary base – its policy instruments – as the interest rate becomes
anchored to the world interest rate by the interest rate parity and the monetary base is automatically
adjusted. This is the case of individual members of the EMU.
In order to keep control over the interest rate or equivalently the money supply, the central bank has to let
the exchange rate float freely, as in the case of the US.
There are two basic types of trilemma. The most common occurs where people are compelled to choose
among three undesirable options. The economic usage is different. Trilemmas here all involve favorable
options, but picking any two precluding acquiring the third.

130

times are bad, the euro appreciates as investors shift to what they perceive as a German safe
haven reducing the GIIPS export competitiveness, while idle labor in the periphery is
prevented from migrating. What works for America, doesn't for the EU because of
supranationality, the omitted variable in optimal monetary union discourse. 12 The trilemma
solution for the PIIGS are three bads: no independent monetary policy, no independent
exchange rate policy, and fiscal paralysis (due to excessive debt), while Germany and other
current account surplus members retain free capital flows, a supranational monetary policy
tailored to its needs, and an appreciating currency of its desire.
Figure 1
(The Economist, 2010) for the consequent divergencies within the EMU

4. INDIVIDUAL COUNTRIES EXPERIENCE
The PIIGS aren't entirely straitjacketed. They can extricate themselves from their plight
with a "real depreciation" or "internal devaluation," but this is little consolation because it
places an immense burden on prices, wages, and productivity growth in an adverse
financial environment.13

12

The ECB sets Eurozone wide interest rates, but if these rates are inappropriate for distressed economies
like Greece, Athens lacks an independent currency to remedy the problem. Likewise it has no national
central bank to act as "lender of last resort." THE ECB cannot act as a "lender of last resort" for Greek
banks because it does not get easy mandate from its Board to do so for political reasons, as well as the fact
that regulation of banks and deposit insurance is mostly in the hands of national authorities.
13
Not all "internal depreciations" are intolerable. The reunification of East and West Germany provides a
relatively painless example. Germany held wages down and increased productivity to alleviate
unemployment and cope with income transfers flowing to the former communist east.

131

Superior German productivity growth, moreover, makes a bad situation for the PIIGS
even worse.

Figure 2 (The Economist, 2011) reveals that PIIGS unit labor costs rose steadily 20012010, while German unit labor costs fell reciprocally. Ceteris paribus, the incentive for
Germany to outsource and invest in PIIGS diminished at the same time foreigners were
coaxed into diverting their purchases of EU exports from the PIIGS to Germany. Given the
EMU's supranational straitjacket, there doesn't appear to any compelling reason to
anticipate a swift reversal of the PIIGS's ill-fortune. A utopian welfare-state vision intended
to ameliorate transnational income inequality, thus may perversely aggravate the problem.
Needless to say, this outcome was unintended, and indeed would not have occurred if
PIIGS were virtuous Germans. They would not have assumed unmanageable debt
obligations, and EU fiscal policy, monetary and foreign exchange rate policies would have
been appropriate for them. The observed outcome can be traced to two features of the
EMU’s supra-nationalism. First, it’s architecture is rigid. A meritorious regime should
provide good solutions across a wide spectrum of initial conditions. For the moment at
least, the EMU has not devised the supplementary internal mechanisms needed to achieve
efficient outcomes for all its members. Second, EU social democratic culture fostered
values which enticed PIIGS to over extend themselves. They may well have done so on
their own volition, but this doesn't change the fact that the Schuman ethos abetted their
delinquency by encouraging them to believe in miracles and eternal free rides.
The weak link in Schuman's social democratic utopianism is a predilection for
egalitarian outcomes combined with an ambivalent attitude toward equal effort and value
added. EU leaders were pleased that the EMU enhanced the GIIPS's creditworthiness in
private investors' eyes, and welcomed outsourcing from the wealthy core to the periphery.
They were delighted that Germany, France, Britain and others shared in the windfall gains
generated by these capital flows, and GIIPS's excess sovereign borrowing. This enthusiasm
was tempered by the PIIGS's declining unit labor productivity and exorbitant social

132

spending, but not enough to outweigh the satisfaction derived from narrowing the intraunion per capita income gap. Just as each EMU member state dislikes but tolerates the
Euro-sclerosis fostered by equalizing outcomes, the European Council and parliament
refrained from engaging the PIIGS on the issue. Moreover by raising the prospect of
"haircuts" (debt forgiveness), they telegraphed the message that financial indiscipline and
extravagant social programming ultimately may prove to be winning strategies. A culture
that is ambivalent to moral hazard, is unintentionally apt to encourage it, adding to the
distress causes by the systems supranational architecture.
Speculative bubbles like the one sparked by EMU's contradictory welfare state political
goals often end in crises. Investors panic when they discover that sand castles are
crumbling, and debts may never be fully repaid even if they are restructured. This is what
has been transpiring in fits and starts since the Autumn of 2010. Ireland was the first victim.
Its toxic debt had been accumulating for a decade fueled by Irish bank borrowing in the
international wholesale market to finance a property development bubble. When real estate
crashed, private bank balance sheets melted down panicking the government into plugging
the hole with a 50 billion euro commitment, equivalent to a third of Ireland's GDP. This
dubious pledge was swiftly followed in 2008 by an equally ill-advised 100 percent
guarantee of all bank deposits and most debt. The ECB joined the party allocating a quarter
of its Eurozone lending to Irish banks by September-October 2010, all to no avail. Ireland
ultimately managed to staunch runs on its private banks by borrowing approximately 145
billion dollars (70 percent of GDP), but this raised its government debt-to-GDP ratio to
stratospheric Greek levels, effectively bankrupting the nation. The Irish government saved
its banks and their creditors by forcing the Irish people to shoulder an unbearable burden. A
10 percent drop in GDP slashed jobs, driving the unemployment rate to 14 percent.
Spain's experience followed a similar script, but its real estate bubble which began in
1985 was home grown, with the government providing incentives for owning rather than
renting, including 40 and even 50 year mortgages. Speculation accelerated after Spain
adopted the euro driven by huge capital inflows until 2008 when the global financial crisis
took the wind out of the real estate market's sails, throwing the country into deep recession.
The national budget plummeted into deficit. It was 9.2 percent in 2010, and even if pared
the debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to rise to 90 percent. On balance, Spain appears stronger
than other PIIGS because of its relatively well regulated banking industry. However,
Madrid is now in the thick of it. Further deterioration in housing prices in adverse times
could threaten mortgage dependent private bank solvency, and intensify the decline in
housing demand because under Spanish law evicted owners remain liable for their
mortgage debt. A $120bn bailout of its banks appeared to have backfired. Because the rules
of the rescue funds preclude direct equity injection into Spanish banks and rescue funds
must be funneled via loans to the Spanish government,they pile up more debt onto the
Spanish government, dragging it a step closer to a full sovereign bankruptcy. Private capital
inflows dried up completely.
Greece's version of the supranational EMU melodrama has a different plot. The
principal culprit in Hellas was unrestrained government welfare expenditures financed with
overseas borrowing. Greek governments customarily have run large public deficits to fund
government sector jobs, pensions and other social benefits since democracy was restored in

133

1974. Its debt-to-GDP ratio has exceeded 100 percent since 1993. The burden was softened
before 2001 by drachma devaluation, but this option was foreclosed in 2001 when Greece
adopted the euro. At first this didn't seem to matter because euro accession allowed Athens
to finance debt on favorable terms, an advantage leveraged by persistently falsifying
official data on the country's financial condition.14 The chickens however finally came
home to roost. On April 27, 2010, the Greek debt rating was cut to "junk" status by
Standard & Poors. The ECB has tried to help by suspending its prohibition on buying junk
collateral, but the situation continues deteriorating despite new austerity measures approved
by parliament July 2011 in part because the fear of default raises interest costs that cannot
be paid.
The best current estimates of the GIIPS's budgetary deficits and cumulative debt
forecast that Greece's debt-to-GDP ratio will reach 180 in 2014. Ireland's plight will be
nearly as dire with a debt-to-GDP ratio of 145, followed by Portugal at 135 and Spain 90.
Figure 3
(Martin Wolf, Financial Ti.mes, June 2011)

14

Greece Paid Goldman $300 Million to Help it Hide its Ballooning Debts, according to
http:www.businessinsider.com/henry-blodget, 2010-2.

134

Obviously, while Europe's sovereign debt crisis can go from bad to worse as Germany
and France permit, the longer GIIPS debt problem is left unattended, the direr the
consequences will be.
The maxim that the rich should pay at the supranational level means that the ECB,
perhaps supplemented with new institutions will grudgingly provide loans to prevent PIIGS
from defaulting on their sovereign debt. They also could provide "solidarity" grants by
analogy with foreign catastrophe aid. If these tactics prove insufficient, wealthy EMU
members like Germany and France can consent to partial "haircuts." This could be done in
diverse ways, but the details aren't matters of high principle. What matters is that creditors
will be transformed into limited liability partners sharing the cost of past transgressions so
that debtors can have a fresh start without being formally cast into permanent default.
Paul De Grauwe (Grauwe, 2011) recently called for the ECB to be even more
ambitious, serving as lender of last resort both to Eurozone member banks and those facing
sovereign debt crises, stressing how easily liquidity crises can degenerate into system-wide
insolvency. His argument is that sovereign debt in a single currency area is denominated in
"foreign" money (money that cannot be issued by the governor of the individual member
central bank), because the individual central bank cannot perform as “lender of last resort"
by printing money. Only the ECB can do it and this requires complex coordination with
other ECB governors, and governments. Therefore, he argues that it is wrong to restrict
ECB monetary policy to inflation fighting, ignoring contagion of sovereign debt crises from
one country to another as financial perils develop. Inflation fighting he insists, contrary to
Goodfriend's advice (Goodfriend, 2011), must be integrated with a war against insolvency
because the catastrophic potential of illiquidity breed insolvency dominate the moral hazard
risk.
De Grauwe doesn’t downplay the moral hazard problem, but claims reassuringly that it
can be managed by imposing rules that constrain government debt issuance. He is right in
principle, but glosses the problem of supranationality. The sovereign debt crisis besetting
the EMU today hasn't arisen because European Council encouraged GIIPS to misbehave, or
the German's are fixated on inflation fighting. It erupted because the GIIPS refused to
listen, and the rich members of the EMU refused to transfer income to the poor members.
The EMU cannot compel them to desist regardless of whether the ECB adopts a
conservative or liberal monetary regime.15
Protecting the people means placing a floor on the reduction of public spending in
deficit countries. Schuman and others may have equated the notion with full employment
and high aggregate economic activity, but idle chatter aside modern social democracies
place much less weight on providing jobs and realizing production potential than on
preserving government programs. Consequently, solving the debt crisis isn't a matter of
economically optimal debt, but politically appropriate levels of excessive sovereign
borrowing, matched by extreme difficulty of income transfers among EMU member states
taxpayers.
15

Paul De Grauwe, "The European Central Bank as a Lender of Last Resort,"August 19, 2011. Marvin
Goodfriend, "Central Baking in the Credit Turmoil: An Assessment of Federal Reserve Practice," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 2011.

135

Thus, it is highly unlikely that the European Union will confront a moment of truth in
the foreseeable future when members seriously contemplate secession. At the same time, it
is highly unlikely that the rich EMU member states will foot the bill necessary to do a
workable debt restructuring. Winners in the daily trench wars(as distinct from attaining the
competitive ideal) like Germany which enjoys current account surpluses, high national
savings, rising productivity and moderate per capita GDP growth risk losing more than they
gain from exiting the EMU, even if they have to pay for partial haircuts. Germany still
carries the baggage of distrust from the Nazi era, and is able to pursue its business and
foreign policy agenda much more effectively under EMU cover than if it tried to prize
similar concessions by other means. The French value the EMU relationship for other
reasons, but like Germany are nowhere near the threshhold of secession.
The EMU's bailout of Greece on July 21, 2011 confirms this surmise. The eurozone
countries and the International Monetary Fund(IMF) gave Greece a second bailout worth
euro 109 billion(155 billion dollars), on top of the euro 110 billion granted a year ago.
Banks and other private investors will add euro 50 billion (71 billion dollars) more to the
rescue package until 2014 by either rolling over Greek bonds that they hold, swapping them
for new ones with lower interest rates or selling the bonds back to Greece cheaply. The deal
involving private creditors may well be deemed a "selective default" by rating agencies,
making Greece the first euro country to ever be in default, but this isn't expected to have
drastic consequences given the other positive aspects of the rescue package. To dampen
adverse effects, the Eurozone will back new Greek bonds issued to banks with guarantees.
This is essential because Greek banks use Greek government debt as collateral for
emergency support from the European Central Bank. Those bonds would no longer qualify
as collateral if hit with a default rating, meaning Greek banks would lose ECB support and
quickly collapse. Bond rollovers, or swaps, were supposed to give Greece more time to
recover and cut approximately 21 percent of its future debt burden. 16 Authorities agreed to
provide the new eurozone rescue loans to Greece at a 3.5 percent interest rate, with
maturities between 15 and 30 years, plus an additional 10 year grace period. Moreover, EU
bailout overseers were given the power to intervene in countries before they are beset with
full blown crises, an institutional reform opposed by Germany.
Nonetheless, this judgment should not be construed to mean that a default, should it
occur, would be innocuous. The inflexibility of the EMU's supranational architecture raises
the specter of hyper-deleveraging. For example, if the EMU's latest rescue plan for Greece
proves inadequate and its sovereign debt goes into full default despite Eurozone guarantees,
Greek bank lending capacity will plummet placing extraordinary downward pressure on
wages, prices and aggregate effective demand because Athens doesn't control its interest
rate (equivalently, its money supply) or foreign exchange rate. Argentina's experience in
2001 under less rigid conditions suggests that EU supranationality could make GIIPS pain
and suffering a protracted ordeal.17 Therefore, it can be reasonably concluded that the
16
The new Greek bonds issued to the banks would have long maturities of up to 30 years and low interest
rates according to the Institute of Interntional Finance, the group representing private sector creditors.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy estimated that the rates would average 4.5 percent.
17
Miguel Kiguel, "Argentina and Greece: More Similarities than Differences in the Initial Conditions,"
August 16, 2011. Argentina, like Greece was confronted with a conundrum. It sought to restore access to

136

political and economic benefits of EU supra-nationality as they are currently constituted are
asymmetric. PIIGS for their part regret having to pay the piper (creditors, reduced
government spending, depression and mass unemployment), but the political and economic
benefits of EMU membership, still lopsidedly exceed costs, even in a worst case scenario
where defaults trigger a decade of suffering. They might contemplate exiting the EMU in
order to increase the number of instruments for dealing with problems largely of their own
making, but still value the EMU's benefits: enhanced creditworthiness and the possibility of
compassionate transfers when the going gets tough. Moreover, rich members seeking to rid
themselves of noisome PIIGS cannot compel them to exit the EMU by treaty, and practical
difficulties will likely dissuade PIIGS from attempting to resurrect national currencies on
their own.
The same principles apply for new entrants. Costs and benefits of EU (but not similarly
to the EMU) accession will depend on each individual case more than generic economic
considerations. It follows directly not only that talk of EMU, and or EU dissolution is
premature, but EU enlargement considered the partnership's greatest foreign policy success,
remains on track. Croatia is acceding, Montenegro and Macedonia are official candidates,
and negotiations are in process for Turkey and Iceland. Preliminary discussions have been
conducted with Russia.

5. A LOOK TOWARDS THE FUTURE
The substantive issue moving forward therefore is whether members are sufficiently
dissatisfied with muddling through that they are willing to reform or ditch supra-nationality.
Inertia favors doing nothing fundamental. Resistance to replacing member governance with
unified federal rule is likely to be insurmountable now that the bloom is off the rose, while
German and French authorities will be charier than ever of ceding ultimate control over the
purse to supranational bodies. The EMU's inflexible supranational architecture is the
patchwork result of contradictory goals and political interests, and pure institutional design.
Any changes made therefore only are apt to improve flexibility at the margin rather than
functioning as a viable surrogate for a unified state. As such reform may deter or mitigate

the international capital market(sovereign debt problem) by raising taxes and cutting public expenditures to
pay down its indebtedness . But, in doing so it risked making repayment more difficult by plunging the
economy into deep depression. Kiguel argues that Argentina's budget cutting had precisely this adverse
effect, and cautions the EU accordingly. His preferred solution is to hold the line on deficit spending insofar
as possible, and promote productivity and competition with non-deflationary tactics. Another
complementary approach that he fails to consider is steamrolling vested political interests, streamlining
government services and earmarking savings for debt repayment. The structural similiarities between
Argentina and Greece that guide Kiguel's recommendation are: 1) loss of devaluation option (currency
board and dollarization in the Argentinian case; replacement of the drachma with the euro in the Greek
case), 2) loss of access to the international capital market(excess sovereign debt), 3) and loss of monetary
options due to dollar/euro-ization. On the policy front, both Argentina and Greece tried to acquire external
assistance and ultimately failed to obtain enough. They also resorted to deflation to spur competitiveness,
but here too were unsuccessful.

137

crises in some instances, but shouldn't prevent them. Politics has been in command from the
beginning, and continue to take precedence over economic potential and performance.
In the redesigning of the EMU, consider a European-wide bank deposit insurance and
single bank-regulation authority as a means to prevent Europe financial contagion which is
spreading across the Southern European countries. A banking union can be created only
with greater political integration. From the Dutch and German point of view it is politically
difficult, and unfair to their tax payers to underwrite the banks of the Southern European
countries, using their own money to pay for generous social benefits that are more generous
than those existing in their own countries. In a political union the Netherlands and
Germany, being the source for the money transfer, will also have a say in leveling the
generosity of social benefits across Europe, which can make it politically feasible to help
sustain the European bank union.18
The EU has wrought substantial political benefits including the democratization of new
members and intra-European major war avoidance, but EMU architecture is comparatively
economically inefficient, bubble prone and unusually subject to systemic risk. This package
may be good enough for supporters of the welfare state, but emulators should weigh the
evidence more judiciously. A greater political union is key to the preservation of the
European monetary union.

18

For comparison, see Sargent (2012) for a description of the US intra-national single –
currency-area historical experience.

138

REFERENCES
De Grauwe, Paul (2000). Economics of Monetary Union, New York: Oxford University
Press.
De Grauwe, Paul (2011). "The European Central Bank as a Lender of Last Resort," 19
August.
Fleming Marcus (1962). "Domestic Financial Policies Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange
Rates," IMF Staff Papers 9, pp. 369-379.
Goodfriend Marvin (2011). "Central Banking in the Credit Turmoil: An Assessment of
Federal Reserve Practice," Journal of Monetary Economics.
Gros Daniel and Niels Thygesen (1999). European Monetary Integration, London:
Longman.
Kenen, Peter B (1967). "Toward a Supranational Monetary System," In: G. Pontecorvo, R.
P. Shay and A. G. Hart, (eds.), Issues in Banking and Monetary Analysis, New York:
Holt, Reinhart, and Winston.
Kiguel Miguel (2011). "Argentina and Greece: More Similarities than Differences in the
Initial Conditions," 16 August.
McKinnon, Ronald I. (September 1963). "Optimum Currency Areas," The American
Economic Review, Vol. 53, No. 4, pp. 717-725.
Mundell, Robert A. (1961). "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," The American
Economic Review, Vol. 51, pp. 657-664.
Mundell, Robert A. (1963). "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy Under Fixed and
Flexible Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science, Vol.
29, No. 4, pp. 475-485.
Rosefielde Steven and Quinn Mills (2012). Democracy and its Elected Enemies: The Root
of the West’s Paralysis, Crisis and Decline, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sargent, Thomas J., “Nobel Lecture: United States Then, Europe Now,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol.120, No.1, February 2012, pp.1-40.

Wolfram Kaiser and Peter Starie (eds.), (2009). Transnational European Union: Towards a
Common Political Space, London: Routledge.

