                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ELECTIONS AND THE QUALITY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
                         EVIDENCE FROM U.S. STATE COURTS

                                           Claire S.H. Lim
                                         James M. Snyder, Jr.

                                         Working Paper 18355
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18355


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2012




The research conducted for this article was supported by a research grant from the American Bar Association
(ABA) Section of Litigation; however, the views expressed here are not intended to represent ABA
positions or policies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Claire S.H. Lim and James M. Snyder, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Elections and the Quality of Public Officials: Evidence from U.S. State Courts
Claire S.H. Lim and James M. Snyder, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 18355
September 2012
JEL No. D72,D78,H70,K40

                                              ABSTRACT

We investigate the influence of electoral rules and voter information in elections on voting outcomes
and the quality of public officials, using new data on state court judge elections in 39 states in the U.S.
from 1990 to 2010. We find, first, that voting is very partisan in partisan judicial elections – i.e., there
is a strong correlation between the Democratic "normal vote'' and the Democratic vote share for judges
– but not in non-partisan or non-competitive "retention'' elections. This partisan voting behavior cannot
be attributed to clear differences between Democratic and Republican judges in their sentencing decisions,
since such differences, if any, are small and not consistent. Second, we find that incumbent judges'
quality has little effect on their vote share or probability of winning in partisan general elections. By
contrast, it has a substantial effect in non-partisan elections and partisan primary elections. It also has
a noticeable effect on their vote share in retention elections, but the magnitude is often too small to
affect reelection. Evidence on turnout is consistent with a simple "voting cue'' hypothesis. We find
that about 83\% of the voters who vote on the top office on the ballot also vote on judicial elections
in partisan elections. In contrast, in nonpartisan and retention elections, only 76\% and 67\% of those
who vote on the top office also vote on judicial candidates, respectively. In addition, the amount of
newspaper coverage affects voter turnout only in non-partisan elections.


Claire S.H. Lim
Cornell University
clairelim@cornell.edu

James M. Snyder, Jr.
Harvard University
1737 Cambridge Street, CGIS
Knafel Building Room 413
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jsnyder@gov.harvard.edu
1     Introduction
How can citizens select good government officials and hold them accountable for their behavior?
This has long been an important question in economics (e.g., Barro (1973) and Ferejohn (1986)).
Recently, there has been a growing interest in how the optimality of selection and retention systems
for public officials depends on the nature of the tasks they perform (e.g. Alesina and Tabellini
(2007)). This paper studies electoral systems used for public officials who perform bureaucratic
tasks: U.S. state court judges.1
    Most countries use the appointment system for public officials who perform bureaucratic tasks,
such as trial court judges, prosecutors, regulators, school district superintendents, and city coun-
cillors. In contrast, a large number of U.S. states employ direct elections of such public officials.
Many important issues surrounding this variation are not clearly understood. How voters behave in
such elections? Under what circumstances is the direct election of these public officials desirable?
On one hand, direct election of public officials may lead to selection of those whose preferences
are well-aligned with voters.2 On the other hand, voters may largely be uninformed, as argued
by Downs (1957), and voter behavior may be influenced by idiosyncratic and irrelevant factors, as
argued by Bartels (2008). Additionally, the paucity of voter information in elections may lead to
poor quality of elected public officials, or poor performance due to insufficient monitoring.
    This paper empirically analyzes the institutional design of electoral processes, with a focus on
voters’ partisan voting behavior and the influence of candidate quality on voting outcomes. We
highlight two comparisons: (1) partisan elections vs. non-partisan elections, and (2) competitive
elections vs. non-competitive “retention” elections. We ask how much these features affect the
degree to which voters base their votes on candidates’ party affiliation, and whether these appear
to increase or decrease the degree to which higher quality or better performing candidates receive
more votes, and win more elections.
    Why should these features of the electoral systems matter? On one hand, given the relatively
strong party attachments of most U.S. voters, when voters know that candidates’ party affiliations
are listed on the ballot they might not search for other information that is more difficult to find
and remember.3 Information about candidate quality or performance is likely to fall into the
“relatively difficult to find and remember” category. Moreover, party polarization in the U.S. has
been relatively high for at least the past two decades, and a variety of different models predict
that when polarization is high, candidate quality and performance will have less impact on voting
outcomes.4 In addition, many voters choose to abstain in non-partisan elections. It is possible that
   1
     Although state supreme court judges have some “policy-making” function, they constitute only about 3.5% of
our election data. Most judges in our data are state trial court judges, in charge of routine tasks such as keeping an
order in court trials rather than ideological policy making.
   2
     Besley and Coate (2003) show that selecting regulators through direct election as opposed to appointment yields
the types of regulators who will conform to voters’ preference rather than the organized interests of the electric power
industry.
   3
     Stumpf and Culver (1992) make this argument: “In partisan [judicial] races, the political party label may give
most voters all the information they seek.”
   4
     See, for example, Ashworth and Bueno de Mesquita (2008), Padro i Miquel (2007), and Besley et al. (2005).



                                                           2
those who vote in non-partisan elections have more information of the “relatively difficult to find
and remember” variety than those who do not. On the other hand, partisan competition may also
have an opposite effect. When there is strong inter-party competition, political parties may have
strong incentives to recruit, support, and disseminate information about high-quality candidates,
leading to a better quality of elected public officials.5
    The state judiciary is an ideal context to study these issues for several reasons. First, there is
unique variation in the rules by which state court judges are selected and retained. Specifically, three
systems are dominantly used: in partisan elections, candidates compete with party affiliation; in
nonpartisan elections, candidates compete without party affiliation; and in retention elections, there
are no challengers, and voters cast a yes-or-no vote on incumbents. (See Table 1 and Section 2.1
for details.) Second, in many states, one or more bar associations routinely evaluate the “quality”
of judges and judicial candidates and publish these evaluations. In a few states, a state commission
compiles and publishes evaluations. Newspapers often print stories about these evaluations as well.
We use two newly collected data sets, one on election results and one on judicial evaluations. The
election data covers state court judges in 39 U.S. states over the period 1990-2010. The judicial
evaluation data covers 24 states, and its time frame varies considerably across states and localities.
Third, the nature of judges’ tasks and the scope of their discretion are fairly uniform across states,
which makes cross-state comparison of their selection systems and their behavior viable.
    Our findings are summarized as follows. First, we find that voting is highly partisan in partisan
judicial elections – i.e., there is a strong correlation between the Democratic “normal vote” and the
Democratic vote share for judges – but not in non-partisan or retention elections.6 This partisan
voting behavior cannot be attributed to clear differences between Democratic and Republican judges
in their sentencing decisions, since such differences, if any, are small and not consistent.
    Second, we find that the quality of judicial candidates has relatively little effect on their vote
share or probability of winning in partisan general elections. By contrast, the quality of judicial
candidates has a substantial effect on their vote share and probability of winning in non-partisan
elections and in partisan primary elections.7 Incumbent judges’ quality also has a noticeable effect
on their vote share in retention elections, although the magnitude is rarely large enough to affect
reelection. It is possible that the presence of opposing candidates and a relatively high degree of
Banerjee and Pande (2007) yields similar kinds of predictions in a multi-party environment.
    5
      Besley et al. (2010) show that strong inter-party competition leads to pro-growth economic policies such as lower
tax rates, higher capital spending, and increased use of right-to-work laws.
    6
      We are not the first to document this. See Dubois (1980) for an early analysis, and Squire and Smith (1988) and
Klein and Baum (2001) for experimental evidence. All of these studies, like almost all existing work, focus exclusively
on high court judges.
    7
      We are only aware of two previous studies that attempt to estimate the impact of bar association evaluations
on voting. Goldstein (1979-1980) studies the 1977 judicial elections in Louisville, Kentucky. Dubois (1984) studies
superior court elections in California over the period 1976-1980. Goldstein finds that bar association evaluations have a
large impact on voting. Dubois finds a smaller effect, although it is still positive and statistically significant. Moreover,
Dubois includes controls for incumbency, campaign spending, and newspaper endorsements in his regressions; since
these are correlated with quality, his estimates probably understate the overall “reduced form” effect of quality, which
is the quantity of interest to us. California and Kentucky use non-partisan elections, so these findings are generally
consistent with ours.



                                                             3
competition are necessary in order for information about candidate quality to reach a large share
of the electorate.8
       Note that candidate quality matters to some degree even in partisan electoral systems, because
the primary elections help to eliminate the low-quality candidates.9 However, partisan general
elections do not do much to eliminate weak candidates, except in areas where the distribution
of voters across parties is relatively balanced. Therefore, when one party is favored in an area,
competition in the favored party’s primary is the key to preventing low-quality candidates from
winning office. In addition, we do not find that partisan elections are significantly more competitive
than non-partisan elections in terms of the number of candidates and victory margins.
       Finally, the evidence on turnout is consistent with a simple “voting cue” hypothesis. We find
that about 83% of the voters who vote on the top office on the ballot also vote on judicial elections
in partisan elections. In contrast, in nonpartisan and retention elections, only 76% and 67% of
those who vote on the top office also vote on judicial candidates, respectively. In addition, the
amount of media coverage affects voter turnout only in non-partisan elections.
       These results have an important implication. The desirability of electing local public officials
through partisan competition critically depends on the nature of the officials’ tasks, the ideologi-
cal variability of decisions by public officials from different parties, and the heterogeneity of voter
preferences. If the primary task of public officials is not to represent voters’ ideology and their deci-
sions do not vary much across parties, then the adverse effect of partisan competition on candidate
quality may outweigh the benefit of reflecting voters’ party preferences in election outcomes. To
the extent that partisan voting behavior crowds out the influence of candidate quality on voting
outcomes, the desirability of partisan election systems may need to be re-considered.
       This paper contributes to a literature on judicial selection mechanisms, in addition to the
aforementioned literature on electoral competition and candidate quality. There have been several
studies that focus on elections of state supreme court judges. For example, Hall (2001) documents
statistics of judicial elections for state supreme court judges, such as the overall rate of incumbent
judges being challenged and defeated, and the average vote share. In a recent book, Bonneau and
Hall (2009) document important patterns in state supreme court elections such as rate of challenges
against the incumbent and campaign spending. This paper substantially expands the scope of our
understanding of the selection systems by conducting a large-scale analysis of state trial courts and
state lower appellate courts, as well as an analysis of the role of candidate quality based on newly
collected ratings data.10
   8
     Dubois (1980) makes this argument: “when judicial elections are highly competitive and controversial, voters
demonstrate a remarkable ability to learn about candidates, to correctly match them with their positions [on issues],
and to vote accordingly.”
   9
     Of course, “smoke-filled rooms” or party conventions might also eliminate these candidates. For example, the ju-
dicial nominating conventions used in New York do not appear to yield a larger percentage of “unqualified” candidates
than the primaries in similar states such as Illinois and Pennsylvania.
  10
     In a review of Bonneau and Hall (2009), Wasby (2009, p. 293) writes: “This makes limiting [Bonneau and
Hall’s] study to state high courts the book’s greatest substantive defect, which is not adequately excused on the basis
that ‘obtaining systematic data on lower court elections over any substantial period is a nearly impossible task’ (p.
18)... Presenting data limited to state high courts not only gives an incomplete picture, but also leaves the authors’



                                                          4
    Several studies in this stream of research also document the empirical relationship between the
selection mechanisms and court decisions. For example, Gordon and Huber (2007) compare criminal
sentencing decisions by appointed and elected judges in Kansas. They argue that the probability of
incarceration is higher and the average sentenced jail time is longer when elected judges determine
the outcome. Lim (2012) also analyzes sentencing decisions in Kansas, and finds that the sentencing
harshness of elected judges is strongly related to the political ideology of the voters in their districts
while that of appointed judges is not. She uses a structural model to estimate their preferences
and reelection incentives and conducts counterfactual experiments of how the level of compensation
for judges affect their reelection incentives and the relative advantages of each selection system.
Lim, Snyder, and Strömberg (2012) study how media influences sentencing decisions by U.S. state
trial court judges. They show that media influence is considerably larger for nonpartisan elected
judges than for partisan elected or appointed judges, which is analogous to our result that candidate
quality has the largest effect in nonpartisan elections. There also exist studies on the relationship
between judicial selection systems and the death penalty (e.g., Gelman et al. (2004), Blume and
Eisenberg (1999)) and civil case adjudication (Tabarrok and Helland (1999)). Our analysis of voting
behavior under different electoral processes helps us to understand the mechanisms through which
selection systems might affect the behavior of judges.


2     Data
2.1    Data on Judicial Elections
Table 1 summarizes the various systems for selecting and retaining trial court judges. There are
three main systems in which voters play a direct role. First, in 9 states, judges are selected and
retained through partisan elections. That is, judicial candidates seek party nomination through
primary elections, then candidates from each party compete against each other in the general
election, and party affiliations are listed on the general election ballot.11 Second, in 22 states,
judges are selected through non-partisan elections. These are two-round systems. First, all judicial
candidates run for elections without party labels on the ballot. Then, if no candidate wins a
majority of the votes in the first round, the top two candidates compete in a runoff race. In almost
all states, the first round elections are held at the time the state holds its primary elections, and
the runoff elections are held at the time of the general election in the state.12 Third, in 10 states
paeans for elections to stand on only one use of a selection method. This is the same problem that results from
over-attention to the U.S. Supreme Court – making generalizations based on far less than all appellate courts, much
less trial courts.”
   Baum (2003, p. 18) also calls for more data on lower state courts: “the electoral fates of lower-court judges are
spotty and largely out of date... All of these trial court studies were carried out prior to the past two decades, before
strong campaigns against judicial incumbents became more common. But that growth has occurred primarily at the
supreme court level, so it is likely that trial (and intermediate appellate) judges continue to do very well at the polls.
Research to test the accuracy of this surmise would be useful.”
   11
      In New York candidates are nominated by party conventions rather than primaries.
   12
      In most of states that have non-partisan elections, there is no nomination of candidates from political parties. In
Ohio, candidates are nominated in partisan primaries, but the party labels do not appear on the ballot in the general



                                                            5
judges are first appointed by the governor and then must face the voters at the end of each term in
retention elections. These are elections with no opponents. Instead, voters choose whether or not
to retain the judge (“yes” or “no”), and the judge continues in office if he or she receives a majority
of “yes” votes.13
    Tables 2 and 3 show summary statistics on the electoral data we have collected. The data
contains results for judicial elections in 39 states, for all three levels of state courts – supreme
courts, appellate courts, and trial (district) courts.14,15 Table 2 shows the number of candidate-
race observations and the data period for each state. The data period varies somewhat across
states, but it covers the past two decades (1990-2010) for a majority of the states.
    Columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 present summary statistics on competition in partisan primaries
and partisan general elections, respectively. They show two important features. First, partisan
judicial elections exhibit a moderate, but non-negligible degree of competition in terms of the
frequency of challenges. Among 8956 primary races, 2327 races (26.0%) are contested. Similarly,
among 6020 general election races, 1889 races (31.4%) are contested. However, the winners’ vote
share shows that challenges may not result in close elections frequently. On average, the vote share
of winners in contested general elections is 56.7%.
    Columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 present summary statistics on competition in non-partisan first-
round and second-round elections, respectively. Perhaps surprisingly, these elections exhibit levels
of competition similar to those of partisan elections, in terms of the frequency of challenges and the
overall distribution of winners’ vote shares. Partisan elections are only slightly more competitive.
The lack of a substantial difference between the partisan and non-partisan elections suggests the
influence of party on election outcomes, if any, is more likely to take place through channels other
than affecting the degree of competition.
    Table 4 presents summary statistics on retention elections. Evidently, judges running in reten-
tion elections are much safer than those who face competitive elections, either partisan or non-
partisan. The mean share of “yes” votes across states is 73.9%, and the standard deviation is 6.7
percentage points. Even the 10th percentile of the share of “yes” votes is around or above 65% in
most of states, showing that almost all incumbents are extremely safe in retention elections. In our
sample, only 39 judges lost their retention election.
election. Michigan also has a similar process for the election of state supreme court judges.
   13
      In Illinois a judge must receive a “yes” vote of 60% to be retained, and in New Mexico (after 1994) a judge must
receive a “yes” vote of 57%.
   14
      When a state has multiple trial courts, we include only “general jurisdiction” trial courts – these are the courts
that handle general civil and felony crime cases. We exclude “limited jurisdiction” courts that are restricted to
handling minor civil cases, misdemeanors, and traffic cases.
   15
      The source varies by state. For the most recent years we collected it directly from state websites – the Secretary
of State or chief state election official, or state elections board. For earlier years we received copies of official election
results from the relevant state officials.




                                                              6
2.2      Data on Judicial Evaluations
Table 5 presents summary information on the judicial evaluations we have collected. In 6 states
– Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Kansas, New Mexico, and Utah – these evaluations are conducted
by state commissions.16          The evaluations for other states are conducted by state or local bar
associations, or by groups of bar associations. Local bar associations typically only evaluate the
local trial court candidates. In all cases these evaluations are based on comprehensive surveys
of attorneys. In some cases they also incorporate surveys of other judges, court employees, and
citizens who have served as jurors or witnesses. For consistency we focus on the attorney surveys.
       The surveys ask for the respondents’ views on a variety of performance criteria, including
integrity, judicial temperament, knowledge of the law, communication skills, diligence, professional
competence, and case management. As an example, the following list shows items from the Colorado
Commission on Judicial Performance survey:

 1. Case Management:
          1a.   Promptly issuing a decision on the case after trial.
          1b.   Maintaining appropriate control over proceedings.
          1c.   Promptly ruling on pre-trial motions.
          1d.   Setting reasonable schedules for cases.
 2. Application and Knowledge of Law:
          2a.   Being able to identify and analyze relevant facts.
          2b.   Basing decisions on evidence and arguments.
          2c.   Willing to reconsider error in fact or law.
          2d.   Issuing consistent sentences when the circumstances are similar.
 3. Communications:
          3a. Making sure all participants understand the proceedings.
          3b. Providing written communications that are clear, thorough and well reasoned.
 4. Demeanor:
          4a.   Giving proceedings a sense of dignity.
          4b.   Treating parties with respect.
          4c.   Conducting his/her courtroom in a neutral manner.
          4d.   Consistently applying laws and rules.
 5. Diligence:
          5a. Using good judgment in application of relevant law and rules.
          5b. Doing the necessary homework and being prepared for his/her cases.
          5c. Being willing to handle cases on the docket even when they are complicated and time
              consuming.
  16
    A number of states have recently established similar commissions or pilot programs. See http://www.ncsc.org/
topics/judicial-officers/judicial-performance-evaluation/state-links.aspx for details.


                                                       7
       Although the surveys address the same general performance criteria, the details – the number
of items, question wording, response categories, and so on – vary widely across states and bar
associations. There is also considerable variation in how the surveys and other information are
aggregated into summary evaluations. In most cases, there is a bottom-line evaluation such as Well
Qualified, Qualified, or Unqualified; Highly Recommended, Recommended, or Not Recommended;
or (for retention elections) Retain or Do Not Retain. Other categories exist, including Outstanding,
Strongly Recommended, Strongly Not Recommended, Adequate, Not Rated, and No Opinion. As
a result, comparing across states requires considerable care.
       To simplify our analysis we collapse the various categories into a dichotomous variable, which we
call Score. We set Score=1 for all candidates with evaluations of Qualified or better, Recommended
or better, or Retain, and Score=0 for candidates with evaluations of Not Qualified or worse, Not
Recommended or worse, or Do Not Retain.17
       State commissions and bar associations claim that one of the main reasons they evaluate judges
and judicial candidates is to inform voters. The surveys are conducted during the months preceding
elections and the evaluations are released within a few weeks of election day. The evaluations also
tend to receive a non-trivial amount of newspaper coverage when they are released. As usual, bad
news is good news when it comes to generating eye-catching headlines: “Lawyers Rank 9 Judges
‘Unqualified’,” “Lawyers Rate PA Judge Unfit,” “Bar Association Rates Two Judicial Candidates as
Unqualified,” and “Democrat Gets Negative Rating from Bar in County Court Race” are examples.
Sometimes, however, good news prevails: “Bar Group Rates Court Candidates – 6 in Appellate
Race Given Top Marks.”18
       Although the survey items are not explicitly ideological or partisan, it is possible that the
responses and resulting evaluations exhibit an ideological or partisan bias. Many conservative
commentators argue that lawyers in general and bar associations in particular are liberal relative
to the overall population. Thus, we might worry that evaluations are correlated with judges’
ideologies or party affiliations. Even if they are not, voters might believe they are, and use them
accordingly.
       We check whether the evaluations from bar associations and state commissions appear to signal
the ideological positions of candidates rather than quality, but find no consistent evidence for this.
First, the correlation between evaluations and party affiliation of judges is small (see appendix Table
A.6). Second, the correlation between judicial evaluations and the normal vote across precincts is
  17
     Several Bar Associations do not provide a categorical bottom-line evaluation. Instead, for each candidate they
report the fraction of respondents who gave various ratings. For the Houston Bar, we set Score=1 if more than 50%
of the respondents gave a candidate a rating of Qualified or better, and Score=0 otherwise. For the Iowa State Bar,
Missouri State Bar, and Nebraska State Bar, we set Score=1 if more than 60% of the respondents recommended
retention, and Score=0 otherwise; for the Wyoming State Bar we set the threshold at 65%. For the Utah State
Commission, we set Score=1 if more than 75% of the respondents gave a recommendation of Adequate or better,
and Score=0 otherwise. In Minnesota and Oregon the evaluations are in the form of preference polls, giving the
percentage of respondents favoring each candidate. In these cases we set Score=1 if a candidate received at least 25%
support, and Score=0 otherwise. We chose the thresholds so the percentage of “bad” candidates was approximately
constant across the states with the same electoral system.
  18
     In order, these headlines are from: Chicago Tribune, October 12, 1988; Philadelphia Inquirer, May 14, 2010;
Ventura County Star ; October 19, 1993; Syracuse Post-Standard, October 0, 2009; Chicago Tribune, March 2, 1990.


                                                         8
also small – i.e., it is not the case that judges with higher evaluations receive a larger share of votes
in Democratic precincts than in Republican precincts.


3     Findings
3.1    Partisan Voting in Partisan, Non-Partisan, and Retention Elections
We begin with an analysis of precinct-level data for a few states. For each precinct and year, we
construct a “normal vote” measure by averaging the Democratic percentage of the two-party vote
across all of the available federal and state partisan elections – president, U.S. senator, U.S. house,
governor, state senator, state house representative, and various down-ballot offices such as state
attorney general, secretary of state, and state treasurer. We call this the Democratic Normal Vote.
We then collect the percentage of the two-party vote won by the Democratic candidate in each of
the available contested judicial elections, and call this Democratic Vote for Judge. For each judicial
election, we then correlate the Democratic Vote for Judge against the Democratic Normal Vote.
    Table 6 shows the results. The patterns are clear: Voting is highly partisan in partisan elections,
and much less partisan in non-partisan elections and retention elections. For example, in Texas the
average correlation between Democratic Vote for Judge and Democratic Normal Vote is 0.99, and
in Pennsylvania the average correlation is 0.91. In North Carolina partisan elections the correlation
is 0.93. In North Carolina non-partisan elections, on the other hand, the correlation is only 0.28.
In non-partisan elections in Arkansas, California, Idaho, and Washington state the correlations are
also small, and these probably overstate the true relationship because we assign partisanship to the
judicial candidates to maximize the correlation. In Arizona and Colorado retention elections the
correlations are also low.
    In Illinois partisan elections the correlation is 0.91, while for Democratic incumbents in retention
elections the correlation is just 0.37, and for Republicans incumbents in retention the correlation is
0.28. Note that the correlation is positive for Republican incumbents – i.e., Republican incumbents
receive a larger percentage of “yes” votes in Democratic precincts than they do in Republican
precincts – which is the opposite of what we expect under partisan voting. Recall that these are
the same candidates running first in partisan elections and then later in retention elections.19
    Note that in Ohio, which has partisan primaries but no party labels on the general election
ballot, the correlation in trial court races is 0.89. This feature indicates that nomination by parties,
as well as information on party affiliation on the ballot, affects voting behavior significantly.
    We have county-level data for many other states. Although these analyses are cruder, they
show the same basic patterns. In particular, the correlation between Democratic Vote for Judge
and Democratic Normal Vote is much higher in partisan elections than in non-partisan or retention
elections. In retention elections the correlations are also low.
  19
     Using county-level data for the whole state, the correlation between Democratic Vote for Judge and Democratic
Normal Vote is 0.71 in the partisan elections. For retention elections, the correlations are much smaller in absolute
terms: 0.08 for Democratic judges and -0.29 for Republican judges.




                                                         9
3.2   The Case of Retention Elections in Cook County, IL
One of the pronounced patterns we documented above is the lack of partisan voting in retention
elections. In this subsection, we document a further analysis of voting patterns in retention elec-
tions, using a unique subgroup of retention elections in which judges are likely to face voters with
the political ideology opposite to the judges’ party: retention elections in sub-circuits of Cook
County, Illinois. Circuit court judges in Cook County are all initially elected through partisan
elections. However, there is variation in the scope of voters that candidates face. The Cook County
judicial circuit is divided to 15 sub-circuits. Among 262 judges, 107 judges are initially elected by
constituents in the entire Cook County, i.e., they are “at-large” judges. The other 155 judges are
initially elected by voters in a sub-circuit. When judges are up for reelection, they face retention
elections by voters in the entire Cook County, regardless of how they were initially elected. There-
fore, judges initially elected in a sub-circuit face retention elections by voters that are different from
voters who initially elected them.
   Analyzing these retention elections of Cook County judges is useful to alleviate the following
sample selection problem in the comparison of voting behavior in non-retention (partisan and
non-partisan) elections and retention elections. In measuring the degree of partisan voting in
partisan and non-partisan elections, we use only contested elections that have both Democratic
and Republican candidates. A contested election takes place when there is an open seat or the
incumbent is not strong enough to deter challengers. Moreover, two-party races are likely to happen
when the voter ideology is not too lop-sided. That is, the ideology of the constituency is balanced
enough to encourage both Democratic and Republican candidates to enter the race. By contrast,
for retention elections, we measure the partisanship in voting behavior using all the elections.
Moreover, candidates are all incumbents, which implies that they are already popular enough in
their jurisdiction to be selected in the first place. Thus, incumbents that would be strong enough
to run unopposed and hence excluded from measurement for partisan elections are all included in
the measurement for retention elections. As a result, compared with partisan elections, retention
elections are more likely to include candidates who get a strong support from voters regardless of
their party affiliation, which may be confounded with the effect of electoral processes. The sub-
circuit structure in Cook County forces incumbents to face voters in reelection that may not find
them as appealing as voters in their sub-circuit do.
   The left panel of Figure 1 shows the composition of Cook County judicial sub-circuits outside
the City of Chicago. The right panel shows the ward-level political ideology of voters, measured
by the vote shares of Democratic and Republican candidates in the 2008 presidential election.
Among fifteen judicial sub-circuits in Cook County, three sub-circuits are located entirely within
the City of Chicago (sub-circuits 5, 6, and 8) and four sub-circuits are located entirely outside
the City of Chicago (4, 12, 13, and 15). The other eight sub-circuits have territory in both the
City of Chicago and the outer counties (1, 2, 3, 7, 9, 10, 11, and 14). Overall, Cook County
is dominantly Democratic, except for the four sub-circuits located entirely outside Chicago. We
document retention elections of 123 circuit (trial) court judges in Cook County for whom we


                                                   10
have precinct-level voting data. Among these judges, seventeen are Republican and the rest are
Democrat. Among seventeen Republicans, sixteen are were initially elected in partisan elections
in one of the four sub-circuits (4, 12, 13, and 15) favorable to Republican, and one was elected
at-large in a partisan election in the entire Cook County.
      Table 7 shows the summary statistics of the estimates of partisan voting (the correlation between
judges’ share of yes-votes and the Democratic Normal Vote) and the share of yes-votes using precinct
level data. The statistics clearly show two features. First, the degree of partisan voting behavior
is relatively small. Second, judges receive a large share of affirmative votes regardless of whether
they face voters that are favorable to their party or not. These patterns strengthen our conclusion
that the degree of partisan voting is very weak in retention elections.

3.3      Candidate Quality and Voting in Partisan, Non-Partisan, and Retention
         Elections
Tables 8 and 9 present results on the relationship between judicial evaluations and election results
in the various types of elections.
      Table 8 shows aggregate summary statistics on win percentages. Each observation is a candidate,
and all elections are included. The cell entries are means, with the associated number of observations
in parentheses. The table shows that for all types of elections, candidates with Score=1 are much
more likely to win than candidates with Score=0. Overall, candidates who are judged to be
Unqualified, Not Recommended, etc. rarely win office. In fact, such candidates constitute only
about 6% of the final winners for all of the candidates for which we have evaluations.
      This appears to be moderately good news for democracy – at a minimum, the electoral process
seems to be weeding out most of the least qualified candidates. However, there are a variety of
possible reasons for this. One possibility, of course, is that voters learn the candidates’ relative
evaluations and vote accordingly. But it would not be surprising if other factors played an even
more important role, including strategic entry (low-quality candidates are opposed more often),
incumbency advantage (incumbents tend to receive higher evaluations but they might also enjoy
other electoral advantages as incumbents), campaigning and media coverage (high-quality candi-
dates might raise more money and receive favorable coverage as well as endorsements), and so
on.
      Table 9 carries the analysis further. In this table we restrict attention to contested races in
which the top two candidates received more than 90% of the vote.20 We then make one observation
for each race. For partisan general elections the results are presented from the point of view of the
Democratic candidate. For primary elections and non-partisan elections the results are presented
from the point of view of the candidate whose name is first in alphabetic order. We call this candi-
date the “Alpha candidate.” The cell entries give the estimated coefficient on the variable “Relative
Score” from simple OLS regressions with either “Win Percentage” or “Vote Percentage” as the de-
pendent variable. Relative Score is equal to the score of the Democratic or Alpha candidate minus
 20
      Also, in the case of partisan general elections, there must be one candidate from each of the major parties.


                                                           11
the score of his or her opponent (and thus can be +1, 0 or -1). Vote Percentage is the percentage of
votes won by the Democratic or Alpha candidate, and Win Percentage is a dummy variable equal
to 100 if the Democratic or Alpha candidate wins and 0 otherwise.21 We include constituency fixed
effects to focus only on the various choices available to voters within each constituence. In sum,
we estimate the following equations:

                      W in P ercentageit = β0 + β1 Relative Scoreit + β2 xit + it
                      V ote P ercentageit = β0 + β1 Relative Scoreit + β2 xit + it

where xit is a constituency fixed effect.
       Several patterns are clear from the table. In the partisan general elections in Illinois and Texas
(top panel), the Democratic candidate is more likely to win if he or she has a higher evaluation
than the Republican candidate, and he or she also receives a larger share of the votes. However, the
differences are not huge. The estimated coefficients for Win Percentage are just 4.5 and 1.7, and
neither is statistically significant at the .05 level. The estimated coefficients for Vote Percentage
are just 0.9 and 2.1.
       By comparison, the differences are much larger in the two-candidate primary elections in these
states (second panel). In Illinois and Texas, the estimated coefficients for Win Percentage are 30.0
and 24.4, and both are highly significant. The estimated coefficients for Vote Percentage are 9.5 and
10.5 – about 5 times as large as those in the partisan case – and they are again highly significant.
We observe similar patterns in Ohio partisan primaries.
       The differences are similarly large in the non-partisan elections (primary or general) in Califor-
nia, Minnesota, Oregon, Washington, and Wisconsin. The estimated coefficients for Win Percentage
range from 29.7 to 47.4, and the estimated coefficients for Vote Percentage range from 7.2 to 16.3.
All are highly significant.
       In Ohio we know each candidate’s party since they run in partisan primaries, but party is not
printed on the general election ballots. The general election results in Ohio are closer to those for
the “pure” non-partisan cases than the partisan cases for the Win Percentage variable. For the
Vote Percentage variable the results lie about halfway between the pure partisan and non-partisan
estimates.22
       In terms of Vote Percentage, the estimated effects of Score are similarly large in retention
elections. On average, incumbent judges in Illinois with Score=1 receive a vote percentage that
is 10.1 percentage points higher than incumbent judges with Score=0, and are 19.7% more likely
to win. Overall, there are large differences in Vote Percentage between judges with Score=1 and
those with Score=0. The results for Win Percentage are more mixed, varying widely from state to
state due to the small number of incumbents who lose. On average, while very few judges receive
  21
    We use 100 rather than 1 so that coefficients can be interpreted as percentage effects.
  22
    The vast majority of primaries are uncontested, so we cannot conduct a separate analysis of contested primaries.
This is also reflected in Table 8, which shows that over 80% of primary candidates win, almost regardless of their
evaluations.



                                                        12
a Do Not Retain recommendation, those who do are more likely to lose than win.
       The analysis above ignores incumbency. That is, the estimates in Table 9 combine the effects
of Score with the effects of incumbency. However, although Score and incumbency are positively
correlated, when we control for incumbency the large differences between the partisan and non-
partisan cases are essentially unchanged. This is in part due to the fact that the incumbency
advantage in trial court elections, while positive, appears to be relatively small.23 The results for
Illinois are indicative, since in these cases incumbency is held fixed – all retention elections involve
incumbents, and all of the partisan primary and general elections are to fill vacancies.
       Other cases exhibit similar patterns. New York has partisan general elections for judges, and
nominations are made by party conventions. In New York City between 1999 and 2010, there were
160 Democratic candidates and 56 Republicans with New York City Bar Association (NYCBA)
evaluations.24 Among the Democratic candidates, 150 were Approved by the NYCBA (Score=1),
9 were Not Approved (Score=0), and 1 was Not Evaluated (dropped). All of the Democrats won
election. Most likely, this is because judicial elections in New York are partisan and voters in New
York City overwhelmingly identify with the Democratic party. New York has multi-seat races, so
we can run regressions with race-specific fixed effects and thus compare candidates with different
evaluations running at the same time for the same offices. After controlling for party affiliation
(and race-specific fixed effects), the NYCBA evaluations appear to have essentially no effect on
voting. The estimated coefficient on Score is 0.81 with a standard error of 1.02, implying that an
Approved evaluation increases a candidate’s expected vote share by less than 1 percentage point.
Since the typical Democrat won with a margin of about 15.5 percentage points, it is unlikely that
the evaluations affect who wins and who loses.
       The situation is similar in Pennsylvania, which also has partisan general elections, as well as
partisan primaries. We have evaluations for 136 Democratic candidates and 38 Republicans who
ran in a general election (not for retention) in Philadelphia or Allegheny counties – about half
from the Philadelphia Bar Association and half from the Allegheny County Bar Association.25
Among the Democratic candidates, 117 were Recommended and 19 were Not Recommended or
Unqualified. All but one of the Democrats won election. Again, this outcome is likely due to the
fact that Pennsylvania has partisan judicial elections, and Philadelphia and Pittsburgh are both
heavily Democratic cities. Pennsylvania has multi-seat races, so we can run regressions with race-
specific fixed effects and thus compare candidates with different evaluations running at the same
time for the same offices. After controlling for party affiliation (and race-specific fixed effects),
the bar evaluations appear to have essentially no effect on voting. The estimated coefficient on
Score is -0.28 with a standard error of 0.50, implying that a Recommended evaluation decreases a
  23
      This is conditional on having two candidates in the race. A large proportion of incumbents are not opposed
either in the primary or the general election.
   24
      Because candidates in New York may be nominated by more than one party, 91 of the Democrats were also
nominated by the Republican party.
   25
      As in New York, candidates in Pennsylvania may be nominated by more than one party, so 86 of the Democrats
were also nominated by the Republican party.




                                                      13
candidate’s expected vote share by less than one-have of one percentage point.26 Thus, it is again
unlikely that the evaluations affect who wins.
       Fortunately, most of the lower-quality candidates in Philadelphia and Allegheny counties are
eliminated in the primary elections – or at least in the Democratic primary, which is what matters.
There were 96 candidates with Score=0 running in Democratic primaries in our sample. Of these,
only 17, or 17.7%, won a Democratic nomination and went on to the general election.
       From the analysis documented above, we can draw two important conclusions. First, partisan
voting behavior appears to “crowd out” the influence of candidate quality on election outcomes
in partisan general elections. Second, non-partisan elections function fairly effectively in terms of
reflecting candidate quality in election outcomes.
       Before proceding, we must consider two issues regarding these conclusions. The first issue is
whether partisan voting behavior in the partisan election system is due mainly to the electoral
process itself, or whether it might be attributable at least in part to the underlying preferences of
voters. In particular, it might be the case that electoral systems across states are tailored somewhat
to voter preferences. Are voters more intensely partisan or more ideologically polarized in states
with partisan judicial elections compared to voters in states with nonpartisan or retention election
systems? The second issue concerns the mechanisms through which candidate quality is reflected in
voting outcomes in partisan primaries and non-partisan elections. Given that most of the voters do
not acquire much information about judicial candidates, the mechanism through which candidate
quality affects voting outcomes may not be self-evident.
       To address the first issue, we turn to survey data, in particular the American National Election
Studies (ANES). We pool the ANES data from 1990 to 2004 and focus on three items: the 7-point
scale of party identification, the 7-point scale of ideological self-placement, and the -100 to 100
“feeling thermometer” measuring the difference in how warm the respondent feels toward liberals
compared to conservatives. We fold the party identification item around its mid-point of 4, to
make a variable measuring the strength of party attachments. This variable takes on the following
values: 0 = pure independent, 1 = independent but lean toward Democratic or Republican party,
2 = weak Democrat or weak Republican, and 3 = strong Democrat or strong Republican. We also
fold the ideological self-placement item around its mid-point of 4, to make a variable measuring
ideological extremity. This variable takes on the values: 0 = moderate (middle of the road), 1
= slightly liberal or slightly conservative, 2 = liberal or conservative, and 3 = extremely liberal
or extremely conservative. We fold the feeling thermometer item around its mid-point of 0, so
the resulting variable is 0 for respondents who like liberals and conservatives equally, and 100 for
respondents who like one group intensely and dislike the other intensely.
       The summary statistics for these three variables are shown in Table 10. The bottom line
is simple: there are essentially no differences between voters living in states with partisan judicial
elections and voters living in states with non-partisan elections or retention systems. In regressions,
  26
     As in New York, the number of votes available per voter varies across races, depending on how many positions
are filled. We therefore also analyzed “normalized” vote-shares. Again, the results are qualitatively similar to those
for the raw vote-shares.


                                                         14
none of the differences between the three types of states with judicial elections are statistically
significant.27
       Regarding the second issue, it is useful to note the following three points. First, our estimates
do not imply that a large fraction of the electorate appears to take candidate quality into account
in their voting. Rather, the percentage is probably only about 10-20% of those who vote in judicial
elections. This is an even smaller fraction of the voting age population, since turnout in primary
elections is typically only around 20-25%, and in non-partisan general elections it is only around
25-40% (due to roll-off). It is plausible that 5% of U.S. adults follow elections closely enough
that they are exposed to information about judicial candidate quality during an election. Second,
political psychologists argue that voters store much of the information they see and hear during
campaigns as impressions. Voters form impressions about candidates, and can remember and
use these impressions, even though they are unable to remember the exact set of facts or events
that led to these impressions. It is therefore difficult to know what facts or falsehoods – i.e., what
combination of newspaper stories, campaign ads, conversations with friends, family and co-workers,
etc. – shape voters’ impressions.28 Third, in many cases a bad rating can lead to a more vigorous
campaign by the opposition (either a candidate or an interest group), and this will dramatically
increase the number of people who might hear something bad about the judge with the bad rating
(and store an unfavorable impression).

3.4      Partisanship and Sentencing
We now ask whether there are any clear partisan differences in the sentencing decisions of Demo-
cratic and Republican judges.29 This would provide a clear rationale for the partisan patterns
exhibited in the voting data. However, we find few systematic differences in sentencing that are
correlated with partisanship.
       We employ criminal sentencing decisions from the National Judicial Reporting Program (NJRP).
This database only reports information about the county where each case was heard, not the indi-
vidual judge hearing the case. However, for a large number of counties we can construct a measure
of the overall partisan composition – the fraction of judges in the county who are Democrats – in
each year. We can then investigate whether the sentences tend to be relatively harsher in counties
with a smaller or larger fraction of Democratic judges.
       Table 11 shows the results for Texas, and also for Alabama, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana,
New Mexico, and Ohio pooled. These are the states for which we can measure the partisan com-
  27
      For the Partisan Intensity variable, the difference between states with appointed judges and the other types is
statistically significant. But the magnitude of the difference is small: about 0.16 on a scale from 0 to 3 with an overall
standard deviation of 0.98.
   28
      See, for example, McGraw (2003). Psychologists would call this is a form of “gist” memory – the ability to
remember the gist of a story without being able to remember almost any details.
   29
      Typically, criminal and civil cases each constitute approximately half of the caseloads. (See court statistics by Na-
tional Center for State Courts at http://www.ncsc.org/services-and-experts/areas-of-expertise/court-statistics.aspx.)
However, only criminal sentencing is appropriate for the purpose of measuring trial court judges’ “ideology”. In
criminal cases, judges have discretion on sentencing even when conviction is done by jury. In contrast, adjudication
in civil cases is primarily conducted by jury.


                                                            15
position of the district for a sufficiently large number of cases. We present the results separately
for Texas, because it is a key case, and because it has a huge number of cases and a large num-
ber of court districts and counties.30 We use the NJRP data for the period of 1990-2006. The
NJRP data contains detailed case-level information such as the nature and number of convictions,
offense category, sentence length, and penal code citation. We analyze the relationship between
the county-level share of Democratic judges and sentencing harshness for four different offense cat-
egories: violent crimes, property crimes, drug crimes, and other crimes. To minimize measurement
error in sentencing harshness caused by the heterogeneity of cases, we compare criminal cases only
with other cases in the same year and with the same penal code citation. In order to classify cases,
we generate a penal code variable that takes the same value for all crimes in each year that has the
same penal code citation for the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd most serious offenses. Then, for each category,
we collect minimum and maximum sentence given for that penal code. The dependent variable we
use, normalized harshness of sentencing is defined as follows:

                                                             Sentence − min
                                 Relative Harshness =                       .
                                                               max − min

The independent variable of interest is Share of Democratic Judges. A positive coefficient on this
variable implies that Democratic judges cast harsher sentences than Republican judges, and a
negative coefficient implies the opposite. We present two sets of results, one that that includes all
available observations, and one in which we restrict attention to “smaller” judicial districts, defined
as districts with no more than 10 judges.
       The result of the regressions show a mixed pattern. First, for Texas half of the point estimates
are positive and half are negative. Even with many thousands of observations, only half of the
estimated coefficients are statistically significant at the .05 level; of these, two are positive and
two are negative. Also, for two offense categories – drug crimes and other crimes – the coefficients
switch sign depending on the sample uses. The magnitudes are small as well. For example, the
.037 point estimate for violent crimes implies that the average normalized sentence length is .037
higher in a district with all Democratic judges, compared to one with all Republican judges. In
the other states the coefficients are uniformly negative, but again small in magnitude. Only one is
statistically significant at the .05 level.
       Violent crimes constitute most of the “high-profile” cases that draw the attention of the public,
so this category is probably the most important from the point of view of voting. For these cases
the data suggest that in Texas Democratic judges are, if anything, slightly tougher than Republican
judges. In the other states the data suggest the reverse, but the coefficient estimates are statistically
insignificant.
       Overall, then, the results indicate that the partisan voting behavior documented above cannot
be attributed to voters responding to large and systematic partisan differences in the actual pattern
of sentencing decisions.
  30
   Illinois is another key case. We do not present Illinois separately, because over 93% of the observations are in
Cook county.


                                                        16
3.5      Turnout
The partisan voting behavior documented in Section 3.1 indicates that the way voters use infor-
mation about candidates differs substantially across electoral processes. To investigate this issue
further, we now turn to an analysis of voter turnout. We first document the variation in voter
turnout across election systems. We focus on the relative turnout, which is defined as follows:

                                        number of votes cast on judicial elections
    Relative turnout =
                             maximum number of votes cast on major elections on the same ballot

in which the major elections on the same ballot are presidential, gubernatorial, U.S. House, and
U.S. Senate elections. Using the relative turnout, rather than the absolute turnout (the number
of voters who cast a vote as a proportion of eligible voters), helps us to focus on voters’ usage of
information about candidates and abstract from the calculation of the cost of voting in analyzing
voters’ choice to vote. A typical voter decides whether to go to the voting booth or not by comparing
the cost of voting and the benefit from voting on their preferred candidates in major elections.31
Once a voter goes to the voting booth to vote in major elections, the additional cost of voting on
other offices is negligible. Hence, the decision to vote in judicial elections is determined by how
sufficient voters regard their information about candidates, and it is unlikely to be influenced by
the cost of voting.32
       Table 12 shows that the turnout rate is highest in partisan elections, followed by nonpartisan
and retention elections. The difference in turnout rates between partisan and nonpartisan elections
shows that information about party affiliation induces some voters who may not vote in the absence
of such information to vote on judicial elections. In addition, the substantial difference between
non-partisan and retention elections shows that competition is important for providing information
about candidates to voters. These features lead us to the following question: Does the information
about party affiliation on the ballot or the competitiveness of the electoral processes affect voters’
sensitivity to alternative sources of information about candidates? We investigate this issue by
estimating the influence of the amount of newspaper coverage about judges on the turnout rates.
       A main concern in identifying the causal effect of newspaper coverage on turnout rates is that
both may be driven by unobserved factors. For example, if a judge makes a controversial decision
in a high-profile case, it would increase both media coverage and voter turnout in judicial elections.
To address this issue, we use a measure, Congruence, based on the degree of match between judicial
districts and the circulation of newspapers, to capture the intensity of newspaper coverage of the
courts.33 Our basic premise is that newspapers cover more stories about districts in which they
have a large share of readers. Therefore, in the places where congruence between judicial districts
  31
     The benefit from voting can be non-negligible if voters take into account the welfare of a large group of citizens
who share their political preference, as in the model by Coate and Conlin (2004).
  32
     In the literature on voter turnout, scholars often argue that voters abstain from down-ballot elections such as
state court elections primarily because they do not have enough information about candidates (e.g., Feddersen and
Pesendorfer (1996)).
  33
     See Lim, Snyder, and Ströomberg (2012) for details of this approach, and Snyder and Strömberg (2010) for the
application of this approach to the analysis of media influence on congressmen.


                                                          17
and newspaper markets is high, newspapers have strong incentives to cover stories about courts.
More precisely, to construct the definition of Congruence, we consider a simple positive relationship
between the number of articles, qmd , that a newspaper m writes about a judge in judicial district
d and the share of newspapers’ readers that live in judicial district d, ReaderSharemd , that is,

                          qmd = α0 + α1 × ReaderSharemd , where α1 > 0.

Typically, multiple newspapers circulate in a judicial district. Hence, we aggregate over multiple
newspapers sold in a judicial district. Congruence of judicial district d is the average ReaderSharemd
weighted by the market share of each newspaper:

                                        M
                                        X
                      Congruenced =           M arketSharemd × ReaderSharemd
                                        m=1

where M arketSharemd is newspaper m’s market share in judicial district d.           Figure 2 illustrates
cases of high and low congruence. The left panel shows an example of perfect congruence between
judicial districts and circulation areas of newspapers (Congruence=1). In such a situation, events
taking place in a judicial district are relevant to all the readers of the newspaper sold in that judicial
district. Hence, newspapers have strong incentives to cover many stories about courts in that judi-
cial district. In contrast, the right panel shows an example of low congruence (Congruence=1/2).
In such a situation, events that take place in a judicial district are relevant only to half of the
readers of the newspapers sold in that judicial district. Hence, newspapers have a weaker incentive
to cover stories about courts.
    Our data on the newspaper coverage of state trial court judges, which is from Lim, Snyder and
Strömberg (2012), contains the coverage of 9,828 state trial court judges for 2004-2005 by 1,400
newspapers in NewsLibrary.com. There are on average 60 newspaper articles per year, newspaper,
and judicial district. The congruence measure has mean .22 and standard deviation .31. An increase
in Congruence from 0 to 1 is associated with an increase in the number of articles per judge by 24
articles.
    To measure the influence of newspaper coverage on turnout, we estimate the following equation:

 T urnoutit = β0 + β1 Congruenceit + β2 Congruenceit ∗ N onpartisanit
                + β3 Congruenceit × Retentionit + β4 N onpartisanit + β5 Retentionit + β6 xit + it

in which Nonpartisan is an indicator variable of nonpartisan elections, Retention is an indicator
variable of retention elections, xit is a set of demographic variables, and it is random disturbance.
Table 13 shows the results of this regression. The result shows that there is no effect of newspaper
coverage in partisan and retention elections. By contrast, in non-partisan elections, there is a
statistically significant positive effect. Column (3) shows that courts with the highest congruence
(Congruence=1) have 7.9 percentage points higher relative turnout rates than those with the lowest



                                                   18
congruence (Congruence=0).
    This result is consistent with the implication of the partisan voting behavior documented in
Section 3.1. In partisan elections, since voters base their votes mostly on party affiliation, other
information conveyed through media would not influence the decision to vote. By contrast, in
non-partisan elections, the shortage of voter information about judicial candidates let voters rely
on other sources of information, which leads to positive marginal effect of newspaper coverage on
turnout. Lastly, in retention elections, the alternative to incumbents is not determined at the point
of election, because there are no challengers. Therefore, the benefit from acquiring information
about judicial candidates is negligible from voters’ point of view. Moreover, the information about
judicial candidates generated by media coverage may not be disseminated effectively, due to the
absence of challengers, which further reduces the influence of newspaper coverage.


4    Discussion
Do partisan electoral systems tend to produce judges of lower quality than non-partisan or retention
election systems? The results above identify one force pushing in that direction: the relatively
weak relationship between quality/performance and voting decisions in partisan general elections.
There are, however, countervailing forces. First, the results above also show that in the primary
elections in partisan systems voters appear to use quality/performance relatively heavily in their
voting decisions. So, the comparison between non-partisan and partisan systems might really
boil down to a comparison between one system in which there are two good opportunities for
quality/performance to make a difference in the electoral outcome (non-partisan), and another
system in which there is only one. If one opportunity is all it takes, then the systems might yield
similar outcomes.
    Other factors might also play a role. For example, party elites might have a stronger incentive
to attempt to screen out low quality judges in partisan systems, in order to maintain a good
reputation or “brand name” for the party. Party leaders can endorse higher quality candidates in
the primaries, or provide campaign funds or other resources to the higher quality candidates, to
help them defeat those of lower quality. Of course, the ability of party leaders to affect primary
election outcomes depends on the strength of their organizations and the amount of resources they
control. Conventional wisdom holds that party organizations are weak in most states and localities,
and party leaders control few resources.
    Two pieces of evidence suggests that the systems do, in fact, produce difference outcomes.
And, consistent with our results above, the evidence suggests that quality/performance is worse in
partisan systems.
    The first piece of evidence comes from evaluations of court systems by the U.S. Chamber
Institute for Legal Reform, a division of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. These studies, entitled
State Liability Systems Ranking Study, which have been released annually since 2002, are based
on surveys of “a nationally representative sample of in-house general counsel, senior litigators and


                                                 19
other senior attorneys who are knowledgeable about litigation matters at companies with annual
revenues of at least $100 million.” This is the most relevant item for our purposes that asks
respondents to rate “Judges’ Competence.”
         Table 14 shows the averaging rank of the states within each judicial selection system, for each
year. In each year, the best state has a rank of 1 and the worst has a rank of 50.34 We show the
years separately, because, although the year-to-year correlations are high (the average correlation
is .86) there is also a non-trivial amount of movement. The bottom line is clear: in every year,
states with partisan elections are ranked significantly lower than other states. Interestingly, there is
also a clear difference between states with non-partisan elections and states with the appointment
system.35
         The second piece of evidence comes from a study of judicial malfeasance over the period 1985-
2007, by Goldschmidt, Olson and Ekman (2009). The data there suggests that malfeasance tends
to take more severe forms in partisan systems than other systems. More specifically, when we take
the figures from their main table (Table 4, pages 482-484), pool the cases for non-partisan and
retention election systems, and compare the pooled set of cases with the partisan cases, we obtain
Table 15 below.
         The bottom line is again reasonably clear. Conditional on a judge being disciplined for malfea-
sance, for each of the following items the percentage of cases involving the item is significantly
higher in partisan systems: criminal findings, “serious” findings, multiple violations in one case,
lack of impartiality, arrogant behavior, and deceitful behavior. For one item, neglect of duties,
the proportion of cases involving the item is significantly lower in partisan systems. There is no
significant difference between partisan and non-partisan/retention election systems on two items:
cases involving improper political activity, and judges with multiple cases.
         The figures presented in this section are only correlations, and cannot be given a causal inter-
pretation. They are suggestive nonetheless.


5         Conclusion
This paper analyzed how the institutional design of electoral processes shape voters’ decisions to
vote and the influence of party affiliation and candidate quality on election outcomes. Partisan
elections may be a good idea for some types of public offices, especially those offices with a large
ideological, policy-making component. However, making elections partisan may have an adverse
effect in that partisanship crowds out the influence of candidate quality. If voters make their
decisions mainly on the basis of party – or ideology, or ethnicity, race, or religion – then they might
elect low-quality officials with the “right” party or ideology over high-quality politicians with the
“wrong” party or ideology.
    34
    We do not have the 2009 survey results.
    35
    Lim (2012) proposes a reason why appointed judges may be of better quality than elected judges. Reelection
concerns imposed by the election system may have the perverse effect of discouraging public officials with a high level
of human capital from holding office. Due to reelection concerns, the welfare level of elected judges is much lower
than that of appointed judges, making judges with a high level of human capital less interested in the job.


                                                          20
   Trial court judges do not have a large policy-making role, and it is not clear that party con-
siderations should loom large. Evidently, however, when party labels are on the ballot, voters rely
heavily on these labels when voting. This cannot be explained by clear partisan differences in
sentencing. More likely, it is due to the fact that the partisan cue is so easy to use. More impor-
tantly, we find evidence that the relative quality of candidates has less effect on voting outcomes in
partisan elections than in non-partisan elections. This suggests that partisan elections might be a
bad idea for public officials who perform relatively bureaucratic, less ideological tasks. Our findings
on turnout rates are also consistent with these findings. The turnout rate is highest in partisan
elections, followed by non-partisan and retention elections. Additional sources of information about
candidates have an effect on turnout only in non-partisan competitive elections.
   Finally, our study can be extended to analyze the following issues. First, holding non-partisan
primaries at the same time as regular partisan primaries strikes us as a bad, at least in princi-
ple, because the electorate is often highly skewed depending on which party has highly contested
primaries at the top of the ticket. How much of problem is this in practice? Second, how does
candidate quality interact with factors such as race and gender, and how does this differ across elec-
toral systems? Third, to what extent does partisan voting behavior affects selecting high-quality
public officials for other low-information offices, such as regulators? Careful studies of these issues
will help us improve understanding of electoral processes.




                                                  21
References
Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini. 2007. “Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part I: A Single Policy
  Task.” American Economic Review 97:169–79.

Ashworth, Scott and Ethan Bueno de Mesquita. 2008. “Electoral Selection, Strategic Challenger
  Entry, and the Incumbency Advantage.” Journal of Politics 70 (4):1006–1025.

Aspin, Larry T. and William K. Hall. 1989. “Friends and Neighbors Voting in Judicial Retention
  Elections: A Research Note Comparing Trial and Appellate Court Elections.” Western Political
  Quarterly 42:587–596.

Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Rohini Pande. 2007. “Parochial Politics: Ethnic Competition and Politi-
  cian Corruption in India.” Working Paper.

Barber, Kathleen L. 1971. “Ohio Judicial Elections – Non-Partisan Premises with Partisan Results.”
  Ohio State Law Journal 32:762–789.

Barro, Robert J. 1973. “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model.” Public Choice 14:19–42.

Bartels, Larry M. 2008. “The Irrational Electorate.” Wilson Quarterly 32 (4):44–50.

Besley, Timothy J. and Stephen Coate. 2003. “Elected Versus Appointed Regulators: Theory and
  Evidence.” Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (5):1176–1206.

Besley, Timothy J., Rohini Pande, and Vijayendra Rao. 2005. “Political Selection and the Quality
  of Government: Evidence from South India.” Working Paper.

Besley, Timothy J., Torsten Persson, and Daniel M. Sturm. 2010. “Political Competition, Policy and
  Growth: Theory and Evidence from the United States.” Review of Economic Studies 77 (4):1329–
  1352.

Blume, John and Theodore Eisenberg. 1999. “Judicial Politics, Death Penalty Appeals, and Case
  Selection: An Empirical Study.” Southern California Law Review 72:464–503.

Bonneau, Chris W. and Melinda G. Hall. 2009. In Defense of Judicial Elections. Routeledge.

Champagne, Anthony and Greg Thielemann. 1991. “Awareness of Trial Court Judges.” Judicature
  74:271–276.

Coate, Stephen and Michael Conlin. 2004. “A Group Rule-Utilitarian Approach to Voter Turnout:
  Theory and Evidence.” The American Economic Review 94 (5):1476–1504.

Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic Theory of Democracy. Harper and Row.

Dubois, Philip L. 1980. From Ballot to Bench: Judicial Elections and the Quest for Accountability.
  Austin: University of Texas Press.

                                               22
———. 1984. “Voting Cues in Non-Partisan Trial Court Elections: A Multivariate Assessment.”
  Law & Society Review 18:395–436.

Feddersen, Timothy J. and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 1996. “The Swing Voter’s Curse.” American
  Economic Review 86 (3):408–424.

Ferejohn, John. 1986. “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control.” Public Choice 50:5–26.

Gelman, Andrew, James S. Liebman, Valerie West, and Alexander Kiss. 2004. “A Broken System:
  The Persistent Patterns of Reversals of Death Sentences in the United States.” Journal of
  Empirical Legal Studies 1 (2):209–261.

Goldschmidt, Jona, David Olson, and Margaret Ekman. 2008-2009. “The Relationship between
  Method of Judicial Selection and Judicial Misconduct.” Widener Law Journal 18.

Goldstein, Joel H. 1980. “Bar Poll Ratings as the Leading Influence on a Non-Partisan Judicial
  Election.” Judicature 63:377–384.

Gordon, Sanford C. and Gregory A. Huber. 2007. “The Effect of Electoral Competitiveness on
  Incumbent Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science 2 (2):107–138.

Hall, Melinda Gann. 2001. “State Supreme Courts in American Democracy: Probing the Myths of
  Judicial Reform.” American Political Science Review 95 (2):315–330.

Klein, David and Lawrence Baum. 2001. “Ballot Information and Voting Decisions in Judicial
  Elections.” Political Research Quarterly 54 (4):709–728.

Lim, Claire S.H. 2012. “Preferences and Incentives of Appointed and Elected Public Officials:
  Evidence from State Trial Court Judges.” Forthcoming in the American Economic Review.

Lim, Claire S.H., James M. Snyder, Jr., and David Strömberg. 2012. “The Judge, The Politi-
  cian, and the Press: Newspaper Coverage and Criminal Sentencing Across Electoral Systems.”
  Working Paper.

McGraw, Kathleen M. 2003. “Political Impressions, Formation and Management.” Oxford Handbook
  of Political Psychology .

McKnight, R. Neal, Roger Schaefer, and Charles A. Johnson. 1978. “Choosing Judges: Do the
  Voters Know What They’re Doing?” Judicature 62:94–99.

Padro i Miquel, Gerard. 2007. “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The Politics of
  Fear.” Review of Economic Studies 74 (4):1259–1274.

Reid, Traciel V. and Robert S. Moog. 2011. “Voter Information, Voter Participation, and the North
  Carolina Judicial Election Reforms: The Views of the Voters.” Politics & Policy 39 (2):223–250.



                                               23
Sheldon, Charles H. 1977. “Influencing the Selection of Judges: The Variety and Effectiveness of
  State Bar Activities.” Western Political Quarterly 30 (3):397–400.

Squire, Peverill and Eric R.A.N. Smith. 1988. “The Effect of Partisan Information on Voters in
  Non-Partisan Elections.” Journal of Politics 50 (1):168–179.

Stumpf, Harry P. and John H. Culver. 1992. The Politics of State Courts. New York: Longman.

Tabarrok, Alexander and Eric Helland. 1999. “Court Politics : The Political Economy of Tort
  Awards.” Journal of Law and Economics 42 (1):157–88.

Volcansek, Mary L. 1981. “An Exploration of the Judicial Election Process.” Western Political
  Quarterly 34 (4):572–577.




                                               24
                                           Table 1
                    Selection and Retention Rules for the State Trial Courts



 No. of States          Initial Selection                 Re-election                 Set of States
        9              Partisan Election             Partisan Election           AL, IN, KS, LA, MO
                                                                                  NY, TN, TX, WV
        22          Non-partisan Election         Non-partisan Election          AR, AZ, CA, FL, GA
                                                                                 ID, IN, KY, MD, MI
                                                                                  MN, MS, MT, NV
                                                                                  NC, ND, OH, OK
                                                                                  OR, SD, WA, WI
        3              Partisan Election            Retention Election                 IL, NM, PA
        10               Appointment                Retention Election           AZ, AK, CO, IA, IN,
                                                                                KS, MO, NE, UT, WY
        11                              Appointment                                 CT, DE, HI, ME
                                                                                    MA NH, NJ, RI,
                                                                                     SC, VA, VT
Note 1 : The classification is based on the selection and retention rule for the state trial courts of general
jurisdiction. Most of the states have the same selection rule for all levels of the state court.

Note 2 : The selection systems can be divided into five groups. There are four states (Arizona, Indiana,
Kansas, and Missouri) that have a within-state variation of two different systems (partisan or non-partisan
election and appointment-retention election) at the district level. These states are included in both cate-
gories. For more details, see the website on judicial selection systems by the American Judicature Society
(http://www.judicialselection.us/). In New Mexico judges are first appointed by the governor, then they
must run in a partisan election, and subsequent elections are retention elections. In Maryland, circuit
judges appointed by the governor must run in the next major election cross-filed in the Democratic and
Republican primaries without party labels. If there are different winners in each primary, they will face off
in the general election.

Note 3 : We classify a state as having non-partisan elections if party labels do not appear on the general
election ballot. In Arizona (in some counties), Maryland, and Ohio, nominations are partisan but the
general election ballot is non-partisan.

Source: Lim, Snyder, and Strömberg (2012).




                                                     25
                                            Table 2
                 Distribution of Candidate-Race Observations in the Election Data


          Main                      Number of Observations by Level and Election Period
          Selection              Supreme            Appellate               Trial
 State    System           Primary General Primary General Primary General                      Total     Period
 AK       Appt + Ret           0         18        0         11          0          153           182    1976-2010
 AL       Partisan            28         56       70          53        278         574          1059    1992-2010
 AR       Non-partisan        25         14       32           7        192          46           316    1992-2010
 AZ       Non-partisan         0         19        0         76          67         528           690    1990-2010
 CA       Non-partisan         0         20        0         280        936         234          1470    1990-2010
 CO       Appt + Ret           0         13        0         33          0         334            380    1996-2010
 FL       Non-partisan         0         39        0         321       1144         262          2990    1978-2010
 GA       Non-partisan        17         19       34          43        655         670          1438    1996-2010
 IA       Appt + Ret           0         19        0         28          0         744            791    1990-2010
 ID       Non-partisan        26          2       11          0         168           8           215    1990-2010
 IL       Part + Ret          51         36       285        184       2722        2819          6097    1982-2010
 IN       Partisan             0          5        0          17        669         604          1295    2002-2010
 KS       Mixed                0         28        0         62        668         1196          1954    1982-2010
 KY       Appt + Ret           3         21       12         50         78         433            597    1999-2010
 LA       Partisan            32          7      139          13       1078         143          1412    1996-2010
 MD       Non-partisan         0         12        0          35        588         251           886    1990-2008
 MI       Non-partisan         0         61       50        131         309         886          1437    1992-2010
 MN       Non-partisan        13         26        0         49         95          789           972    1990-2010
 MO       Partisan            0           9        0         52        250          432           743    1996-2010
 MS       Non-partisan        24         39        0         40           0         136           239    1986-2000
 MT       Non-partisan        31         32        0          0        215          179          457     1992-2010
 NC       Non-partisan        13         38       36         60          69         294           510    1994-2010
 ND       Non-partisan        17         17        0          0        222          192           448    1990-2010
 NE       Appt + Ret           0         24        0         18          0          175           217    1990-2010
 NM       Part + Ret           7         19       24         33         170         334           587    1996-2010
 NV       Non-partisan        22         29        0          0        262         200           513     1998-2010
 NY       Partisan            0           0        0          0           0        1144          1144    1990-2008
 OH       Non-partisan        60         54      483        380       2143         1824          4944    1990-2010
 OK       Non-partisan        0          36        0         69        641          400          1146    1990-2010
 OR       Non-partisan        41         10       37         15        696          193           992    1990-2010
 PA       Part + Ret          16         17       56          53       1074         492          1708    1991-2011
 SD       Non-partisan         0          9        0           0        24         107           140     1990-2006
 TN       Partisan             0          6        0         36          0         254            296    2000-2010
 TX       Partisan            94         86      668        495        3475        2713          7531    1990-2010
 UT       Appt + Ret          0          10        0         26          0          229           265    1990-2010
 WA       Non-partisan       154         92      103         95        504         268           1216    1970-2010
 WI       Non-partisan        18         28        9          72        474        1041          1642    1988-2010
 WV       Partisan            33         19        0           0        296         218           566    1992-2010
 WY       Appt + Ret           0         12        0          0          0           56            68    1996-2010
 Total                       725       1001      2049       2837      20162       21555         49553
Note: When a state has primary-runoffs (general-runoffs), we count them as primaries (general elections) in this
table. Since primary-runoffs and general-runoffs are rare, this classification does not affect the picture of our data
in a meaningful way. There are states with variation in selection systems across different levels of courts. In the
case of such variation, we put the main selection system for the state trial courts. “Appt + Retention” refers to
states with appointment and retention systems. “Part + Ret” refers to states with partisan elections followed by
retention elections. “Mixed” refers to a case of within-state, cross-district variation. The total number for Florida
includes 1224 observations of unopposed candidate-races that are not classified as primary or general elections.




                                                         26
                                       Table 3
               Summary Statistics of Partisan and Non-Partisan Elections


                                               Partisan Elections       Non-Partisan Elections
                                               Primary General          1st Round 2nd Round
                                                 (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)
 No. of States                                           17                         23
 No. of Seats up for Election                           7817                      11019
 Total No. of Races                              8956          6020        9280           2619
 No. of Uncontested Races                        6629          4131        6862           1067 a
 No. of Contested Races                          2327          1889        2418           1552
 No. of Candidates in                Mean         2.8           2.0         2.8             2.0
 Contested Elections                 S.D.         1.4           0.2         1.3             0.2
 Winners’ Vote Share in              Mean        .529          .567        .560            .578
 Contested Elections                 S.D.        .145          .074        .120            .070
a The number of uncontested races in the second round of nonpartisan elections only includes Arizona,
Maryland, and Ohio, which have election rules that are different from standard non-partisan elections.
There are states in which candidates who won the first round with majority votes appear on the ballot
again in general elections and win automatically. This number does not include such races. Therefore,
competitiveness of second-round races in non-partisan elections should not be directly compared with
partisan general elections.




                                                 27
             Table 4
Statistics of Retention Elections


    No. of States       20
    No. of Elections   6505
      Share of Yes-Votes
    Mean             0.739
    Std. Dev.        0.067
    Minimum          0.326
    10th percentile  0.646
    Median           0.747
    90th percentile  0.817
    Maximum          0.916




               28
                                      Table 5
                         Summary of Judicial Evaluations Data


State   Type    Name of Evaluating Body                            Period     Number
AK      State   Alaska Judicial Council                           1996-2010    152
AL      Bar     Birmingham Bar Association                        2004-2010     118
AZ      State   Arizona Commiss. on Judicial Performance Review   2000-2010     384
CA      Bar     Los Angeles County Bar Association                1994-2010     314
CA      Bar     Orange County Bar Association                     1998-2010      65
CA      Bar     San Diego County Bar Association                  1994-2010     98
CA      Bar     San Francisco County Bar Association              1996-2010     21
CO      State   Colorado Commiss. on Judicial Performance         1996-2010     781
FL      Bar     Dade County Bar Association                       2001-2010     487
IL      Bar     Illinois State Bar Association                    1990-2010    3501
IL      Bar     Chicago area Bar Associations (several)           1990-2010    2619
IA      Bar     Iowa State Bar Association                        1990-2010     803
KS      State   Kansas Commission on Judicial Performance         2008-2010     127
KY      Bar     Louisville Bar Association                        2003-2010      98
MI      Bar     Detroit Metropolitan Bar Association              1992-2010     354
MN      Bar     State Bar Association (with 2 county Bar Assoc)   1990-2010     190
MO      Bar     Missouri Bar Association                          1996-2006     293
NE      Bar     Nebraska State Bar Association                    2002-2010     694
NM      State   New Mexico Judicial Perform. Eval. Commiss.       2002-2010     194
NV      News    Las Vegas Review Journal                          2000-2011     408
NY      Bar     New York City Bar Association                     1997-2010     322
OH      Bar     Cleveland area Bar Associations (several)         1992-2010     769
OH      Bar     Columbus Bar Association                          1993-2010     628
OR      Bar     Oregon State Bar Association                      1990-2010     913
PA      Bar     Philadelphia Bar Association                      1991-2011     768
PA      Bar     Allegheny County Bar Association                  2001-2009     167
TX      Bar     Houston Bar Association                           1992-2010    1959
TX      Bar     Dallas Bar Association                            1993-2011    1550
UT      State   Utah Judicial Council                             1998-2010     223
WA      Bar     Seattle-King County Bar Association               1990-2012     425
WY      Bar     Wyoming State Bar Association                     1998-2010      87




                                          29
                                               Table 6
                        Estimates of Partisan Voting Using Precinct Level Data


    State   Area                    Election Type      Court Type      Party Determinationa        N    Avg Corr

    ILb     Cook County             Partisan           trial           on   ballot                  8      0.91
    NC      State                   Partisan           trial           on   ballot                 49      0.93
    NC      State                   Partisan           appellate       on   ballot                 20      0.97
    PA      Philadelphia County     Partisan           trial           on   ballot                 11      0.88
    PA      Philadelphia County     Partisan           appellate       on   ballot                  7      0.94
    TX      State                   Partisan           trial           on   ballot                 61      0.99
    TX      State                   Partisan           appellate       on   ballot                 32      0.99
    OH      Hamilton County         Nonpartisan        trial           partisan primary            16      0.89
    OH      Hamilton County         Nonpartisan        appellate       partisan primary            19      0.92
    AR      State                   Nonpartisan        trial           maximum possible           27       0.31
    CA      San Diego County        Nonpartisan        trial           maximum possible           12       0.45
    ID      State                   Nonpartisan        trial           maximum possible            3       0.33
    NC      State                   Nonpartisan        trial           previous electionc        151       0.28
    NC      State                   Nonpartisan        trial           maximum possible          151       0.55
    WA      King County             Nonpartisan        trial           maximum possible           16       0.45
    AZ      Maricopa County         Retention,   D     trial           appointing governor        74        0.17
    AZ      Maricopa County         Retention,   R     trial           appointing governor       126        0.06
    AZ      Maricopa County         Retention,   D     trial           registration/groups        30       0.40
    AZ      Maricopa County         Retention,   R     trial           registration/groups        16       0.02
    CA      San Diego County        Retention,   D     appellate       appointing governor         9       0.53
    CA      San Diego County        Retention,   R     appellate       appointing governor        14       0.26
    CO      State                   Retention,   D     appellate       appointing governor         7       0.17
    IL      Cook County             Retention,   D     trial           1st election              110       0.37
    IL      Cook County             Retention,   R     trial           1st election               18       0.28
    IL      Logan County            Retention,   R     trial           1st election                8       -0.23

a
  In nonpartisan elections, party affiliation is not shown on the ballot. Thus, we cannot exactly determine party
affiliation in most cases. In such cases, we code party affiliation of candidates to maximize correlation (“maximum
possible”). For example, if candidate A’s vote share increases and candidate B’s vote share decreases as Demo-
cratic Normal Vote increases, we regard that candidate A is Democrat and candidate B is Republican.
b
  In Illinois, judges are initially elected in partisan elections. Then, when their term expires, they run for reten-
tion election.
c
  North Carolina changed its judicial selection system from partisan to nonpartisan election. The change took ef-
fect in 1998 for trial court judges, and in 2004 for appellate and supreme court judges. Thus, we can determine
the party affiliation of many judges in North Carolina based on records of partisan elections.




                                                         30
                                            Table 7
                               Retention Elections in Cook County

                           Correlation                      Share of Yes-Votes
  Circuit      Party                                                 10th      med      90th
                       N     Mean    SD       N      Mean    SD
                                                                  percentile -ian     percentile
                D      49     .33    .14    117831   77.3    6.8     69.9      77.6      85.0
 At large
                R       1     .06            2448    74.2    5.3     67.6      74.1      81.3
                D      57     .41    .16    137472   74.7    8.5     64.8      75.7      84.0
Sub-circuits
                R      16     .28    .18     38673   74.9    7.7     66.3      75.7      83.2




                                              31
                           Table 8
Percentage of Winners By Recommended/Not-Recommended Status


                                                        % of Winners
  State              Score=0             Score=1        with Score=1
                  Mean     # Obs     Mean     # Obs     Mean     # Obs

                      Partisan Primary Elections
  Illinois         24.5     [709]     53.4    [1308]     80.0     [872]
  Texas            49.0     [208]     79.1     [589]     82.0     [568]
  Ohio             43.4     [129]     71.3     [296]     79.0     [267]

                      Partisan General Elections
  Illinois         58.7     [172]     76.7     [696]     84.1     [635]
  Texas            43.6      [94]     60.1     [436]     86.5     [303]

             Non-Partisan Elections (Primary and General)
  California       23.0     [113]     57.1     [340]     88.2     [220]
  Minnesota        9.5       [42]     71.8      [78]     93.3      [60]
  Oregon           19.5      [82]     61.7     [128]     83.2      [95]
  Washington       22.5      [40]     59.4     [207]     93.2     [132]
  Wisconsin        37.0      [27]     64.9      [74]     82.8      [58]
  Ohio             29.0     [69]      68.1     [383]     92.9     [281]
 Note: All candidates with bar association scores are shown. 0=Not Recom-
 mended, 1=Recommended. Robust standard errors are in parentheses, and the
 numbers of observations are in brackets. The columns denoted “Mean” gives
 the overall means of the dependent variables for each sample.




                                    32
                                             Table 9
                              Effect of Score on Election Outcomes


 State                         Win Percentage                             Vote Percentage
                              Coef    Std Error      # Obs               Coef     Std Error     # Obs
                    Mean                                        Mean
                               (1)        (2)           (3)               (4)         (5)         (6)
                                     Partisan General Elections
 Illinois            56.4      4.5       (5.1)          [227]    52.9     0.9        (0.9)       [226]
 Texas               44.9      1.7       (4.6)          [243]    46.0     2.1        (0.7)       [243]

                                     Partisan Primary Elections
 Illinois            49.4     30.0       (4.8)          [170]    48.6     9.5        (1.4)       [169]
 Texas               49.2     24.4       (6.0)          [122]    50.3     10.5       (1.8)       [122]
 Ohio                65.7     23.4       (10.7)         [35]     53.7     11.9       (3.1)        [35]

                                       Non-Partisan Elections
 California          37.2     38.0       (6.0)          [113]    48.2     12.4       (1.8)       [113]
 Minnesota           46.3     47.4       (5.7)          [54]     49.5     10.8       (1.1)        [49]
 Oregon              44.7     29.7       (12.4)         [47]     48.8     7.2        (2.3)        [47]
 Washington          50.8     42.5       (10.3)         [63]     49.9     16.3       (2.7)        [63]
 Wisconsin           48.6     34.1       (11.3)         [37]     50.9     11.8       (3.0)        [37]
 Ohio                61.7     28.8       (5.9)          [162]    53.1     7.0        (1.3)       [163]

                                         Retention Elections
 Arizona             100.0     0.0       (0.0)          [332]    72.5     14.8       (3.4)       [331]
 Colorado            98.5     65.8       (6.1)          [333]    71.9     20.2       (2.8)       [605]
 Illinois            98.8     19.7       (1.4)       [1202]      76.9     10.1       (0.7)       [1202]
 Iowa                99.9     14.3       (1.3)          [741]    74.8     9.7        (1.9)       [741]
 Kansas              100.0     0.0       (0.0)          [111]    71.7     0.6        (2.9)       [111]
 Missouri            100.0     0.0       (0.0)          [291]    68.1     6.3        (1.4)       [290]
 Nebraska            99.5     10.0       (2.1)          [222]    72.1     9.6        (1.4)       [222]
 New Mexico          96.6     57.1       (4.8)          [117]    74.1     24.4       (1.9)       [117]
 Utah                99.0     28.6       (3.3)          [200]    80.3     15.0       (1.8)       [200]
 Wyoming             100.0     0.0       (0.0)          [71]     77.8     11.3       (1.8)        [71]
Note: Each cell in columns (1)-(6) shows the estimated coefficient on the variable Relative Score, as well
as the standard error (in parentheses) and the number of observations (in brackets).




                                                   33
                                   Table 10
               Partisan and Ideological Differences Among Voters

Year                            Appointed   Retention   Nonpartisan   Partisan

Partisan Intensity                 1.70        1.89         1.86        1.89
                                  [1851]      [1363]       [6244]      [3991]
Ideological Extremity              1.10        1.10         1.11        1.08
                                  [1420]      [1050]       [4431]      [2700]
Ideological Warmth Extremity       22.6        22.4         22.1        21.2
                                  [1624]      [1206]       [5387]      [3410]




                                      34
                        Table 11
               Partisanship and Sentencing


 Dependent Variable: Relative Harshness of Sentence
 Independent Variable: Share of Democratic Judges
 Offense       Parameter
 Category      Estimate       Std Error         N         R2
                     Texas, All Districts
 Violent           0.037         0.016        24941       0.32
 Property         -0.014         0.017        38400       0.39
 Drug             -0.040         0.010        51566       0.44
 Other            -0.039         0.019        22686       0.44
               Texas, Smaller Districts Only
 Violent           0.044         0.082        1984        0.39
 Property         -0.098         0.067        3043        0.43
 Drug             0.077          0.041        3334        0.48
 Other             0.096         0.050        1890        0.37

                 Other States, All Districts
 Violent          -0.036         0.025       28849        0.28
 Property         -0.009         0.025       54284        0.31
 Drug             -0.023         0.014       106403       0.39
 Other            -0.068         0.026       41386        0.30
           Other States, Smaller Districts Only
 Violent          -0.106         0.075        3505        0.39
 Property         -0.019         0.076        7532        0.37
 Drug             -0.029         0.035        9710        0.42
 Other            -0.096         0.054        3830        0.39
Note: In each panel the coefficient estimates are from four sepa-
rate regressions, one for each offense category. Control variables
are: demographic composition of the population (race, gender,
ethnicity, age), income, and crime rates. Other states are: Al-
abama, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, and
Ohio.




                               35
                      Table 12
    Relative Turnout Rates by the Type of Elections


 Type of Elections                N      Mean (%)      Std. Dev.
 partisan contested             1246       82.9           30.3
 partisan uncontested           3481       63.5           22.6
 nonpartisan contested           946       76.0           21.5
 nonpartisan uncontested        1973       61.1           14.7
 retention                      3989       66.7           18.9
 Total                         11635        67.3          22.1

Note: Only general elections are included. All pairwise differences
in turnout rates between election systems are statistically signifi-
cant at 5%-level. Arizona and Ohio, which hold partisan primaries,
are excluded from nonpartisan elections in turnout calculation,
even though party affiliation does not appear on the ballot. Wis-
consin, which does not hold judicial elections together with other
state elections, and Tennessee, which has general judicial elections
with state primaries, are also excluded from the statistics. Uncon-
tested second round races of nonpartisan elections are included in
this table, for comparison with uncontested partisan general elec-
tions.




                                36
                            Table 13
    Voter Turnout and Newspaper Coverage (Congruence)

 Variable                            (1)        (2)             (3)
 Congruence                     -0.052∗∗∗    0.010        -0.003
                                (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.014)
 Congruence*Nonpartisan          0.097∗∗∗     0.067∗∗∗     0.079∗∗∗
                                (0.024)      (0.019)      (0.020)
 Congruence*Retention            0.021       -0.021       -0.005
                                (0.028)      (0.022)      (0.018)
 Nonpartisan                    -0.109∗∗     -0.063∗      -0.085∗∗
                                (0.043)      (0.036)      (0.039)
 Retention                       0.040∗∗      0.075∗∗∗     0.063∗∗∗
                                (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.016)
 State Fixed Effects            Yes          Yes          Yes
                                             pop.,
 Control Variables              No                        All
                                             density
 R2                             0.40         0.45         0.48
 No. obs                        9149         9149         9149
Note: Standard errors are clustered at state-year level. ∗∗∗ : signif-
icant at 1%-level. Control variables included are: population (log),
density (log), demographic composition of the population (race, gen-
der, ethnicity, age), income, education, and crime rates.




                                 37
                     Table 14
Judge Competence Ranking by the Chamber of Commerce



  Year      Appointeda Retention            Nonpartisan       Partisan

  2002          23.2            16.2             25.4            37.8
  2003          21.0            16.9             26.1            38.2
  2004          19.5            15.7             27.7            37.7
  2005          19.0            21.4             25.4            37.8
  2006          19.4            16.6             26.7            39.1
  2007          18.1            21.9             26.0            36.9
  2008          19.3            15.4             27.5            38.6
  2010          16.9            19.8             26.6            39.1

 # Obs            11              9               21               9
a The ‘Appointed’ category includes all the states with appointed judges

regardless of whether they are life-tenured, re-appointed, or they face re-
tention elections. There is no significant difference in rankings between
sub-categories of the appointment system.




                                      38
                           Table 15
                      Judicial Malfeasance



                                          Retention/
Item                                      Nonpartisan   Partisan

Criminal Findings                            11.1         18.6
Serious Findings                             17.3         32.1
Multiple Findings in One Case                41.6         54.1
Findings of Lack of Impartiality             21.1         29.0
Findings of Arrogance                        33.5         45.2
Findings of Deceitfulness                    10.6         16.2
Neglect of Duties or Incompetence            16.6         10.7
Findings of Improper Political Activity       7.3          9.7
Judges w/Multiple Disciplinary Cases         8.5           8.6
Number of Observations                       331          290




                               39
                    Table A.1: Competition in Partisan Elections by State – Primary Elections
                                     Number of Races                      Number of                Winner’s
 State    Seats                    Democrat          Republican         Candidates in           Vote Share in
          up for              UnCon-      Con-    Uncon-     Con-     Contested Elections     Contested Elections
         Election    Total∗    tested    tested   tested    tested     Mean      Std Dev       Mean      Std Dev
 AL         541        189        59       49        32       49        2.3        0.5         0.589      0.093
 AR          52         28        9         13        3         3       2.1        0.3         0.625      0.090
 AZ          49         58        28        6        22        2        2.4        0.7         0.593      0.190
 IL         969       1365       309       435      368      253        3.5        2.0         0.448      0.162
 IN         407       491       151         37      243        60       2.4        0.7         0.553      0.101
 KS         526        562       241        31      240       50        2.3        0.8         0.544      0.110
 MD         104        206        67       36        66       37        2.6        1.2         0.638      0.141
 MO         177        195        86        18       69       22        2.4        0.7         0.553      0.110
 MS         12          11         5         5        0         1       2.0        0.0         0.637      0.107
 NC         50          16         0        12       0         4        2.1        0.3         0.623      0.088
 NM         122       143        53         35       46         9       2.3        0.6         0.548      0.092
 OH        1565       2154       776      191      1046       141       2.6        1.2         0.548      0.144
 PA         97         188        11        84       23       70        3.2        1.5         0.496      0.132
 TX        2572       3122      1163       283     1352      324        2.2        0.6         0.591      0.094
 WV         193        228       111       57        50       10        2.3        0.6         0.563      0.105
 Total     7436       8956      3069      1292     3560      1035       2.8        1.4         0.529      0.145

Note: For the number of candidates and winners’ vote share, we report only the statistics of the elections with
single winners, because statistics of the elections in multi-winner elections are not comparable to those of single-
winner elections. Arkansas used partisan elections until 2000, then switched to non-partisan elections. In Arizona,
counties with populations of 250,000 or greater select state trial court judges through gubernatorial appointment
and retention election, and all other counties use partisan primaries and non-partisan general elections. Indiana
uses partisan elections with the following exceptions: Circuit Courts and Superior Courts in Vanderburg County
and Superior Court in Allen County use non-partisan elections; and, Superior Courts in Lake and St. Joseph
Counties use gubernatorial appointment and retention elections. In Kansas, 14 judicial districts use partisan elec-
tions, and the other 17 districts use gubernatorial appointment and retention elections. In Missouri, Jackson,
Clay, Platte, and St. Louis counties use gubernatorial appointment and retention elections for state trial court
judges, and all other use partisan elections. Gubernatorial appointment with retention elections are used for ap-
pellate and supreme courts. Mississippi used partisan elections until 1992. North Carolina used partisan elections
for superior courts until 1998, and for appellate and supreme courts until 2004. New York, which uses partisan
elections, is omitted from the table because it uses party conventions rather than primaries to make judicial nom-
inations. The data on primary elections in Tennessee are unavailable.
Note∗ : The total number of races does not include the primaries of the third party.




                                                        40
       Table A.2: Competition in Partisan Elections by State – General Elections
                            No. of No. of          Number of             Winner’s
 State  Seats      Total   Uncon- Con-           Candidates in         Vote Share in
        up for    Number tested tested Contested Elections Contested Elections
       Election of Races Races       Races     Mean      Std Dev     Mean      Std Dev
 AL       541       533      391       142       2.0        0.0      0.552       0.066
 AR        52        32       16        16       2.0        0.0      0.602       0.074
 IL       969       962      562       400       2.0        0.1      0.595       0.069
 IN       407       406      307        99       2.0        0.1      0.573       0.063
 KS       526       522       449      73        2.0        0.0      0.563       0.056
 MO       177       174       135      39        2.0        0.2      0.576       0.088
 MS        12        11        8        3        2.0        0.0      0.613       0.078
 NC        50        44       11        33       2.0        0.0      0.535       0.040
 NM       122       118        63      55        2.0        0.2      0.557       0.045
 NY       201       201       40       161       2.1        0.3      0.589       0.087
 PA        97        97        37      60        2.1        0.2      0.559       0.038
 TN       180       180       134       46       2.4        0.8      0.578       0.130
 TX      2572      2547      1825      722       2.0        0.2      0.554       0.074
 WV      193        193       153      40        2.0        0.0      0.570       0.049
 Total   6099      6020      4131     1889       2.0        0.2      0.567       0.074
Note: For number of candidates and winners’ vote share in contested elections, we report only the statistics
of the elections in single-member districts, because statistics of the elections in multi-member districts are not
comparable to those of single-member districts.




                                                       41
   Table A.3: Competition in Non-Partisan Elections by State – First Round
                  No. of No. of No. of Candidates         Top Vote-getter’s
          Total  Uncon- Con-           in Contested         Vote Share in
        Number tested tested             Elections       Contested Elections
 State of Races Races       Races    Mean      Std Dev     Mean      Std Dev
 AR        109       41        68      2.3       0.7       0.569      0.089
 CA        377       52       325      2.8       1.3       0.584      0.132
 FL       1689     1505       184      3.2       0.9       0.453      0.116
 GA        804     660        144      2.6       1.2       0.589      0.117
 ID        182      164        18      2.3       0.5       0.581      0.074
 IN        29        24         5      2.8       0.8       0.526      0.110
 KY        361      232       129      2.4       0.9       0.557      0.099
 LA        812      568       244      2.8       1.1       0.550      0.115
 MI        504      349       155      3.3       1.7       0.527      0.135
 MN        741     639        102      2.9       2.8       0.581      0.119
 MS        111       58        53      2.4       0.8       0.568      0.096
 MT        154      128        26      2.9       1.3       0.523      0.124
 NC        172      101        71      2.7       1.2       0.544      0.127
 ND        168      146        22      2.7       1.2       0.561      0.143
 NV        181       88        93      3.3       1.5       0.538      0.142
 OK        571     348        223      2.5       0.9       0.571      0.102
 OR        703      602       101      2.9       1.3       0.545      0.125
 SD         83       59        24      2.4       0.8       0.560      0.130
 WA        493      296       197      2.6       1.0       0.565      0.110
 WI       1036      802       234      2.7       1.2       0.580      0.125
 Total    9280     6862      2418      2.8       1.3       0.560      0.122
Note 1 : For the number of candidates and winners’ vote share in contested elections, we report
only the statistics of the elections in single-member districts, because statistics of the elections
in multi-member districts are not comparable to those of single-member districts.
Note 2 : In Indiana, non-partisan election is used only in Vanderburgh and Allen County. All the
nonpartisan elections in Indiana in this table were held in general elections.




                                                42
  Table A.4: Competition in Non-Partisan Elections by State – Second Round
                  No. of No. of No. of Candidates              Winner’s
         Total   Uncon- Con-           in Contested          Vote Share in
        Number tested tested             Elections       Contested Elections
 State of Races Races       Races    Mean      Std Dev     Mean     Std Dev
 AR         9                  9       2.0       0.0       0.564      0.039
 AZ        56       47         9       2.8       1.6       0.554      0.100
 CA       105                105       2.0       0.0       0.563      0.052
 FL        125               125       2.0       0.0       0.558      0.045
 GA        36                 36       2.0       0.2       0.577      0.065
 ID          5                 5       2.0       0.0       0.552      0.026
 KY        23                 23       2.0       0.0       0.581      0.062
 LA         75                75       2.0       0.0       0.569      0.093
 MD       119      112         7       2.0       0.0       0.615      0.052
 MI        70                 70       2.0       0.0       0.548      0.040
 MN        20                 20       2.0       0.0       0.584      0.068
 MS         4                  4       2.0       0.0       0.563      0.068
 MT         47                47       2.0       0.0       0.586      0.069
 NC        22                 22       2.0       0.0       0.554      0.037
 ND         40                40       2.0       0.0       0.592      0.068
 NV         57                57       2.0       0.0       0.573      0.054
 OH       1564     908       656       2.1       0.3       0.592      0.081
 OK        57                 57       2.0       0.0       0.558      0.043
 OR         28                28       2.0       0.0       0.559      0.044
 SD         7                  7       2.0       0.0       0.559      0.043
 WA        54                 54       2.0       0.0       0.563      0.045
 WI         96                96       2.0       0.0       0.579      0.060
 Total    2619     1067     1552       2.0       0.2       0.578      0.070
Note 1 : For number of candidates and winners’ vote share in contested elections, we report only
the statistics of the elections in single-member districts, because statistics of the elections in
multi-member districts are not comparable to those of single-member districts.
Note 2 : Arizona has partisan primaries and non-partisan general elections in counties with pop-
ulation smaller than 250,000. The nonpartisan elections in Arizona in this table were all held in
general elections after partisan primaries.
Note 3: The nonpartisan elections in Ohio and in Maryland in this table were all held in general
elections after partisan primaries.




                                               43
                  Table A.5: Vote Share in Retention Elections by State
                                            Shares of Yes-Votes
           No. of                                  10th                90th
 State    Elections Mean Std Dev           Min    Percen Median Percen-                          Max
                                                    -tile               tile
 AK          182      0.662     0.055     0.519    0.601     0.660    0.730                     0.841
 AZ          549      0.721     0.060     0.537    0.632     0.726    0.802                     0.831
 CA          300      0.695     0.061     0.519    0.611     0.707    0.763                     0.801
 CO          380      0.709     0.058     0.378    0.635     0.721    0.770                     0.822
 FL          360      0.698     0.051     0.531    0.631     0.706    0.761                     0.810
 IA          791      0.746     0.054     0.376    0.683     0.756    0.800                     0.852
 IL         1677      0.766     0.053     0.511    0.705     0.775    0.825                     0.885
 IN           33      0.696     0.037     0.595    0.649     0.702    0.732                     0.780
 KS          691      0.754     0.063     0.509    0.673     0.757    0.837                     0.905
 MD           47      0.845     0.040     0.746    0.779     0.861    0.883                     0.899
 MO          279      0.683     0.043     0.554    0.627     0.685    0.739                     0.780
 MT          108      0.813     0.057     0.591    0.730     0.832    0.877                     0.916
 NE          217      0.720     0.057     0.326    0.665     0.730    0.775                     0.825
 NM          207      0.741     0.062     0.505    0.655     0.750    0.809                     0.861
 OK          105      0.643     0.043     0.557    0.575     0.656    0.689                     0.720
 PA          195      0.744     0.080     0.355    0.628     0.755    0.825                     0.865
 SD            9      0.830     0.011     0.812    0.812     0.829    0.846                     0.846
 TN           42      0.746     0.024     0.683    0.710     0.755    0.771                     0.776
 UT          265      0.795     0.052     0.460    0.745     0.798    0.853                     0.886
 WY           68      0.779     0.045     0.493    0.743     0.785    0.820                     0.847
 Total      6505      0.739     0.067     0.326    0.646     0.747    0.817                     0.916
Note: Arizona, California, Florida, Oklahoma, and Tennessee use gubernatorial appointment and reten-
tion election for state appellate courts and supreme courts. In Montana, incumbent judges who are un-
opposed in the first round run for retention elections at the time of general elections. South Dakota uses
gubernatorial appointment and retention election only for the state supreme court.




                                                   44
                  Table A.6: Partisan Differences in Judicial Evaluations
                                                                    Average   Score
State   Evaluating Body
                                                             Dem    Rep        Diff   P-val
AZ      Arizona Commiss. on Judicial Performance Review      1.00   0.98       0.02   0.19
                                                             (110)  (190)
CO      Colorado Commiss. on Judicial Performance            0.99   0.99       0.00   0.77
                                                             (474)  (184)
IL      Average Across All Associations                      0.75   0.81      -0.07   0.00
                                                             (2604) (1439)
IA      Iowa State Bar Association                           1.00   1.00       0.01   0.45
                                                             (116)  (400)
KS      Kansas Commission on Judicial Performance            0.96   0.95       0.01   0.75
                                                             (55)   (40)
MO      Missouri Bar Association                             0.96   0.99      -0.03   0.13
                                                             (191)  (101)
NE      Nebraska State Bar Association                       0.97   0.99      -0.03   0.08
                                                             (162)  (177)
NM      New Mexico Judicial Performance Eval. Commiss.       0.98   1.00      -0.02   0.41
                                                             (104)  (35)
NY      New York City Bar Association                        0.94   0.54       0.41   0.00
                                                             (68)   (56)
OH      Average Across All Associations                      0.76   0.86      -0.10   0.00
                                                             (603)  (492)
TX      Average Across All Associations                      0.72   0.81      -0.09   0.00
                                                             (621)  (769)
WY      Wyoming State Bar Association                        0.94   0.92       0.02   0.75
                                                             (48)   (24)




                                            45
                        Figure 1
Judicial Sub-circuits and Partisanship of Cook County, IL


                                   Barrington          Palatine           Wheeling         Northfield                       New
                                                                                                                            Trier




                                                                                                                                             Evanston
                                                                                        Maine                      Niles
                                                  Schaumburg          Elk Grove
                                 Hanover
                                                                                                                                                        49
                                                                                                                                             50

                                                                                                                                               40        48
                                                                                  41                                   45        39
                                                                                                  Norwood                                           47       46
                                                                                                   Park                                  33
                                                                                                                   38
                                                                                                   36                        30                               44
                                                                                                                             31         35              32
                                                                                       Leyden                                                                     43
                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                            37          26
                                                                                                   River
                                                                                                   Forest
                                Barack Obama &           John McCain &                                       Oak                                             27        42
                                                                                                             Park             28
                                Joe Biden                Sarah Palin
                                                                                                                       29                                          2
                                (Democrat)               (Republican)                  Proviso                                      24




                                                                                                              Berwyn
                                                                                                                                                        25
                                           <40%          >60%                                                          Cicero
                                                                                                 Riverside                         22
                                                                                                                                             12              11
                                       40 - 50%          50 - 60%
                                                                                                                                                                        3        4
                                                                                                             Stickney                   14
                                       50 - 60%          40 - 50%
                                                                                                                       23                                    16
                                       60 - 70%          30 - 40%                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                        Lyons                                      13
                                                         <30%                                                                                            17
                                           >70%
                                                                                                                                             18                             6
                                                                                                             Stickney                                                                        7
                                City of Chicago data is represented                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                                  21
                                at ward-level.
                                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                          Palos                   Worth                                           34                         10
                                                                                                                                                                             9

                                                                       Lemont
                                                                                                                                                        Calumet




                                                                                         Orland                             Bremen                                      Thornton




                                                                                                                                 Rich                                        Bloom




                           46
                  Figure 2
Example - High Congruence and Low Congruence

   ,ŝŐŚŽŶŐƌƵĞŶĐĞ        >ŽǁŽŶŐƌƵĞŶĐĞ


                              ǭ




          ŝƌĐƵůĂƚŝŽŶƌĞĂŽĨEĞǁƐƉĂƉĞƌ
          ŝƌĐƵůĂƚŝŽŶƌĞĂŽĨEĞǁƐƉĂƉĞƌ
          :ƵĚŝĐŝĂůŝƐƚƌŝĐƚŽƵŶĚĂƌǇ




                     47
