NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TARGETING NOMINAL INCOME: A NOTE

Kenneth D. West

Working Paper No. 1835

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1986

I thank Christina Romer, David Romer, John Taylor, and, especially,
Charles Bean for helpful comments, and the National Science
Foundation for financial support. This paper was revised while I
was a National Fellow at the Hoover Institution. This note builds
on a handout 'Targeting Nominal Income" that I prepared for Fall
I thank my students for help1984 class at Princeton University.
ful questions. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1835
February 1986

Targeting Nominal Incorre: A Note

ABSTRACI'

This paper compares nominal income and monetary targets in a standard
aggregate demand -

aggregate supply framework. If the desirability of policies

is measured by their effect on the unconditional variance of output, nominal

income targeting is preferable if and only if the aggregate elasticity of
demand for real balances is greater than one.

This is precisely the opposite

of the condition that in Bean (1984) is sufficient to make nominal income
targeting preferable.

This points out the importance of specification of

supply and of objective function in work on nominal income targeting.

Kenneth D. West

Woodr Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

A policy of targeting nominal income has been advocated in recent
years by many economists, for example, Tobin (1983) and Vines et al.

(1983). The arguments are for the most part informal, with no explicit

model. Bean's (1984) able analysis is a notable exception. Bean uses a
standard, simple aggregate demand curve and an aggregate supply curve
similar to those found in the Fischer (1977) and Taylor (1980)

contracting models. He measures the desirability of policies in terms of
their ability to reduce the variance of output around a certain "full

information" level. He reaches the conclusions (among others) that in
the face of demand shocks nominal income targeting is always preferable

to money supply targeting. In the face of supply shocks, a sufficient
(but not necessary) condition for nominal income targeting to be
preferable is that the elasticity of aggregate demand for real balances
be less than one (Bean 1984, pp. 808-813).

The purpose of this note is to consider whether these conclusions
still hold if Bean's supply curve is replaced with a standard

expectations augmented supply curve (equation (Ib) below). It turns out
that radically different conclusions can result. The discussion in
section I below focuses on a simple formulation where the contrast is
dramatic, namely, when expectations are adaptive, shocks are serially

uncorrelated and the desirability of policies is measured by their

ability to reduce the unconditional variance of output. In such a case,
nominal income targeting is preferable to money supply targeting if and
only if the elasticity of demand for real balances is greater than one.

This is true for both supply and demand shocks. Note that this necessary
and sufficient condition is precisely the opposite of Bean's sufficient
condition in the face of supply shocks.

-2-

The contrast between these conclusions and those of Bean result from
the different supply curves and the different criteria for measuring the

desirability of policies. As explained in section II, results
contradictory to those of Bean are still obtained if the section I
framework is amended to assume, as did Bean, rational expectations and

serially correlated shocks. But results somewhat consistent with those
of Bean do result when an analogue of Bean's measure of desirability is

mechanically adapted. This measure does riot, however, seem particularly
sensible in an aggregate demand - aggregate supply framework.
To prevent misunderstanding, let me emphasize that my aim is not to
argue for the use of variants of the present paper's model instead of
Bean's in future theoretical and empirical analyses of nominal income

targeting. On the contrary, I find Bean's carefully developed aggregate
supply curve more attractive in many respects than the standard, somewhat

ad hoc, aggregate supply curve used here. The point of this note,
rather, is that the two models, each of which probably would be

considered acceptable by many economists, lead not only to different but
even contradictory conclusions concerning the conditions under which

nominal income targeting is desirable. It is therefore extremely
important in future work on nominal income targeting to be precise about
what environjiient is assumed.

I. Nominal income versus money supply targets
Notation throughout is as close to Bean's as possible. Aggregate
demand and supply are given by

-3-

=

y + y(m-p) + Vt

0 +
=

+ Ut

+

(la)

(ib)

8p1

oo< I
o < y,3

is log output, m log money stock, Pt log price level, p price

expected by the public at period t-1, y0 the natural rate of output, v

and u serially uncorrelated disturbances. Aggregate demand (la) is as
in Bean a simple function of real balances. y is the elasticity of the
aggregate demand for real balances and will play a key role in the
analysis.

Aggregate supply, unlike Beants, is an expectations augmented

Phillips curve. Expectations are assumed to be formed adaptively, so

P= (1_o)(1eL)p1.'
For algebraic simplicity, y0 and y0 will be assumed to be zero in

the algebra to follow. This is a harmless assumption since output
variability does not depend on the constant terms. With the constants
set to zero, the reduced form of the model is

=

Pt

(+y)(
(ft'-y)1(

+ v+yu)
+

+ Vt -

Ut)

(2a)

(2b)

-4-

As in Bean (1984), the monetary authority must choose the period t

money supply m before the shocks u and v are known. Unlike Bean,
policies will be compared in terms of their ability to stabilize output,

i.e., to minimize Ey.

This is of course the criterion assumed in many

textbook discussions of optimal monetary policy (e.g. Sargent (1979,
ch. XV)).

Consider first Ey under a constant money supply rule, say, m 0
for all t. From the reduced form price equation (2b), under such a rule

Pt =

(÷yY

[(1-0)(1-OLY

u]

(3)

Nultiplying through by (1—eL) and recollecting terms yields the final

form equation for Pt and therefore for p:

Pt =

(+y)(1-OL)(1-pL)(v- u)

(4a)

p E (+y)(+Oy), 0<p<1

pe =

(+y)(1-O)(1_pL)(v

uj)

(4b)

To solve for the stochastic process for output under a constant
money supply rule, subtract (4b) from (4a), and put the result into the

supply equation (Ib) (again, with y0 set to zero). After a little
rearrangement, this becomes

=

(+y)

(IpL)(IL)(v

u)

-5-

The first term is that of an ARHA(1,1) process. Use of the standard
formula for the variance of such a process (Box and Jenkins (l976,p. 76))
yields the variance of output under a constant money supply rule:

Ey =

2(+y)2[2(1-p)(1-p2)1
+

2(p+y)

1Eut(vt_u) +

(6)

E(v-u)2]

Eu

Now consider the policy of targeting nominal income. The
authorities attempt to set (log of) nominal income,

to an arbi-

trary level, say, zero. Since they must choose m before the serially
uncorrelated shocks u and v are known, it follows from the reduced form
equations (2a) and (2b) that m is chosen so that

(÷)l(e) +

(÷)1(÷e)

= 0

(7)

Equation (7) may be solved to get a rule for setting money as a function

of the expected price level p. The resulting rule may be plugged into
the reduced form price equation (2b) to obtain the final form equations

for Pt and p:

=

(8)

(ftt-O)(1+)1

0<v<1

A tedious detailed derivation of (8) is omitted to save space.

Equation (8) may now be plugged into the aggregate supply equation
(ib) (again, with y0

=

0), to obtain

(+y)(1-vL)(1-L)(v

-u

+ Ut

(9)

-6-

This is precisely the same as the equation (5) stochastic process for

output under the money supply rule, except that V replaces p. The
variance of output under the nominal income rule is therefore

Ey

2(ftfyY2[2(1_v)(1_v2Y1E(vt_u)2}
+

(10)

2(ft$-y) 1Eu(v_u) + Eu

Compare (10) and (6). The nominal income rule leads to a lower

variance of output only if (i-v)(i-v21< (1-p)(i-p21. This in turn
is true if and only if p<v, i.e., if and only if

(+yO)(+y)< (÷O)(1+)_1. This latter inequality holds if and only
if y>l. That is, a policy of targeting nominal income leads to a lower
output variance than does a policy of targeting the money supply if and
only if the elasticity of demand for real balances is greater than one.
This condition is necessary and sufficient in the face of demand shocks,
supply shocks or any combination of the two.

It is instructive to illustrate why the model (1) leads to this
condition. In Figure (1), DD and SS are the supply and demand curves in

and initial equilibrium with y =

y0.

(The constant terms y0 and 0 have

been restored in the picture.) XX is a line with slope minus one along
which nominal income is constant. Suppose that in period 1 a demand
shock pushes demand to D1D1. (The illustration in the case of a supply
shock is similar.)

The period 1 supply shock is assumed to be zero, as are both demand

and supply shocks in all future periods. Since price falls in period 1,
supply shifts outwards in period 2, say, to S2S2. Supply then slowly
shifts back up towards SS.

—7—

The path followed by output depends on the monetary policy followed.

Suppose first a constant money supply rule is followed. Then demand
shifts back to DD in period 2, and period 2 equilibrium is at E2. In
future periods, output shifts from

y2 toward y0.

Suppose instead a constant nominal income rule is followed. Then
the monetary authority adjusts the money supply so that nominal income

from period 2 onwards falls on the XX line. Since period 2 supply is

S2S2, period 2 equilibrium is a E. In future periods output shifts

from y to y0.
Nominal income targeting clearly leads to greater variability of
income. Just as clearly, this results because DD is steeper than XX,

i.e., because y<1. Were y>I, nominal income targeting would lead to less
variability of income.

—8—

I .Di.scussion

Six comments on the previous section's results are of interest. First, a
comparison of Figure 1 here with Bean's Figure 1 (P. 812) will help illustrate

the role played by the different specifications of supply.

In both models,

once a demand shock causes output to deviate from Y0, supply shifts. But in
the present paper's model, the shift is such that nominal income targeting does

not return output to Y0 until long run equilibrium is achieved.

In Bean's

model, on the other hand, the shift is such that nominal income targeting does

return output to its optimal level in the period following the shock. Hence in

the face of demand shocks, nominal income targeting my or may not be optimal
in the present paper's model, but it assuredly is optimal in Bean's model.

The second comment is that nominal income targeting will isolate the
economy from the demand shock v even in the present paper's model if' one drops

Bean's assumption that the monetary authority does not see V when

is set.

For if the authority sees the shock, it will prevent the shock from causing
nominal income fluctuations by appropriately adjusting the money supply; this

will prevent output (and price) fluctuations as well. How realistic it Is to
assume that the authority sees the shock perhaps depends on the unit of' time.

If t indexes, say, months, it would seem implausible to assume that v is seen

when m is set: the relevant data on output, which are needed to deduce v (and
u) are only available with a considerable time lag. If t indexes, say, years,
the assumption may be more palatable. The Taylor (1985, p.65) statement that

in an aggregate demand - aggregate supply framework nominal income targeting
isolates that economy from demand shocks is therefore quite reasonable, given
that he uses annual data.

The third comment concerns the implications of assuming rational
expectations, With the supply curve (lb), monetary policy will not effect the
probability distribution of'

output

unless the monetary authority has an

information advantage over the public (Sargent and Wallace (1975)). Perhaps

—9—

the simplest possible advantage is that the authority sees the shocks when

setting m, but the public does not see them when forming p. The nomini
income policy will of course be preferable in the face of demand shocks, as

explained in the preceding comment. But it may be shown that in the face of
supply shocks, nominal income targeting again leads to a lower output variance
If and only if T>1.

The fourth comment is that there is an inverse relationship between output
and price variability. With 1>1, nominal income targeting leads to less output

variability but more price variability, than does money supply targeting. In
Figure 1, the variation in equilibrium price from

E2' to E0.

to E0 is greater than from

If' one believes that the sole function of monetary policy is to

stabilize prices, then nominal income targeting is to be preferred to money

supply targeting if and only if 1<1.

If the authority is to stabilize a

weighted sum of output and price variances, then there appears to be no simple

condition under which ne policy Is preferable.
The fifth comment is that the conflict between output and price variability

is part of the explanation of the difference between the present paper's
results and those of Bean, when there are supply shocks. Bean ranked policies

by E(Y_y), where y is in his model a certain "full Information" level of
output. In the present paper's model, the natural analogue to Bean's criterion

is the output that would result if p=p, i.e., if

is probably E(yt_ut)2:

the public is fully informed and not suprised.

In a private communication,

Bean has pointed out to me that a possible justification for use of
is to penalize a policy for allowing the sustained inflation or deflation that

can result from permanent shocks. A model with permanent shocks is discussed
in the sixth comment below.

It is useful as a preliminary to consider the

implications of using E(yt_u)2 in the section I model. Use of E(yt-u)2
instead of' EYt2 will not change the results of section 1,

equations (5) and (9).

as

is evident from

Nor will it if rational Instead of adaptive

—10—

expectations is assumed. But a result similar to Bean's is delivered when, as

in the third comment, rational expectations is combined with the assumption
that the shocks are seen by the monetary authority when m is determined. For
then yt_ut=pt_pte, and under rational expectations, with serially uncorrelated

shocks, E(pt_p)2 = Ept2

price variance. When the policies are ranked

purely in terms of their effect on the variance of price, the condition that in

Bean's model suffices to make nominal income targets preferable, 1<1, is
necessary and sufficient here as well.

The sixth and final comment is that the results appear to carry over
directly to more complicated and dynamic versions of the supply and demand
curves. I considered two dynamic versions under the ground rules of the third
comment, i.e., rational expectations, with the shocks seen by the authorities

when m is set. (Under adaptive expectations, each of the dynamic versions
leads to messy expressions that are difficult to evaluate.)

One version

allowed stationary serial correlation of the shocks u and Vt; the other added

a lagged output term to the right hand

side

of (lb), as did, e.g., Lucas

(1973). Space limitations preclude presenting anything but the results, which
were the same for both versions. Nominal income targeting always leads to less

output (and price) variability in the face of demand shocks, for reasons
explained in the third comment. It leads to less output variability in the
case of supply shocks if and only if Y>1. If the policies are compared by the

E(Yt_ut)2 criterion, then, as in the preceding comment, the nominal income
policy is preferable in the face of supply shocks if and only if 1<1.

This

last comment holds even when u and v are nonst.ationary, with unit roots, as
assumed by Bean.

It is worth noting in closing that the last two comments have established
conditions under which the present paper's aggregate demand - aggregate supply

model will yield Bean's result that nominal income targeting is always
preferable in the face of demand shocks, and preferable in the face of supply

—11—

shock if 1<1.

These conditions are that: expectations are rational, the

monetary authority has an information advantage over the public, and the
desirability of policies is measured by the variance of output around a certain

full information level. The first assumption is made by Bean. The second is
not, and may or may not be plausible (see the first comment). The third is
formally equivalent to one made by Bean.

The assumption has an explicit

microeconomic justification in Bean, where it is linked to the functioning of

the labor market, This is not the case here, however, where the assumption
simply ranks policies by their effect of price volatility. I doubt that most
economists would consider this a reasonable criterion for moneta'y policy (see,
e.g. Hall (19314)).

III .Conclusions

This paper compared nominal income targeting to money supply targeting in

an aggregate demand - aggregate supply framework, assuming for the most part

that the desirability of policies is measured by their effect on the
unconditional variance of' output. The results were quite different from those
of Bean (19814), who used a contracting model and measured the desirability of

policies by their effect on the variance of output around a certain "full
information" level.

A condition that is sufficient to make nominal income

targeting more desirable in Bean's model is necessary and sufficient to insure
precisely the opposite in the present paper's model. This suggests that future

work on nominal income targeting be precise about what supply curve and what

objective function is assumed, since the conclusions obtained depend quite
sensitively on these.

FOOTNOTES

1. The supply curve assumes adaptive expectations on the price level

rather than on the inflation rate for algebraic simplicity. It is
intuitively clear that the necessary and sufficient condition to be

established here applies as well when the public adapts on the inflation

rate. See the discussion of Figure 1 below. I have not, however,
verified this algebraically: the ARNA (1,1) processes for output about
to be derived here are instead ARNA (2,2) when the public adapts on the
inflation rate and the variance formulas are too complicated to make it
easy to prove the necessary and sufficient condition.
If expectations are rational (as in some of the comments in section
II), one could of course just as well put inflation instead of price
level in the supply curve, since with rational expectations the solution
is the same in the two cases.

FIGURE 1

Pt

D

x

'S

S

s2
D
I

I

y0y2 y

—
yt

REFERENCES

Bean, C. R. (1984). 'Targeting nominal income: an appraisal.' The
Economic Journal, vol. 93, pp. 806-819.
Box, G.E.P. and C. H. Jenkins (1976). Time Series Analysis:
Forecasting and Control. San Francisco: Holden-Day.
'Long term contracts, rational expectations and the
Fischer, S. (1977).
optimal money supply rule.' Journal of Political Economy, pp. 191-210.

Hall, R. E. (1984). "Monetary Policy with an Elastic Price Standard,"
Hoover Institution Working Paper no. E-84-10.
'Some international evidence on output-inflation
Lucas, R. E. (1973).
trade—offs.' American Economic Review, vol. 63, pp. 326—34.

Sargent, T.J. (1979). Macroeconomic Theory. New York: Academic Press.
Sargent, T. J. and N. Wallace (1975). '"Rational" expectations, the
optimal monetary instrument, and the optimal money supply rule.'
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 83, pp. 241-54.
Taylor, J. B. (1980).
'Aggregate dynamics and staggered contracts.'
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 88, pp. 1-23.

'What would nominal GNP targetting do to the
Taylor, J. B. (1985).
business cycle?' Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
vol. 22, pp. 61-84.

Tobin, J. (1983). 'Monetary Policy: Rules, Targets and Shocks.'
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. XV, pp. 506-518.
Vines, D., J. !laciejowski and J. E. Meade (1983). Demand Management.
London: George Allen.

