                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




CONSUMER INERTIA AND FIRM PRICING IN THE MEDICARE PART D PRESCRIPTION
                    DRUG INSURANCE EXCHANGE

                                       Keith M. Marzilli Ericson

                                         Working Paper 18359
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18359


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2012




Portions of this paper previously circulated as "Market Design When Firms Interact with Inertial Consumers:
Evidence from Medicare Part D." I thank Martin Andersen, Raj Chetty, David Cutler, Stefano DellaVigna,
Drew Fudenberg, Andreas Fuster, Larry Katz, David Laibson, Michael Grubb, Oliver Hart, Dan McFadden,
Tom McGuire, Jim Rebitzer, and Amanda Starc for their thoughtful comments. I thank the Williams
College Tyng Committee and the National Science Foundation for research support. I have no further
disclosures. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Keith M. Marzilli Ericson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Consumer Inertia and Firm Pricing in the Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Insurance Exchange
Keith M. Marzilli Ericson
NBER Working Paper No. 18359
September 2012
JEL No. H51,I1,I11,I13,I18,I28,L11,L38,L51,Z18

                                              ABSTRACT

I use the Medicare Part D prescription drug insurance market to examine the dynamics of firm interaction
with consumers on an insurance exchange. Enrollment data show that consumers face switching frictions
leading to inertia in plan choice, and a regression discontinuity design indicates initial defaults have
persistent effects. In the absence of commitment to future prices, theory predicts firms respond to inertia
by raising prices on existing enrollees, while introducing cheaper alternative plans. The complete set
of enrollment and price data from 2006 through 2010 confirms this prediction: older plans have approximately
10% higher premiums than comparable new plans.


Keith M. Marzilli Ericson
Boston University School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
kericson@bu.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18359
1       Introduction

    I examine the dynamics of firm interaction with consumers on the Medicare Part D
prescription drug insurance exchange, a large and controversial program that receives gov-
ernment subsidies of about $40 billion annually and covers over 24 million people (Duggan,
Healy, and Scott Morton 2008). Medicare Part D is the largest change to the Medicare
program since its inception. Unlike Medicare’s classic fee-for-service components, Medicare
Part D established a marketplace in which firms compete to provide prescription drug in-
surance plans: a competitive insurance exchange. It is therefore a model for the insurance
exchanges envisioned in the 2010 federal health reform. It began providing coverage in 2006,
allowing us to see the market’s first year and subsequent evolution. While program costs
were initially below expectations, premium growth in recent years has outpaced growth in
drug costs (Duggan and Scott Morton 2011). Strategic firm responses to inertia can explain
this pattern.
     In many markets, individuals are subject to switching costs and other frictions that lead
to inertia.1 Rational firms should respond to inertia when setting prices, initially pricing low
to acquire market share and then raising prices on consumers when they are less responsive
to price. However, market design decisions determine the form this response takes. For
instance, while firms would like to use introductory oﬀers to price separately to new versus
repeat enrollees, such oﬀers are legally prohibited in the Medicare Part D market. Firms
have an incentive to replicate this pricing pattern in other ways. In this context, theory
predicts firms should initially oﬀer plans at low prices to attract first-time enrollees. In later
periods, firms should raise prices when their plans have a base of enrollees "stuck in place",
while new plans are introduced at low prices to attract new individuals entering the market.
I show empirically that Medicare Part D enrollees display inertia in their choice of plan, and
that prices in this market display the pattern predicted by the theory.
     Existing literature shows that health insurance choices display inertia that can have
substantial consequences. Handel (2009) examined insurance choice the year following a
large price change and found that individuals may have forgone gains of over $1500 that
year to stay in their current plan.2 Inertia in enrollees’ choice of plan results from switching
    1
     Carroll et al. (2009) find that employees typically stay with arbitrary 401(k) savings defaults, but make
substantially diﬀerent decisions when forced to make an explicit choice for themselves. Jones (forthcoming)
argues that inertia explains the pattern of over-withholding of income taxes. Chetty et al. (2011) examine
labor supply elasticities, and show that observed responses match the pattern predicted by an adjustment
cost model: larger tax changes lead to larger estimated elasticities.
   2
     In addition, Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) discussed health insurance decisions as an example of
status quo bias, though they recognized that inertia might be accounted for by classical explanations such
as switching costs. Strombom, Buchmueller and Feldstein (2002) examine plan share sensitivity to health
plan premiums at the University of California. They find that new hires have higher premium elasticities


                                                      1
frictions, including both switching costs (the time and eﬀort costs that result from moving
between plans), and psychological factors that lead to inaction. If individuals do not make
an active decision, they take the default option, which for standard enrollees is to stay in the
same plan from year-to-year, regardless of firm price changes.3 Crucially, switching frictions
lead enrollees to be less responsive to price once they have already enrolled in a plan.
     Even though switching prescription drug coverage is arguably easier than switching
an entire health insurance plan, changing plans may still be diﬃcult if individuals find it
costly to evaluate their options. Abaluck and Gruber (2011) argue that Medicare Part D
enrollees have diﬃculty in making their initial plan choices, while Kling et al. (2011) show
that enrollees may not be paying attention to their options in subsequent years. Switching
is low in this market, which is consistent with either inertia or preference heterogeneity.
While Medicare Part D enrollees have the opportunity to switch plans each year during
open enrollment without regard to their health status, only about 10% of enrollees switched
between 2006 and 2007 (Heiss, McFadden and Winter 2007). Yet at least some enrollees
are attentive: Ketcham, Lucarelli, Miravete, and Roebuck (forthcoming) found that the
probability of an enrollee switching plans increased with their potential gain to doing so.
    In the presence of inertia, random variations in initial conditions will have persistent
eﬀects. I first show suggestive evidence of inertia: higher prices in a plan’s first year are
associated with lower enrollment in subsequent years, even conditional on subsequent years’
prices. I then use a regression discontinuity design in Medicare Part D’s low-income subsidy
(LIS) program to more credibly identify inertia. LIS recipients, which comprise about half
the market, faced an automatic enrollment program set up by policy makers who were
concerned they would fail to enroll. Individuals identified as being eligible for the subsidy
were automatically defaulted into plans selected at random from the set of plans below a price
benchmark. Because the precise level of the benchmark is unknown to firms in advance, a
regression discontinuity design can estimate the causal eﬀect of pricing below the benchmark.
Pricing below the benchmark in the first year had a strong eﬀect on enrollment: plans priced
just below the benchmark had more than twice the market share of plans priced just above.
Plans that randomly priced below the benchmark in the market’s first year continued to
have higher enrollment in later years, indicating that the LIS program’s initial assignment
of enrollees to plans had persistent eﬀects on later choices.
     A large theoretical literature examines the response of firms to switching costs (see
than incumbent employees, as predicted by models of inertia. This work has not examined firms’ strategic
responses to inertia in setting premiums, in part because it has typically examined employer-based health
insurance, where firm behavior is constrained by an employer gatekeeper.
   3
     Ericson (2012) considers alternative default rules and provides a framework for setting optimal dynamic
defaults.



                                                     2
Farrell and Klemperer 2007), and predicts an "invest-then-harvest" pricing pattern: products
are oﬀered at low prices and then subsequently at high prices. (This pattern is widely, albeit
pejoratively, known as "bargains-then-ripoﬀs" pricing.) One firm provides a stark example
of this strategy. In the first year of Medicare Part D, Humana priced its basic plans as loss
leaders: about $10 per month on average, substantially below the market’s average of $30.
Both management and analysts agreed Humana was setting low prices to gain market share
in the market’s first year.4 Over the next three years, Humana raised its price on these plans
by more than 40% each year, until by 2009 and 2010, the average price was over $40 per
month, now above the market average.
     While Humana is a particularly extreme example, pricing data confirms the market
as a whole displays the pattern predicted by invest-then-harvest pricing. I show that firms
initially set relatively low prices for newly introduced plans, but then raise prices as plans age
while new, low-cost plans are introduced each year. In a given year, plans that have existed
for a longer period of time have annual premiums that are 10%, or $50, higher than newly
introduced plans. The higher prices of existing firms suggest that many consumers either
have switching costs of this amount or face other switching frictions (e.g. procrastination,
forgetting) with costs in this range.5
     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the structure of the Medicare
Part D market. Section 3 discusses the theory of firm pricing when individuals are subject
to switching frictions. Section 4 describes the data used in the empirical portions of the paper
and shows that past prices predict market share. Section 5 uses a regression discontinuity
design to test for inertia among LIS recipients. Section 6 then tests the predictions of
the theory for firm pricing. Finally, Section 7 discusses the implications of the results and
concludes.
   4
      For instance, referring to the market’s first year, Humana VP Steve Brueckner said: "If you don’t get
your fair share, you’re going to be in trouble later on." (see "New Medicare Drug Benefit Sparks an Industry
Land Grab" Wall Street Journal. Jan. 25, 2006)
    5
      Optimization frictions of this magnitude have implications for what economists can learn from individu-
als’ responses to changes in their environment. Chetty (2011) shows that in the presence of switching costs or
other optimization frictions, a range of structural elasticities (i.e. long-run elasticities) is consistent with the
observed response to a price change. For policy changes to the Medicare Part D market, such as increased
subsidies for more generous coverage, the switching frictions found here would imply that the elasticities
estimated from the stock of enrollees would be essentially uninformative about the true long-run elasticity.




                                                         3
2       Basic Structure of the Medicare Part D Market

2.1      Standalone PDPs

    Medicare Part D began oﬀering prescription drug insurance in 2006 for seniors over the
age of 65 and other Medicare beneficiaries. I focus on the core portion of the program—
standalone prescription drug plans (PDPs), which are distinct from other sources of cover-
age (e.g. Medicare Advantage HMOs or employer/union sponsored PDPs). As in health
insurance exchanges, there is a menu of plans available for purchase at listed prices. Firms
must accept all individuals who choose a given plan at a fixed price: the premium enrollees
pay does not vary by age or health status. Firms are free to enter the market, so long as
they satisfy CMS regulations. Many firms compete: from 2006-2010, 92 unique firms oﬀered
coverage.
    Plan design is constrained by Medicare regulation. Each plan is required to oﬀer at
least "basic" coverage, as defined by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS).
Basic plans can come in three diﬀerent forms: Basic Alternative, Actuarially Equivalent
Standard, or Defined Standard Benefit. Each type of basic plan must oﬀer coverage that is
actuarially equivalent to the Defined Standard Benefit,6 with a formulary that covers each
therapeutic class of drug.7 However, "enhanced" plans may oﬀer coverage that is actuarially
more generous (e.g. lower deductibles or coverage in the "doughnut hole"). I focus analyses
on basic plans, which have fewer unobserved characteristics.
     Contracts are annual, with firms committing to a price and formulary for that year.8
Each year, firms simultaneously submit plan price bids. Then, during an open enrollment
period (Nov. to Dec.), individuals observe the new prices and can switch plans. Standard
enrollees must initially make an active choice to enroll in Medicare Part D. However, once
they are enrolled, they stay with their current plan by default if they take no action. Pricing
and plans oﬀered vary by PDP region: each of the 34 PDP regions9 is either a state or group
of states (plus Washington D.C.), and I refer to these regions as "states" throughout.
    6
      Defined Standard plans have a fixed format: in 2010, the standard benefit has a $310 deductible, 25
percent coinsurance up to an initial coverage limit of $2,830 in total drug spending, a coverage gap (the
“doughnut hole”), and catastrophic coverage when enrollee out-of-pocket spending exceeds $4,550. Actuari-
ally Equivalent Standard plans have the same deductible, but may use copayments instead of coinsurance and
tiered copayments for brand-name and specialty drugs. Basic Alternative allows plans to vary the amount
of the deductible.
    7
      Formulary variation may be a source of switching costs. Even if drugs within a therapeutic class are
close substitutes, individuals face costs of changing their prescription.
    8
      While firms can make mid-year changes to the formulary, they must be approved by CMS. Most changes
are beneficial from the enrollees’ perspective. Approved negative changes most often take the form of
swapping a newly-available generic drug for the identical branded drug. See Levinson (2009).
    9
      I limit the analysis to plans in 50 United States proper and exclude those in its territories and possessions.



                                                         4
     The prices that enrollees face are a result of firm bids and government subsidies. The
subsidies are designed so that enrollees pay the full marginal cost of a more expensive plan;
an increase in a firm’s bid translates one-for-one into an increase in enrollee premiums. For
basic plans and standard enrollees, plan premiums are equal to the plan bid minus a fixed
dollar subsidy, which is calculated by CMS based on the national average bid.10
     Because premiums are community-rated (all enrollees pay the same price) and guaranteed-
issue (plans must take all comers), a risk adjustment scheme was designed to reduce the
incentives for firms to select a healthier or lower-cost population. Firms receive higher pay-
ments from CMS for enrollees with higher expected costs. The risk adjustment system is
designed so that firms should determine their prices/bids based on the cost of providing
coverage to an average individual in the population. The payments firms actually receive
are equal to their bid multiplied by enrollees’ risk adjustment factors.These factors are based
on demographic characteristics and diagnostic history, with additional adjustment made for
low-income subsidy status and institutionalization status. For more detail, see Robst, Levy
and Ingber (2007) and Appendix Section A.3.
    Section 6.2 evaluates the risk adjustment model for standard enrollees and finds that
payments compensate firms for enrollees’ higher expected costs as they age. However, risk
adjustment for LIS recipients is insuﬃcient. When designing the risk adjustment scheme,
CMS had limited data on the relative costs of LIS recipients. Hsu et al. (2010) show that
while CMS risk adjustment scheme assumes that full-subsidy LIS recipients are only 8%
more expensive than comparable standard enrollees, they are in fact 21% more expensive.
LIS recipients are therefore less profitable for firms than standard enrollees.
     Firms might wish to continually introduce virtually identical cheap plans. However,
there are both formal and informal restrictions that make this diﬃcult. CMS requires that
firms oﬀering multiple plans demonstrate that there are significant diﬀerences among the
plans; this regulation only formally applied beginning in 2009, but CMS negotiated with
firms to enforce this provision earlier. Moreover, for a firm to oﬀer a plan, CMS must
approve its bid submission. This bid is required to be tied to the firm’s estimate of the
revenue it needs to provide the benefit. Thus, firms may not wish to introduce variations in
plan prices that they cannot plausibly link to variations in cost of benefit provision. CMS has
been progressively increasing the standards that firm bids must meet (see Levinson 2008).
  10
     To calculate the subsidy, CMS calculates the national average bid p̄. Each plan receives a fixed dollar
subsidy, equal to 0.745−r
                     1−r p̄, where r is an adjustment factor for the cost of catastrophic reinsurance. The
program costs for individuals without the LIS are subsidized 74.5% by the federal government. The premium
subsidy is less than 25.5% of a plan’s bid, since the government also subsidizes the plans by providing
catastrophic reinsurance for expenses above a certain threshold. The next section describes the additional
subsidy given to LIS recipients. Heiss, McFadden, and Winter (2007) provide more details on the bidding
process and the subsidy calculation for enhanced plans.


                                                     5
2.2    The Low-Income Subsidy (LIS) Program

     Low-income subsidy recipients comprise a large share of the market (52% of PDP en-
rollees in 2006).11 LIS recipients enroll in the same plans as standard enrollees, but receive
additional premium subsidies and reduced cost-sharing. Medicare beneficiaries become eligi-
ble for at least a partial form of the LIS if their incomes are below 150 percent of the federal
poverty level and pass an asset test; the exact amount of assistance varies with income and
assets. Individuals receiving the full LIS benefit receive a premium subsidy equal to that
of the LIS "benchmark" b in that state; if they choose a plan with a premium below the
benchmark, they pay no premiums. In a plan with premiums of p, an LIS recipient thus pays
max {p − b, 0} . The benchmark diﬀers in each state and is recalculated each year based on
the state’s average plan bid; it is not known ex ante to firms.12 In 2006, the average state’s
benchmark was about $32 per month.
     The LIS program applies defaults in two ways: automatic initial enrollment and auto-
matic switching. First, due to concern about inertia in enrollment behavior, individuals who
meet certain eligibility criteria13 for the full LIS are automatically enrolled into Medicare
Part D. They are defaulted into a randomly selected basic PDP with a premium below the
benchmark premium. LIS recipients may actively elect to choose another plan; they may do
so at any time and are not limited to switching during the open enrollment period.
     The mix of plans that price below the benchmark varies between years, as plans change
their prices and the benchmark adjusts. The second default—"automatic switching"— is ap-
plied if a plan moves from being below the benchmark in one year to above the benchmark
in the next. If an auto-enrolled LIS recipient in such a plan had never made an active choice,
they are automatically switched to a diﬀerent plan below the price benchmark, unless they
take action to stay in their current plan. LIS recipients who actively enrolled themselves,
or who were auto-enrolled but then chose to move from their default plan, are notified that
they will pay a higher premium if they do not switch, but they are not re-defaulted into a
new plan.
  11
     Many individuals not eligible for the LIS do not choose a standalone PDP, but instead choose Medicare
Advantage HMOs with prescription drug coverage or receive an employer-sponsored plan.
  12
     In 2006-2007, the benchmark was the average bid in that state, with PDPs equal weighted and Medicare
Advantage prescription drug (MA-PD) portions enrollment weighted. In subsequent years, the benchmark
transitioned to enrollment weighted PDP and MA-PD bids. Appendix Section A.3 gives more detail on the
calculation of the benchmark and its evolution over time.
  13
     Approximately 84% of LIS recipients in 2010 were deemed automatically eligible for the full LIS by their
Medicaid, Supplemental Security Income (SSI), or Medicare Savings Program (MSP) status. Other potential
LIS recipients must apply for the subsidy. CMS reserves the term "automatic enrollment" for Medicare and
Medicaid dual-eligibles, and uses a similar "facilitated enrollment" process for individuals who were not
dual-eligible but otherwise deemed eligible for the full LIS. Since the processes are virtually identical, I use
the term "automatically eligible" to refer to both groups.


                                                       6
     Concerned with the diﬃculties of switching LIS recipients away from plans that previ-
ously priced below the benchmark, CMS instituted a "de minimis" policy for LIS recipients
for 2007 and 2008. De minimis plans were those whose premium exceeded the benchmark
by less than $2 (2007) or $1 (2008) per month. Under the policy, LIS enrollees in de min-
imis plans would not be automatically switched by default. However, no new LIS enrollees
would be defaulted into such plans, and de minimis plans would not receive any additional
premiums over the benchmark amount from any of their LIS recipients.14 While this policy
reduced the need to switch LIS recipients between plans, it also had the eﬀect of making LIS
recipients less profitable for firms, as they could yield $12-$24 less per year in revenue than
a standard enrollee.


3   Theory: Inertia and Firm Responses

    Switching frictions lead to inertia in individuals’ choice of plan, and so individuals will
be more sensitive to price when they initially enroll than in later periods. As a baseline
model, we can simply assume that individuals choose optimally when they initially enroll.15
However, in later periods, they only switch if the gain do doing so is larger enough to
outweigh their switching friction. The probability of switching for a gain of ΔU is thus
some function F (ΔU ) that increases in the gain to doing so. There are a variety of types
of switching frictions, including both switching costs that result from moving between plans
and reduce welfare, and psychological frictions that aﬀect whether an individual acts, but
not their welfare conditional on the action taken. For instance, when an individual switches
plans, they need to learn the rules of the new insurance plan, may need to do paperwork
at their pharmacy, and may experience disutility from negative emotions (e.g. confusion,
loss aversion)— these are real switching costs that reduce welfare. On the other hand, an
individual may wish to switch plans but forget (Ericson 2011) or procrastinate (O’Donoghue
and Rabin 2001)— these are psychological frictions that lead them not to act and simply take
the default option.
     If consumers display inertia in their health insurance choices, firms will rationally re-
spond. In setting prices, firms have two motives: an investment motive, to acquire market
share for the future, and a harvesting motive, to maximize profits this period on new and
existing customers. Farrell and Klemperer (2007) review the theoretical literature on how
inertia aﬀects equilibrium under imperfect competition. In a wide variety of contexts, the-
ory predicts an invest-then-harvest (a.k.a. "bargains-then-ripoﬀs") pricing pattern, in which
  14
     That is, all LIS recipients who were eligible for the full subsidy. Partial subsidy recipients were not
automatically enrolled or switched, and so the de minimis policy did not apply to them.
  15
     They may in fact make some mistakes, as argued by Abaluck and Gruber (2011).


                                                     7
products are initially sold at low (perhaps below marginal) cost, but sold at higher prices in
later periods.
     I model insurer behavior in the Medicare Part D market, which is regulated as described
in Section 2. Insurers must issue a policy to anyone who requests it, and must charge all
enrollees the same price for a given plan. Risk adjustment implies that individuals do not
vary in cost by age. I make the simplifying assumption that the form of the insurance
contract (e.g. copays, drugs covered) is fixed, which is a good approximation to government
regulation of basic plans. Keeping with the way Medicare Part D and other insurance markets
are regulated, firms oﬀer policies for one period, without the possibility for commitment to
future premium levels.
     Each firm j oﬀers one plan,16 and sets its price pjt in each period. Quantity sold this
period sjt is a function of this price and past market share.17 The expected cost of each
enrollee, net of risk adjustment, to the firm is cj . Firms are infinitely lived with discount
factor δ, and seek to maximize the expected discounted present value of profits Vjt . The
value of the firm Vjt is given by flow profits and future profits in the recursive equation:

                                   Vjt = (pjt − cjt ) sjt + δVjt+1 (sjt )

where the second term captures that future firm value may depend on its current market
share.18 The firm’s first order condition for optimal pricing is thus:

                                                 sjt         dVjt+1 (sjt )
(1)                             pjt − cjt =               −δ
                                              −dsjt /dpjt       dsjt

where dsjt /dpjt is the firm’s demand curve. Factors that make demand more inelastic,
such as switching frictions, raise markups. The demand curve dsjt /dpjt that a firm j faces
when setting prices is the sum of the demand curves for three diﬀerent types of individuals:
1) potential repeat customers, 2) potential switchers from other plans, and 3) new enrollees
entering the market unattached to any plan. Potential repeat customers likely have relatively
inelastic demand, compared to the other groups, since new choosers and potential switchers
  16
     While firms may oﬀer more than one plan so long as they are suﬃciently distinct, for clarity, I examine
the case where one plan only is oﬀered. The Theory Appendix shows that the same incentives face firms
that oﬀer multiple plans.
  17
     The demand of sophisticated consumers for a plan will depend on both its price and its market share, as
market share may predict firm’s future behavior. In this discussion, I ignore this eﬀect, which is equivalent
to assuming individuals cannot observe market share or are myopic. Equilibrium models with sophisticated
consumers give similar results (see Ericson 2012 and Farrell and Klemperer 2007).
  18
     This model could be generalized in a number of ways. Switching costs or attachment to the firm could
depend on the length of time an enrollee has been in a plan. Furthermore, type of consumer might matter:
older individuals may be less valuable since they will not live as long.



                                                     8
can choose from many close substitutes. In such a case, older plans will face more inelastic
demand and optimally set prices higher than comparable newer plans, since newer plans
have fewer potential repeat customers.19
    A simple example illustrates the intuition behind invest-then-harvest pricing. Let all
plans be perfect substitutes, and take the case where δ = 0 (e.g. as though it were the
market’s last period.20 ) Then, new plans would set price equal to marginal cost, and all
new enrollees would choose one of these new plans. Existing plans with potential repeat
                                                                        s
customers would set price equal to marginal cost plus a markup term −dsjtjt/dpjt that depends
on the elasticity of repeat demand. New entrants will therefore have lower prices than
comparable existing plans. Some enrollees in existing plans would switch to cheaper, newly
introduced plans, while others remain stuck in place at their previously chosen plan.


4        Describing the Medicare Part D Market

4.1       Data Source

    Data from the Medicare Part D market show both that individuals display inertia and
that firm prices display the pattern predicted by the model above. I use data from CMS
on plan premiums, characteristics, and aggregate enrollment. Data on PDP premiums and
characteristics for each year are available from 2006 (the first year of the market) through
2010. I divide the 2,464 plans into cohorts based on the year they were first oﬀered. Enroll-
ment data is available for July 1 of each calendar year from the monthly enrollment reports.
The Data Appendix provides more details.
     For each plan, I observe its premium, deductible, and benefit type,21 along with the
firm and plan name. Table 1 gives descriptive statistics of the Medicare Part D plans, by
year of plan introduction (cohort).22 States vary in the number of plans oﬀered and average
premiums. Moreover, a given firm may price essentially the same plan quite diﬀerently in
diﬀerent states. For example, in 2006 Humana oﬀered the "Humana PDP Complete" plan
for $767 per year in Ohio and only $575 in New York.
     There is substantial variation in premiums, even for basic plans. Figure 1 shows the
distribution of premiums in 2010 for basic plans, split between older cohorts of plans (plans
introduced in 2006 and 2007) and newer cohorts (plans introduced 2008 and later). Though
    19
     In this general model, switching frictions and previous market share sjt−1 can have an ambiguous eﬀect
on optimal prices, depending on the relative elasticities of these three groups.
  20
     While this example assumes δ = 0, Ericson (2012) shows that a invest-then-harvest pricing pattern is
the equilibrium of this environment when δ > 0 as well, consistent with the predictions of other models of
equilibrium under imperfect competition (Farrell 1986; Farrell and Klemperer 2007).
  21
     Basic alternative, actuarially equivalent standard, defined standard benefit, or enhanced.
  22
     Table A.1 gives descriptive statistics, limiting the sample to basic plans only.


                                                    9
the peaks of the distributions are similar (around $400/year), the older cohorts have a larger
tail of high premium plans, consistent with the predictions of Section 3 that plans raise
premiums as they age. However, the variance in prices indicates that there is heterogeneity
in firm strategies or costs. Variation in pricing can come from firm-specific costs of providing
coverage, price strategies (e.g. firm estimates of demand elasticity, or whether firms recognize
the investment value of acquiring market share), and perceived quality of firms (firm-specific
demand shocks).
   New plans come from one of three sources: existing firms oﬀering suﬃciently distinct
plans, existing firms expanding into diﬀerent geographical regions, or new firms entering the
market. Table 1 indicates that for the first five years of the market, it was primarily existing
firms expanding in both ways. Most new plans were oﬀered by firms who already oﬀered
plans somewhere else in the country, while about two-thirds were introduced by firms already
oﬀering a plan in the same state.
    The number of individuals choosing plans for the first time was largest in 2006, since
this was the first year Medicare Part D oﬀered coverage, and the stock of all people eligible
for Medicare could choose in that year. The initial enrollment period ended May 15, 2006,
after which individuals faced a late enrollment penalty fee if they did not have a qualifying
form of prescription drug coverage. Immediate enrollment was optimal for most seniors,
and most seniors did in fact enroll: by May 2006, Medicare had met its target that 90% of
the eligible population have some form of prescription drug coverage (Heiss, McFadden, and
Winter 2007). In subsequent years, new entrants to the PDP market come from individuals
newly eligible for Medicare and from individuals leaving another source of coverage (e.g.
Medicare Advantage plans).
    Figure 2 shows total enrollment over time, broken down by plan cohort (the year in
which a plan was introduced). The 2006 cohort of plans captured most of the market,
as most of the inflow into the PDP market took place in the market’s first year; inertia
implies that enrollees are likely to stay with their initial plan. This cohort has an aggregate
enrollment23 of 15.4 million in 2006, a number that drops over time, as enrollees leave these
plans (by death or switching) or as plans attrit from the sample. Subsequent cohorts of
plans have much lower enrollment, consistent with the predictions of the model in Section 3:
there are fewer new enrollees after the first year of the market.24 After 2006, the number of
  23
     These numbers diﬀer from the aggregate numbers released by Medicare by about 1 million, as my
numbers exclude Employer/Union Only Direct Contract PDPs and PDP enrollment outside the 50 U.S.
states.
  24
     Other factors could also contribute to the observed pattern of lower enrollment in subsequent cohorts.
For instance, fewer plans are introduced in later years. Yet this is unlikely to explain the full story: the
number of plans introduced in 2007 was over half the number introduced in 2006, but the 2007 cohort’s
enrollment is substantially below half of that in the 2006 cohort.


                                                    10
new choosers is small relative to the size of market: I estimate that newly eligible individuals
comprise less than 10% of new PDP enrollees in each year.25
   I examine the behavior of standard choosers (non-LIS enrollees) separately from that
of LIS recipients, since LIS recipients face diﬀerent prices and are not necessarily making an
active choice even when they first enroll. I subtract estimates of LIS enrollment from total
enrollment to get estimates of standard enrollment.26 I construct plan market shares of total
enrollment in each state, and then market shares of standard enrollees: a plan’s non-LIS
enrollment over the state’s total non-LIS enrollment. Plan shares of total enrollment in 2006
                       1
range from less than 1000 % to 38%; the median plan share is 0.4%. The median plan’s share
of standard enrollment is also 0.4%. Appendix Figures A.1 and A.2 plot LIS enrollment and
standard enrollment by cohort of plan. The fraction of enrollees receiving the LIS among
the 2006 cohort is initially high (52%), but falls to 41% by 2009. Newer plans have a higher
fraction of LIS enrollment in 2009 (70% to 89% depending on cohort), which is expected,
since new plans have lower prices.

4.2    Correlation between Enrollment and Past Prices

     I begin with standard enrollees and provide suggestive evidence that this half of the
market displays inertial behavior. Using aggregate enrollment data, I test whether past
prices predict market share (conditional on present prices and characteristics). I estimate
regressions of the following form:

                      ln sjtm = xjtm β 1 + α1 pjtm + xjt−1m β 2 + α2 pjt−1m + vtm

where ln sjtm is plan j’s log market share in market m at time t, pjtm is the plan’s premium,
and xjtm contains its observed characteristics. State fixed eﬀects vtm capture factors that vary
among states, including the number of plans oﬀered. Of course, firms set prices endogenously
to unobserved quality, with the expectation of price increasing in quality in most models. If
firm price-setting is subject to random noise (e.g. information shocks), then even conditional
on present prices, the expectation of quality should increase in lagged price pjt−1m , giving
α2 > 0 in the absence of inertia.27 Inertia predicts that α2 < 0 : higher past prices induce
lower enrollment which persists into later periods.
  25
      From 2007 to 2010, about 2 million Americans turned 65 each year and become eligible for Medicare;
less than half of them chose a standalone PDP.
   26
      Since CMS has not released LIS enrollment figures regularly, I have LIS enrollment data from July of
2006 and 2007, but from February of 2008 and 2009; they were unavailable for 2010. Hence, these data
slightly underestimate the share of LIS enrollees in later years. The Data Appendix gives more details.
   27
      Other models of unobserved heterogeneity can lead to biases in either direction; hence this evidence is
only suggestive.


                                                     11
       I estimate this regression using standard (non-LIS) enrollment,28 limiting the sample
to basic plans: these plans oﬀer similar actuarial value and have little flexibility in plan
design, reducing unobserved heterogeneity.29 I run regressions both with and without firm
fixed eﬀects. Each specification is useful: using variation in pricing among firms is valuable
because such variation may be less endogenous to market conditions (e.g. if firms are subject
to information shocks), but controlling for firm fixed eﬀects reduces unobserved heterogeneity.
     Table 2 examines the association between 2007 enrollment and 2006 prices for the co-
hort of plans introduced in 2006. It shows that past prices strongly and negatively predict
enrollment. Column 1 regresses 2007 log plan shares on 2006 and 2007 prices. It finds that
premiums in 2006 still predict enrollment in 2007, with a coeﬃcient on past premiums nearly
as large as that on current premiums. Column 2 runs the "naive" regression of 2007 log plan
shares on 2007 prices only and shows that the coeﬃcient on 2007 premiums is 50% larger in
magnitude when lagged prices are omitted, due to the correlation of past and present prices.
For comparison, column 3 examines initial choices in 2006, regressing log plan shares on
price for the same sample. The coeﬃcient on contemporaneous price is larger in magnitude
for the first year of the market (column 3) than for 2007 (column 1): premiums that are $1
higher predict a plan share that is 14 percent lower in 2006. (Thus, for a plan with a 2%
market share, a $1 higher premium would predict a 1.7% market share.) In contrast, the
same $1 decrease predicts that market share is only 9.7 percent lower in 2007. Columns 4-6
present analogous regressions with firm fixed eﬀects included and show that the results are
similar.
     The association between enrollment and past prices is a robust phenomenon. Similar
regressions for 2009 data shows that even three years later, premium in 2006 is still nega-
tively associated with enrollment (Appendix Table A.2). Moreover, in 2009, there is a series
of previous prices that can be included as controls. Of all the past prices, the 2006 premiums
should have the largest eﬀect, since that was when the largest cohort of individuals made
its initial choices. Indeed, Appendix Table A.3 shows that premiums in the year of intro-
duction have the largest association with enrollment when all the lags of premiums and plan
characteristics are included.
  28
     LIS recipients face diﬀerent defaults and prices. I include controls for whether the plan is below the
benchmark to capture any eﬀect of the LIS program on the plan.
  29
     Ideally, I would like to separate out new enrollees from existing enrollees, but this is not possible using
aggregate data.




                                                      12
5        Low-Income Subsidy: Defaults and Inertia

5.1       Regression Discontinuity Design

    While the above analysis suggests standard enrollees display inertia, this section provides
more precisely identified evidence on inertia from the other half of the market: LIS recipients.
The LIS program only automatically enrolls individuals into plans that set their price below
a price benchmark. Because the benchmark is not known ex ante, but is a random variable,
firms cannot precisely choose whether to set prices above or below the benchmark.30 Hence, a
regression discontinuity strategy can identify the causal eﬀect of being randomly assigned LIS
enrollees. I compare the subsequent enrollment and pricing strategies of plans that randomly
fell just above the benchmark in 2006 to those that fell just below. The identification
assumption is that pricing directly above or below the benchmark is as good as random, so
that plan characteristics do not change discontinuously around the benchmark.
      The regression discontinuity approach is particularly credible in 2006, as it was the
first year of the Medicare Part D market. Because the benchmark in 2006 is an equal-
weighted average of PDP bids in each state, even a large number of firms colluding could
not precisely predict the benchmark level. Define the variable "relative premiums" to be a
plan’s premiums minus that state’s benchmark level; this is the forcing variable. Appendix
Table A.4 supports the identification assumption that there are no discontinuous changes in
covariates at the benchmark. The observed characteristics of PDPs (type of basic plan, and
deductible level) are similar on either side of the benchmark for the bandwidths used here,
though in some bandwidths, the mix of basic plans diﬀers slightly. I show regressions with
and without controls for these characteristics; results are similar.31
     Plans attrit from the sample overtime. Attrition can occur because firms cease oﬀering
a plan, or if they merge with or are acquired by another firm. Attrition, of course, has no
    30
     This is particularly true in 2006, since plan bids were all equally weighted in the construction of the
benchmark, and firms did not know all competitors’ bids. However, Decarolis (2012) shows that in later
years, when the LIS benchmark is enrollment weighted, some firms will have the ability to manipulate the
benchmark. This potential manipulation does not aﬀect the regression discontinuity presented here, which
relies on 2006 pricing.
  31
     Although it is not necessarily for the validity of the design, McCrary (2008) suggests testing for dis-
continuities in the density of the forcing variable. A discontinuous density at the cutoﬀ may suggest firms
were able to manipulate whether they are above or below the benchmark. In the absence of collusion with
CMS, this seems implausible. Applying the test suggests there may be a discontinuity in the density at the
cutoﬀ, but these seems to be a result of the density not being smooth in general. Appendix Figure A.3
graphically displays the result of the density discontinuity test at the cutoﬀ, which finds a log diﬀerence in
density height at the cutoﬀ of 0.317 (standard error 0.14), giving a t-statistic of 2.21. Yet rather than firms
sorting around the cutoﬀ, further tests suggest the density is not smooth: testing for discontinuities at one
dollar intervals around the cutoﬀ gives t-statistics above 1.6 at four of ten locations. Appendix Figure A.4
displays the histogram of relative premiums and shows that there are spikes at a number of points in the
histogram, including one near zero.


                                                      13
eﬀect on the estimates of 2006 enrollment, but may aﬀect estimates of enrollment and price
responses in subsequent years. Attrition between 2006 and 2007 is negligible: Appendix
Table A.5 shows that less than 5% of plans attrit by 2007 in the regression discontinuity
windows used here. Attrition by 2008 is similarly small. Yet by 2009 and 2010, more than
20% of plans in the regression discontinuity windows have attrited, and plans that price
below the benchmark in 2006 are more likely to attrit. I present estimates for 2009 and
2010, but they should be viewed as conditional on remaining in the data.

5.2     Eﬀect of Pricing Below Benchmark on Enrollment

       Figure 3 confirms that pricing below the benchmark leads to a substantial increase in
enrollment. This figure plots 2006 premiums relative to the LIS subsidy amount against
2006 log enrollment share, and plots predicted enrollment, controlling for premiums relative
to the benchmark in linear and quartic polynomial specifications. The first two panels in
Table 3 confirm the visual eﬀect: Panel 1 shows a regression that controls for relative pre-
miums linearly, while Panel 2 uses a quadratic polynomial of relative premiums, plus plan
characteristic controls. The Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2009) optimal bandwidth for log
plan shares is approximately $4,32 but the eﬀect is robust to the use of other bandwidths.
Regardless of specification, the coeﬃcient in column 1 for being below the benchmark indi-
cates that pricing just below the benchmark leads to market shares that are approximately
200 log-points (150%) higher than other plans. Average plan market shares in the $4 window
above the benchmark are just under 1%, while below the benchmark the average is about
5.5%. A placebo test using only the enrollment of non-LIS individuals finds eﬀects that are
small in magnitude and not significantly diﬀerent than zero, supporting the identification
strategy: the benchmark does not appear to aﬀect non-LIS enrollment.
     Pricing below the benchmark in 2006 has a persistent eﬀect on subsequent enrollment.
The eﬀect of pricing below the benchmark on 2006 enrollment can be due in part to LIS
recipients accepting the default, and in part to price sensitivity (plans below the benchmark
are free); most LIS recipients do not make an active choice.33 The eﬀect of pricing below
the benchmark in 2006 on enrollment in 2007 and beyond is evidence of inertia, as random
variation in initial conditions has persistent eﬀects Additional columns in Table 3 show that
pricing below the benchmark in 2006 predicts enrollment not only in 2006, but in later years
as well: plans below the benchmark in 2006 have market shares that are 130 log points
higher in 2007. The eﬀect decays over time, but is still substantial in 2008. Appendix Figure
  32
    The optimal bandwidth varies slightly by year; I use a consistent cutoﬀ for each year.
  33
    While the exact number of LIS recipients who made an active choice cannot be determined from the
aggregate data, the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (2010) puts the number of LIS recipients who
ever made an active choice by 2010 at 2.5 million, or about a third of LIS recipients.

                                                 14
A.5 shows this visually for 2008 enrollment. For 2009 and 2010, the local linear regressions
indicate a large eﬀect, but not the polynomial regressions. The estimated eﬀect on enrollment
in these later years is conditional on not attriting from the data.
       The persistent eﬀect of random variation in initial conditions comes from two sources:
plans that continue to price below the benchmark hold on to the enrollees they have acquired
by default, and individuals make active choices to stay with plans that subsequently price
above the benchmark. Panel 3 of Table 3 regresses log plan shares in each year on indicators
for being a benchmark plan in 2006 interacted with being a benchmark or de minimis plan
in the current year. Focus on 2007, in which the three indicator variables control for each
possible history of pricing below the benchmark: below the benchmark in both years, below
in 2006 only, or below in 2007 only, compared to never having been a benchmark plan. The
first row indicates that plans that priced below the benchmark both years had market shares
that were 209 log points higher than plans that were below the benchmark in neither year.
The coeﬃcient in third row shows that pricing below the benchmark in 2007 alone leads to
market shares that were only 15 log points higher than plans never below the benchmark.
Comparing these two coeﬃcients shows that pricing below the benchmark has a larger eﬀect
on enrollment if the plan was previously a benchmark plan, as such plans keep their previously
acquired LIS recipients by default.34
     Thus, inertia in LIS enrollment comes both from the eﬀect of defaults as well as from
active choices to avoid switching costs. Being below the benchmark in 2006 is associated with
higher enrollment in 2007 even if the plan is not a benchmark plan in 2007: such plans have
market shares that are 62 log points higher than plans that were never below the benchmark.
These estimates indicate that about a quarter to one half of LIS recipients chose to stay with
their plan even after it priced above the benchmark.

5.3     Eﬀect of Pricing Below Benchmark on Subsequent Pricing

     Firms that receive LIS recipients have a relatively larger base of existing enrollees, which
may aﬀect firms’ pricing in later periods. However, LIS recipients behave diﬀerently from
standard enrollees, as they are automatically switched if the plan raises its price over the
benchmark. Because they face diﬀerent defaults and prices, Appendix Section A.1.2 shows
that the eﬀect of acquiring LIS recipients on a plan’s future prices is theoretically ambiguous.
     To examine whether falling above or below the benchmark in 2006 had any eﬀect on
average premiums in the subsequent year, Figure 4 plots monthly relative premiums in 2007
against relative premiums in 2006 (horizontal axis). In contrast to the enrollment results,
  34
    Appendix Table A.6 shows that results are similar if controls are included, including premium in the
current year.


                                                  15
visual inspection indicates no obvious discontinuity in average firm behavior above or below
the cutoﬀ. This is confirmed in Appendix Table A.7, which finds that being below the
benchmark had an insignificant eﬀect on 2007 pricing using a bandwidth of $6 (approximately
the optimal bandwidth for premiums). Similarly, for later years (2008 - 2010) the eﬀect is
noisily estimated, never significantly diﬀerent from zero. The sign of the point estimate is
not stable across years or specifications.
    Even if acquiring LIS recipients did not have an eﬀect on average prices, the desire
to hold on to auto-enrollees could create an incentive to keep prices below the benchmark
or the de minimis amount in subsequent years. Average prices could remain the same,
even as firms were more likely to price below the benchmark. Yet Appendix Figure A.6
shows that plans that were below the benchmark in 2006 are no more likely to be below
the benchmark or to be a de minimis plan in 2007. The absence of an eﬀect is confirmed
by Appendix Table A.8, which shows that the point estimate is insignificant and in fact
negative in most specifications: the point estimates indicate plans are slightly less likely to
fall below the benchmark in subsequent years if they did so in the first year, with the local
linear regressions indicating a 6 percentage point decrease. Thus the evidence suggests little
eﬀect on firm pricing behavior of having acquired LIS recipients.


6     Invest-then-Harvest Pricing Behavior

6.1    Pricing Evidence

    The core prediction of switching frictions for firm behavior is that older plans should
charge higher prices. Figure 5 confirms graphically that prices follow the pattern predicted
by invest-then-harvest pricing. It plots the average premium charged by each basic plan
in each year, separating out plans by cohort. As predicted, we see that premiums in each
cohort rise over time. Plans are introduced each year, with new plans generally having
lower premiums than existing plans. The pattern is not perfect, as premiums for the 2006
cohort declined slightly from 2006 to 2007; afterwards, the 2006 and 2007 cohorts appear
to act similarly. CMS, along with other commentators, noted the drop in premiums from
2006 to 2007 and suggested it was the result of lower than expected prescription drug costs,
more substitution into generic drugs than anticipated, and higher than expected competitive
pressures. It is likely that substantial firm learning occurred between 2006 and 2007; for the
2006 cohort, the standard deviation of premiums for basic plans dropped from about $10 in
2006 to about $6 in 2007. Because aspects of the market are changing over time, including
regulation, pharmaceutical prices, and firm information, I do not identify the eﬀect of plan
age oﬀ the time-series of plan prices.


                                              16
       I first compare the distribution of premiums between older plans and newer plans in a
given year: recall that Figure 1 compares the distribution of basic plan premiums in year
2010, for the earlier cohorts (2006 and 2007) and later cohorts (2008+) of plans. It shows
that the higher premiums of older cohorts are not due to a few outliers, but to the behavior
of many plans. Moreover, in addition to having a higher mean, the 2010 distribution of
premiums in the older cohorts is more right skewed than the distribution of premiums for
the newer cohorts. This suggests heterogeneity in the extent to which firms are raising prices
on existing plans.
    To identify the relative prices of older versus newer cohorts of plans, Table 4 regresses log
premiums on plan age with various controls for observable plan characteristics.35 It includes
year fixed eﬀects (interacted with state fixed eﬀects) in all specifications and so identifies the
eﬀect of plan age on price by comparing plans of diﬀerent ages in a given year, removing any
market specific shock. As a result, the 2006 prices do not contribute to the identification of
the eﬀect of plan age. The regressions cluster standard errors at the firm level, to account for
the fact that premiums are serially correlated at the plan level and to allow for the possibility
that plans oﬀered by the same firm experience common shocks. These analyses show that
the observed association between plan age and premiums is not merely due to changes in
composition of plans toward cheaper plan types.
     Column 1 gives the association between plan age and premiums, confirming the visual
results of Figure 5 among basic plans when controlling for state by year fixed eﬀects. Older
plans have higher premiums than new plans, about 6% higher in their fourth year and 18%
higher in their fifth year.36 Column 2 adds controls for the form of the basic benefit type,
interacted with year fixed eﬀects. These regressions indicate that plans in their fourth year
cost 12% more than comparable newly introduced plans, while five-year-old plans cost 15%
more than comparable new plans. This column also includes an indicator for whether the firm
oﬀering the plan also oﬀered a Medicare Advantage (M.A.) plan, as firms may strategically
attract Part D enrollees in an attempt to also enroll them in a Medicare Advantage plan.37
Firms that oﬀer a Medicare Advantage plan are cheaper, by about 15% per year, suggesting
firms may be using PDPs as loss leaders. The invest-then-harvest pricing pattern can result
from both new firms entering and existing firms introducing new plans. Column 3 includes
  35
     Individual plan fixed eﬀects regressions are not estimated due to the well-known inability to separately
identify cohort, age (i.e. year of plan existence), and year fixed eﬀects.
  36
     The gradual price increases may result from a number of factors. Sharp raises may draw unwelcome
publicity and attention from policy makers; Humana was criticized for its extreme strategy. Switching costs
may also develop over time: if a person joins a plan in November and has the opportunity to switch beginning
in January, he may not have learned enough about his current plan to make learning about another plan
more costly.
  37
     Because this variable is collinear with firm, it must be dropped in regressions that use firm fixed eﬀects.



                                                      17
firm fixed eﬀects and identifies the eﬀect of plan age on price using variation within firms over
time. The pattern persists, indicating that the observed eﬀect is not due to new firms entering
at lower prices but not raising them; the pattern persists even controlling for firm quality.
Although I do not observe the detailed formulary characteristics of each plan, controlling for
firm fixed eﬀects should remove most of the variation in plan formularies.
     While the regressions in Columns 1-3 equally weight all plans and therefore describe the
experience of the average plan, enrollment-weighted regressions provide a better description
of the experience of the average enrollee. Columns 4-6 weight each plan observation by
its total enrollment in that year. The estimated eﬀect of oﬀering a Medicare Advantage
plan shrinks, but the age eﬀects become somewhat larger in magnitude when regressions
are enrollment-weighted. Compared to new plans, premiums are statistically significantly
higher for all plans at least three years old. Because the strategy of introducing plans at
lower prices is successful at attracting higher enrollment, the price increase experienced by
the average enrollee is larger than the average plan’s price increase.
     The enrollment-weighted regressions also indicate that the results are not being driven
by attrition of plans from the sample. Plans can leave the sample either because the firm
discontinues the plan or because the plan is merged with another plan (e.g. when firms
merge). Relatively few plans are discontinued (less than 8%; see Appendix Table A.9).
Dropping such plans from the regressions does not aﬀect the results. An additional 28% of
plans leave the sample because they merge with another plan. The new, larger plan receives
additional weight in the enrollment-weighted regressions. These regressions indicate the age
eﬀect remains robust.
     Appendix Tables A.10 and A.11 show that these results are robust to a number of
changes in the regression specification. When regressions include firm interacted with year
fixed eﬀects, they identify the eﬀect of age on pricing using variation in a given year at
a particular firm. Similarly large eﬀects of plan age on pricing are found using equally
weighted regressions. An enrollment-weighted regression find noisy to zero eﬀects within
firms, suggesting that larger firms do not vary their prices within a given year based on
plan age, consistent with the potential regulatory constraints described in Section 4. The
age eﬀect also persists when enhanced plans are included in the sample: the percentage
increase with age is larger, albeit measured with more noise. (Recall, we do not capture all
the features of enhanced plans). The results are also similar when the regressions are run
separately when the sample is split into plans that were ever below the LIS benchmark and
plans that were never below that benchmark. Finally, when the dependent variable is the
absolute premium in dollars rather than logs, the results are similar and show that plans
that are five years older cost about $50 more than comparable newly introduced plans.


                                               18
6.2    Interpretation: Invest-then-Harvest Pricing or Alternative Stories

     These regressions show that there is in fact a price diﬀerence between younger and
older plans, consistent with the predictions of invest-then-harvest pricing theory. Plans in
their fifth year charge an additional 10%, or about $50, per year than equivalent, newly
introduced plans. The price diﬀerence Δp between young and old plans can be decomposed
into a diﬀerence in average costs and markups between cohorts: Δp = Δc + Δm. How
much of this price diﬀerential is attributable to diﬀerences in markups, as implied by invest-
then-harvest pricing, and how much to diﬀerences in costs? If risk adjustment compensates
firms fully for diﬀerences in costs, then Δp would be driven diﬀerences in markup. In the
absence of firm cost data, we cannot directly estimate Δc. However, we can evaluate the risk
adjustment model and other sources of variation in cost.
    The existence of this pricing pattern is itself relevant, regardless of whether the expla-
nation is invest-then-harvest pricing or imperfect risk adjustment: it implies that enrollees
will have an incentive to switch between otherwise identical products, either to take ad-
vantage of introductory prices (the invest-then-harvest explanation) or a better risk pool (a
failure of risk adjustment explanation). Some enrollees will switch, ineﬃciently expending
real resources to do so.
     Cost Variation Due to Risk Adjustment Failures.–There are two ways risk
adjustment could fail for standard enrollees, and lead to Δc > 0. First, risk adjustment may
not suﬃciently account for the increase in a firm’s costs as a representative sample of the
population ages. Second, risk adjustment may not suﬃciently account for the selection of
enrollees who choose to stay in older plans: if enrollees whose cost is higher than their risk
adjustment payments (that is, enrollees for whom the risk adjustment model fails more) were
less likely to switch, older cohorts of plans would have higher costs.38
      First, risk adjustment does seem to account for the age-related increase in drug spending.
Older cohorts of plans will have an older enrollee base, as a result of inertia and the low rate
of switching. Thus, eﬀective risk adjustment requires that as an enrollee ages, they do not
become more costly to a firm. Risk adjustment payments are based on diagnostic history,
  38
     For instance, Brown, Duggan, Kuziemko, and Woolston (2011) show that plans in the Medicare Advan-
tage market engage in risk selection on dimensions not covered by the risk adjustment formula–specifically,
that the private Medicare Advantage plans disproportionally enroll low cost individuals, compared to Tra-
ditional Medicare. However, the threat of selection is much less severe in Part D than in Medicare Advan-
tage. While Medicare Advantage plans are competing with an essentially non-strategic actor (Traditional
Medicare), Part D plans are competing with other strategic Part D plans attempting to select profitable
enrollees. The pricing regressions in Table 4 compare diﬀerent cohorts of Part D plans to each another, and
so a selection story must rely not on firms merely attempting to select, but on older firms being less able to
select a profitable population than younger firms. However, that is inconsistent with the eﬀects of expertise
(older firms have more knowledge) or with the switching results described in this section.



                                                     19
but when that information is unavailable, a simpler model based on age and sex is used. I
evaluate the simpler model, as I do not have enrollee claim history; the more detailed model
should do even better in modeling costs. Consider when a representative sample of the
population 65 and above is aged five years. The change in drug spending for this population
matches the change in firm risk adjustment payments. Using the 2007 Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey, average prescription drug spending would rise by 2.6% as this population ages
five years. Using the age-based risk adjustment factors, a firm’s risk adjustment payments
would increase by 3.1%. Appendix Section A.3 gives more detail on the construction of these
figures.
     Second, we can examine how switching behavior varies by observable factors. While
we do not know the people for whom the risk adjustment model underpredicts cost (as we
do not have data on firm costs), we can infer they likely to be older and sicker enrollees—
the enrollees with the highest costs. So if cohort composition is driving the pricing results,
we would expect older and sicker enrollees to be more likely to stay with older cohorts of
plans. However, we see the opposite pattern: Ketcham, Lucarelli, Miravete, and Roebuck
(forthcoming) examine who switches Part D plans using proprietary data on a subset of
the market. They find that the probability of switching to an alternative plan is higher for
1) older individuals, and 2) individuals with a higher risk score, and 3) individuals with a
changed risk score. Thus, there is no evidence that enrollees who stay behind in older plans
are the type for whom risk adjustment is likely to fail.
     Moreover, while the primary dimension within the market on which we would expect
diﬀerential selection is basic versus enhanced plans, the relative costs of these types of plans
do not drive the results. The preferred analyses in Table 4 are limited to basic plans alone, as
these plans have fewer unobserved characteristics. Nonetheless, the pricing pattern is robust
to including enhanced plans in the sample or solely looking at enhanced plans (Appendix
Tables A.10 and A.11).
     Cost Variation Due to the LIS Program.–While the LIS program has the po-
tential to aﬀect firm pricing strategy, the observed pricing pattern is not attributable to the
LIS program. The results in Section 5 indicate that there is no consistent eﬀect of acquiring
a large number of LIS recipients on subsequent premiums; the preferred specification finds
a negligible negative eﬀect (about 68 cents per month). Moreover, risk-adjustment for LIS
recipients is insuﬃcient to cover their higher costs (Hsu et al. 2010), potentially creating
an incentive to raise premiums among plans that disproportionately attract LIS recipients.
Yet it is the new cohorts of plans that have a higher fraction of their enrollees receive the
LIS, a result of their lower prices. In 2009, 40% of enrollees in the 2006 cohort of plans re-
ceive the LIS, compared to 70-89% of later cohorts (Appendix Figures A.1 and A.2). Hence,


                                              20
incomplete risk adjustment for LIS recipients implies that the estimated eﬀects of plan age
actually underestimate the increases in prices that would occur if risk adjustment were per-
fect. Finally, Appendix Table A.11 shows that the observed pricing pattern is similar when
the sample is split between plans that were ever below, verus were never below, the LIS
benchmark.39
    Cost Variation Due to Negotiated Prices.–Even if the average utilization of
enrollees were the same across two firms, firm costs could vary because that the prices firms
pay for a given bundle of drugs varies. Yet this potential cost diﬀerence should bias us
against finding the invest-then-harvest pattern. Older cohorts have higher enrollment, and
so have greater bargaining power for pharmaceutical prices. Thus, we should expect older
cohorts to have lower costs than new entrants, suggesting the markup would be even higher
than the observed Δp. (See Lakdawalla and Yin 2012 for evidence that Part D increased the
bargaining power of insurers.)
    Variation in Markups: Invest-then-Harvest Pricing.–The model of Section 3
predicts that firms are sophisticated and vary prices in response to variation in the price
elasticity of demand they face. The pricing behavior is consistent with the invest-then-
harvest pricing pattern predicted by Section 3. Plans in their fifth year charge an additional
10%, or about $50, per year than equivalent, newly introduced plans— and this diﬀerence is
unlikely to be driven by cost diﬀerences between firms. Although we do not know the full
distribution of switching frictions, these results are quantitatively consistent with the model
as well: it seems reasonable that seniors may not switch for gains as small as $50.40

7        Discussion and Conclusion

     Inertia and firms’ responses to it have implications for researchers and policy makers.
Since firms predictably raise prices on plans in later years, analysis of this market should
consider the lifecycle price of an insurance product. Under perfect competition, firms do not
make positive profits: in the first period, they compete away the rents they will later earn
(see Ericson 2012 for more detail). Under imperfect competition, switching frictions have
an ambiguous eﬀect on firm profits.41 In either case, total premiums paid will depend on
    39
     Decarolis (2012) shows that in later years of the market, some large firms may have had the ability to
manipulate the LIS benchmark, and identifies Aetna, CVS, and Medco as displaying suspicious behavior.
Manipulation does not drive the pricing results, since 1) only a few large firms have this incentive and 2)
Appendix Table A.11 runs the pricing regressions excluding the three suspicious firms and finds no substantive
change in the results.
  40
     This is a pure utility gain if plans have perfect substitutes; to the extent plans are imperfect substitutes,
the utility gain from switching would be attenuated.
  41
     For models of imperfect competition, there is an active debate about whether switching costs raise or
lower the average level of markups: compare Farrell and Klemperer (2007) and Dubé, Hitsch & Rossi (2009),


                                                       21
an enrollee’s ability and willingness to switch plans, which may raise equity concerns: more
sophisticated enrollees who can switch to inexpensive plans will eﬀectively be cross-subsidized
by enrollees stuck in place at relatively expensive plans.
     Inertia limits how enrollees will respond to changes in their environment, and so enrollees
who face switching frictions will respond to a policy change diﬀerently than individuals
making initial decisions. Even moderate switching frictions can limit what can be learned
about long-run population responses from existing enrollees. The results in Table 4 suggest
an approximate magnitude of switching frictions: $50, or about 10% of annual premiums.
     Chetty (2011) shows that in the presence of switching costs or other optimization fric-
tions, a range of structural elasticities (i.e. long-run elasticities) is consistent with the ob-
served response to a price change. Consider a hypothetical large policy change that puts a
50% subsidy on premiums paid, replacing the current arrangement in which individuals pay
the full marginal cost of choosing a more expensive plan. How would this subsidy aﬀect total
expenditure on premiums? Suppose a researcher examined existing enrollees and precisely
identified the change in their premium spending that resulted from the policy, estimating a
price elasticity of spending of -0.07 (similar to that measured in other contexts.)42 Appendix
Section A.4 uses the results of Chetty (2011) to show that with switching frictions of 10% of
premiums, an observed elasticity of -0.07 would be consistent with long-run elasticities that
range from virtually zero (−9.0 × 10−4 ) to very large (−5.0), a rather uninformative range.
     Compared to a situation in which firms could commit to future prices or simply charged
the same price each period (lifetime average cost), this equilibrium is ineﬃcient: with invest-
then-harvest pricing, some individuals switch to get better deals, and expend some real
resources in the process.43 The current contracting structure makes it diﬃcult for firms to
commit to future prices, but commitment to future prices (e.g. by allowing multi-year bids)
could reduce ineﬃcient switching.44 Some rough calculations give a sense of the potential
who find that the eﬀect of switching costs on average markups are non-monotonic and depend on the setting.
Markups are transfers from enrollees to firms and so aﬀect the distribution of income. Higher markups would
also lead to added deadweight loss for the increased taxes to pay for higher premiums (consumers only pay
about 25% of the premiums), and from individuals substituting out of the market.
  42
     The response of interest here is the percentage change in total spending for a percentage change in price.
This diﬀers from the plan share elasticity estimated in Section 4.2, which measures substitutability among
plans. Gruber and Washington (2005) observe an elasticity of total premiums spent on health insurance of
about -0.07 for employer provided health insurance.
  43
     A similar welfare loss would result if there were imperfect risk adjustment, leading to costs varying by
cohort of plan. In such a case, enrollees would expend resources switching plans merely to join a better risk
pool.
  44
     Firms submit annual bids. Because final prices are determined by a subsidy amount that is unknown
to firms when submitting their bid, firms cannot easily communicate future pricing intentions to enrollees
(e.g. a firm cannot advertise that their plan will cost $30 month for the next five years). Other barriers to
commitment include uncertainty about future costs and inability to commit to unobserved quality.



                                                      22
welfare gain to flat pricing. Heiss, McFadden and Winter (2007) find that 10% of enrollees
switch between 2006 and 2007. We do not know how much of this switching is induced by
price changes, as opposed to consumer learning or preference change. Suppose that only half
of the observed switching would have occurred if firms had set constant prices, so there are
about 0.8 million excess switches per year. If the average switching cost borne, conditional on
actually switching, is $25 (recall, switchers can save about $50), then about $20 million per
year in real costs are expended on switching that would not have occurred if firms committed
to constant prices.
       Contract restrictions play a major role in determining the form equilibrium takes. Under
current regulations, plans must charge all enrollees the same price. If firms were instead
allowed to charge “introductory prices” for first-time enrollees, they would choose to do so
(see Taylor 2003). Such a policy would still lead to ineﬃcient switching between plans.
However, it would weaken incentives for firm entry, since existing firms could simultaneously
oﬀer attractive prices to new enrollees while charging enrollees stuck in place a higher price.45
     Market design decisions can aﬀect the extent to which individuals are inert. The default
for standard enrollees is automatic reenrollment in the same plan, regardless of firm price
increases. In contrast, LIS recipients face an automatic switching default, which can raise
the elasticity of repeat demand and limit price increases in later periods. Ericson (2012)
considers how to set these dynamic defaults, and shows that they depend crucially on source
of switching frictions (real costs or psychological factors) and the pricing response of firms.
     Medicare Part D is a large, functioning exchange that is important to study in its
own right, and also gives insights into the design of health insurance exchanges. Yet firms’
strategic responses to inertia are relevant for market design in domains other than health
insurance: for instance, governments organize school voucher programs and private social
security accounts. Market design decisions in these and similar domains should take into
account the inertial behavior of individuals, real switching costs individuals face, and the
strategic responses of firms to both.


REFERENCES

Abaluck, Jason and Jonathan Gruber. 2011. "Choice Inconsistencies Among the El-
derly: Evidence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program." American Economic
Review, 101: 1180-1210.
  45
    Similarly, if firms were allowed to oﬀer multiple, identical plans at diﬀerent prices, they would desire to
do so, as this would essentially replicate introductory pricing.




                                                      23
Carroll, Gabriel, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew
Metrick. 2009. “Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
124: 1639-1674.

Chetty, Raj. 2011. "Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of
Micro and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply." NBER Working Paper 15616.

Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. "Adjustment
Costs, Firm Responses, and Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax Records."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 749-804.

Choi, James, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004. "For
Better or For Worse: Default Eﬀects and 401(k) Savings Behavior." David Wise, editor.
Perspectives in the Economics of Aging. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 81-121.

Decarolis, Francesco. 2012. "Pricing and Incentives in Publicly Subsidized Health Care
Markets: The Case of Medicare Part D". Working Paper.

Dubé, Jean-Pierre, Günter Hitsch, and Peter Rossi. 2009. "Do Switching Costs Make
Markets Less Competitive?." Journal of Marketing Research 46: 435-445.

Duggan, Mark, Patrick Healy, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2008. "Providing Prescrip-
tion Drug Coverage to the Elderly: America’s Experiment with Medicare Part D." Journal
of Economic Perspectives 22: 69-92.

Duggan, Mark, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2011. "The Medium-Term Impact of Medicare
Part D on Pharmaceutical Prices." American Economic Review. 103: 387-392.

Ericson, Keith M. 2011. "Forgetting We Forget: Overconfidence and Memory." Journal
of the European Economic Association. 9: 43-60.

Ericson, Keith M. 2012. "Dynamic Defaults". Working Paper.

Farrell, Joseph. 1986. "A Note on Inertia in Market Share." Economics Letters 21: 77-79.

Farrell, Joseph, and Paul Klemperer. 2007. "Coordination and Lock-In: Competition
with Switching Costs and Network Eﬀects." Handbook of Industrial Organization, Elsevier
Vol 3: 1967-2072.

Farrell, Joseph, and Carl Shapiro. 1988. "Dynamic Competition with Switching Costs."
RAND Journal of Economics 19: 123-137.


                                           24
Gruber, Jonathan, and Ebonya Washington. 2005. "Subsidies to Employee Health
Insurance Premiums and the Health Insurance Market." Journal of Health Economics 24:
253-276.

Handel, Benjamin. 2009. "Adverse Selection and Switching Costs in Health Insurance
Markets: When Nudging Hurts." Working Paper.

Heiss, Florian, Daniel McFadden, and Joachim Winter. 2007. "Mind the Gap! Con-
sumer Perceptions and Choices of Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plans." NBER Work-
ing Paper 13627.

Hoadley, Jack, Juliette Cubanski, Elizabeth Hargrave, Laura Summer, and Tricia
Neuman. 2009. "Medicare Part D Spotlight: Part D Plan Availability in 2010 and Key
Changes Since 2006." Kaiser Family Foundation Issue Brief 7986.

Hsu, John, Vicki Fung, Jie Huang, Mary Price, Richard Brand, Rita Hui, Bruce
Fireman, William Dow, John Bertko, and Joseph Newhouse. 2010. "Fixing Flaws
In Medicare Drug Coverage That Prompt Insurers To Avoid Low-Income Patients." Health
Aﬀairs 29: 2335-2343

Imbens, Guido and Karthik Kalyanaraman. "Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Re-
gression Discontinuity Estimator." Working Paper, 2009.

Jones, Damon. Forthcoming. "Inertia and Overwithholding: Explaining the Prevalence of
Income Tax Refunds." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Ketcham, Jonathan, Claudio Lucarelli, Eugenio Miravete, and M. Christopher Roebuck.
Forthcoming. "Sinking, Swimming, or Learning to Swim in Medicare Part D." American
Economic Review.

Kling, Jeﬀrey R., Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Mar-
ian V. Wrobel. 2011. "Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug
Plans." NBER Working Paper No. 17410.

Lakdawalla, Darius and Wesley Yin. 2012. Insurers’ Negotiating Leverage and the Ex-
ternal Eﬀects of Medicare Part D. Working Paper.

Lacetera, Nicola, Devin Pope, and Justin Sydnor. Forthcoming. "Heuristic Thinking
and Limited Attention in the Car Market." American Economic Review.

Levinson, Daniel. 2008. "Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Audits of Medicare
Part D Bids." Oﬃce of Inspector General, Department of Health and Human Services.

                                           25
Levinson, Daniel. 2009. "Midyear Formulary Changes in Medicare Prescription Drug
Plans." Oﬃce of Inspector General, Department of Health and Human Services.

Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea. 2001. "The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 1149-1187.

McCrary, Justin. 2008. "Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discon-
tinuity Design: A Density Test." Journal of Econometrics 142: 698-714.

The Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. 2010. “Report to the Congress:
Medicare Payment Policy." Online: www.medpac.gov/chapters/Mar10_Ch05.pdf

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 2001. "Choice and Procrastination." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116:121-160.

Robst, John, Jesse Levy, and Melvin Ingber. 2007. "Diagnosis-Based Risk Adjustment
for Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Payments." Health Care Financing Review 28: 15.

Samuelson, William, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1988. "Status Quo Bias in Decision
Making." Journal of Risk & Uncertainty 1: 7-59.

Strombom, Bruce, Thomas Buchmueller, and Paul Feldstein. 2002. "Switching
Costs, Price Sensitivity and Health Plan Choice." Journal of Health Economics 21: 89-116.

Taylor, Curtis. 2003. "Supplier Surfing: Competition and Consumer Behavior in Subscrip-
tion Markets." RAND Journal of Economics 34: 223-246.




                                           26
                              .08
                              .06
                   Density
                     .04      .02
                              0




                                             0      20                  40              60         80
                                                                 Monthly Premium

                                                         2006-7 Cohorts            2008+ Cohorts




Figure 1: Distribution of Basic PDP Plan Premiums in 2010, by Year of Plan Introduction.
Epanechnikov kernel density.
                              15000
                   Enrollment (Thousands)
                   5000       0   10000




                                            2006   2007               2008             2009        2010
                                                                      Year



Figure 2: Total PDP Enrollment, by Year and Cohort of Plan. Each line traces the total en-
rollment of each cohort of plans over time. The enrollment of the 2010 cohort is indicated by
a circular marker. Total enrollment includes both standard enrollees and LIS recipients, and
is taken as of July 1 of each year. See Appendix Section A.2 for details on data construction.



                                                                    27
                                       -3
                    Log Enrollment Share, 2006
                   -7      -6      -5  -8   -4




                                                            -10   -5                0                  5         10
                                                                    Monthly Premium - LIS Subsidy, 2006

                                                                    Local Linear            Quartic Polynomial




Figure 3: The Eﬀect of 2006 Benchmark Status on 2006 Enrollment. Dots are local averages
with a binsize of $0.50. Dashed lines are predictions from local linear regressions with
bandwidth of $4. Solid lines are predictions from regressions with a quartic polynomial with
a bandwidth of $10.
                                                        5
                   Monthly Premiums - LIS Subsidy, 2007
                             -5        -10 0




                                                            -10   -5                0                  5         10
                                                                    Monthly Premium - LIS Subsidy, 2006

                                                                    Local Linear             Cubic Polynomial




Figure 4: The Eﬀect of 2006 Benchmark Status on 2007 Premiums. Dots are local averages
with a binsize of $0.50. Dashed lines are predictions from local linear regressions with
bandwidth of $6. Solid lines are predictions from regressions with a cubic polynomial with
a bandwidth of $10.



                                                                                   28
                            40
                  Monthly Premium ($)
                   30       25    35




                                        2006   2007    2008   2009   2010
                                                       Year



Figure 5: Evolution of Cohort Premiums over Time. Average monthly premiums for basic
PDP plans, by plan cohort and year. Each line traces gives the annual premium over time
of a given cohort. Standard errors are in grey.




                                                      29
     Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Medicare Part D Plans

                                      Cohort (Year of Plan Introduction)
                                      2006    2007      2008      2009     2010

 Mean monthly premium                 $ 37    $ 40      $ 36      $ 30     $ 33
                                   (13)       (17)  (20)  (5)   (9)
 Mean deductible                   $ 92       $ 114 $ 146 $ 253 $ 118
                                      (116) (128)       (125)     (102)    (139)
 Fraction enhanced benefit 0.43 0.43        0.58    0.03     0.69
 Fraction of plans oﬀered by firms already oﬀering a plan...
 ...in the U.S.                    0.00       0.76      0.98      1.00     0.97
 ...in the same state              0.00       0.53      0.91      0.68     0.86
 N Unique Firms                    51         38        16        5        6
 N Plans                           1429       658       202       68       107
 Source: Author’s calculations from CMS Landscape Source Files. Plan char-
acteristics are taken from the year the plan was introduced (e.g. premium in
plan’s first year). Standard deviations in parentheses.
          Table 2: Response of Enrollment to Contemporaneous and Past Prices: 2007

                           (1)               (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                           ln s2007          ln s2007        ln s2006     ln s2007     ln s2007     ln s2006

 Premium in 2007           -0.0971*** -0.146***                           -0.0899*** -0.105***
                           (0.0308)   (0.0447)                            (0.0285)   (0.0335)
 Premium in 2006    -0.0773***                               -0.140***    -0.0694***                -0.173***
                    (0.0185)                                 (0.0281)     (0.0222)                  (0.0254)
 Type of Basic Plan Yes                      Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Firm Fixed Eﬀects No                        No              No           Yes          Yes          Yes
 N                  560                      560             553          560          560          553
   2
 R                  0.648                    0.484           0.552        0.827        0.800        0.757
 OLS regression. Dependent variable: log of plan market share for non-LIS enrollees in a year. Sample: basic
PDP plans that were introduced in 2006, and that do not attrit or switch to or from enhanced benefit type before
2007. Plans are dropped from the regression if they have fewer than 10 total enrollees or if estimated enrollment
net of LIS is negative. See Appendix Section A.2 for more details. In all columns, state fixed eﬀects and benefit
type indicators (Defined Standard, Actuarially Equivalent Standard, or Basic Alternative) are included, and
for Basic Alternative plans, deductible bins of $0, $1 to $50,$51 to $100 ..., are included. In columns 1 and 4,
controls are included separately for type of basic plan and deductible in both 2006 and 2007. Indicators for
pricing below the LIS benchmark are also included, separately for 2006 and 2007. Heteroskedasticity robust
standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                        30
             Table 3: Eﬀect of LIS Benchmark Status in 2006 on Plan Enrollment

 ln st                               2006           2007           2008           2009           2010

                                                   Panel 1: Local linear, bandwidth $4
 Below Benchmark, 2006               2.224***      1.332***    0.902***      0.803**   0.677
                                     (0.283)        (0.267)        (0.248)        (0.362)        (0.481)
 Premium - Subsidy, 2006
 ... Below Benchmark                 -0.0141        -0.0774        -0.0731        -0.170         -0.215**
                                     (0.0322)       (0.0882)       (0.116)        (0.105)        (0.0878)
 ... Above Benchmark                 -0.142*        -0.0331        0.0494         0.0737         0.0488
                                     (0.0783)       (0.110)    (0.163)     (0.170)     (0.202)
 N                                   306            299        298         246         212
 R2                                  0.576          0.325      0.131       0.141       0.124
                                          Panel    2: Polynomial with controls, bandwidth $4
 Below Benchmark, 2006               2.464***       1.364***   0.872***    0.351       -0.277
                                     (0.222)        (0.321)    (0.246)     (0.324)     (0.301)
 Premium - Subsidy, 2006   Quadratic                Quadratic Quadratic           Quadratic Quadratic
 N                         306                      299          298              246        212
 R2                        0.794                    0.576        0.472            0.535      0.685
                               Panel 3:             Past interactions, local    linear, bandwidth $4
 Below Benchmark or de minimis in:
 ...2006 and current year  2.224***                 2.089***       2.377***       2.633***       2.443***
                           (0.283)                  (0.364)        (0.275)        (0.257)        (0.309)
 ...2006 but not current year                       0.628**        0.892**        1.068**        0.967
                                                    (0.293)        (0.329)        (0.446)        (0.625)
 ...current year but not 2006                       0.148          1.356***       2.107***       2.281***
                                                    (0.290)        (0.293)        (0.242)        (0.259)
 Premium - Subsidy, 2006             Linear         Linear         Linear         Linear         Linear
 N                                   306            299            298            246            212
 R2                                  0.576          0.480          0.426          0.498          0.467
 Each panel is a separate regression. Dependent variable: log of total plan market share (including LIS
enrollees) in a year. Sample: basic PDP plans with premiums within the bandwidth window ($4 on either
side of the benchmark) in 2006. In "Polynomial with controls", regressions include state and firm fixed eﬀects,
and benefit type indicators (Defined Standard, Actuarially Equivalent Standard, or Basic Alternative). For
Basic Alternative plans, deductible bins of $0, $1 to $50, $51 to $100 ..., are included. Premium minus
subsidy is included as a polynomial separately above and below the benchmark. Heteroskedasticity robust
standard errors, clustered at the firm level, are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                     31
                          Table 4: Medicare Part D Premiums by Plan Age

                                (1)         (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)

                                                           ln(Monthly Premium)
                                         Equal Weighted                         Enrollment Weighted
 Year of Plan Existence
 ...2nd Year                    -0.0167 -0.0103            0.0129         0.0183       -0.0229      0.0139
                                (0.0508) (0.0597)          (0.0511)       (0.0478)     (0.0446)     (0.0593)
 ...3rd Year                    0.0290      0.0585         0.0785         0.128**      0.0795** 0.133***
                                (0.0808) (0.0699)          (0.0519)       (0.0528) (0.0326)         (0.0358)
 ...4th Year                    0.0690   0.117*            0.148***       0.199*** 0.112**          0.191***
                                (0.0660) (0.0617)          (0.0496)       (0.0647) (0.0522) (0.0684)
 ...5th Year                    0.177** 0.147**            0.0960*        0.320*** 0.154*** 0.152*
                                (0.0871) (0.0593)          (0.0551)       (0.0861) (0.0530) (0.0764)
 Firm Oﬀers M.A. Plan                       -0.145**                                   -0.0390
                                            (0.0653)                                   (0.0350)
 Type of Basic Plan             No          Yes      Yes                  No           Yes           Yes
 Firm Fixed Eﬀects              No          No             Yes            No           No            Yes
 N                              4,276       4,276          4,276          4,123        4,123         4,123
 R2                             0.189       0.396          0.405          0.364        0.632         0.683
 Dependent variable: log monthly PDP premium or monthly premium. Sample: basic PDP plans. All
regressions include state fixed eﬀects interacted with year fixed eﬀects. Controls for type of basic plan include
benefit type indicators (Defined Standard, Actuarially Equivalent Standard, or Basic Alternative) interacted
with year fixed eﬀects. For Basic Alternative plans, deductible bins of $0, $1 to $50,$51 to $100 ..., are
also included and interacted with year fixed eﬀects. Enrollment weighted regressions are weighted using the
plan’s total enrollment in July of each year. Plans with fewer than 10 enrollees are dropped from weighted
regressions. See Appendix Section A.2 for more details. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, clustered
at the firm level, are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      32
