NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECESSIONS, OLDER WORKERS, AND LONGEVITY:
HOW LONG ARE RECESSIONS GOOD FOR YOUR HEALTH?
Courtney C. Coile
Phillip B. Levine
Robin McKnight
Working Paper 18361
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18361

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

We thank Dan Fetter, Doug Miller, Chris Ruhm, Ann Huff Stevens, and seminar participants at the
Boston College Center for Retirement Research, NBER Summer Institute, and Wellesley College
for helpful comments. This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through
grant #5RRC08098400-04-00 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement
Research Consortium. All correspondences regarding this paper should be addressed to Levine. The
findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of
SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Courtney C. Coile, Phillip B. Levine, and Robin McKnight. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Recessions, Older Workers, and Longevity: How Long Are Recessions Good For Your Health?
Courtney C. Coile, Phillip B. Levine, and Robin McKnight
NBER Working Paper No. 18361
September 2012
JEL No. I18,J26
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the impact of exposure to higher unemployment rates in the pre-retirement years
on subsequent mortality. Although past research has found that recessions reduce contemporaneous
mortality, these short-term effects may reverse over time, particularly for older workers. If workers
experience an economic downturn in their late 50s, they may face several years of reduced employment
and earnings before “retiring” when they reach Social Security eligibility at age 62. They also may
experience lost health insurance, and therefore higher financial barriers to health care, through age
65, when Medicare becomes available. All of these experiences could contribute to weaker long-term
health outcomes. To examine these hypotheses, we use Vital Statistics mortality data between 1969
and 2008 to generate age-specific cohort survival probabilities at older ages. We then link these survival
probabilities to labor market conditions at earlier ages. We also use data from the 1980-2010 March
Current Population Surveys and the 1991-2010 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System surveys
to explore potential mechanisms for this health effect. Our results indicate that experiencing a recession
in one’s late 50s leads to a reduction in longevity. We also find that this exposure leads to several
years of reduced employment, health insurance coverage, and health care utilization which may contribute
to the lower long-term likelihood of survival.

Courtney C. Coile
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ccoile@wellesley.edu
Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu

Robin McKnight
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
rmcknigh@wellesley.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The 2007-2009 recession and the lingering levels of high unemployment in the United States
afterwards are the worst since the Great Depression. One might imagine that Americans’ health
would be adversely affected by the downturn, given the income losses from unemployment. Yet an
extensive literature has shown that high unemployment rates are, perhaps counter-intuitively,
associated with improved health outcomes. Ruhm (2000) was the first to show that mortality rates
actually fall when the economy deteriorates.1 Others have confirmed this, including Stevens, et al.
(2011) who show that many age groups experience mortality declines during recessions, but that
these declines are concentrated among the older population. In this paper, we extend the existing
literature to explore the longer-term consequences of recessions, focusing on individuals who are
approaching retirement at the time the downturn begins.
Individuals who are approaching retirement when a recession hits may be particularly likely
to suffer long-lasting negative consequences. These individuals may have considerable difficulty
finding new jobs if job training is viewed as a poor investment for older individuals given their
relatively short time horizon in the labor market or if there is discrimination against older workers in
the labor market (Lahey, 2008). This may lead to a long period without a job leading up to a
retirement that may not be voluntary. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (2012) found that
around one-third of unemployed workers over age 55 in 2010 and 2011 had been without a job for
over a year. Johnson and Butrica (2012) document that in the latest recession, older unemployed
workers were substantially less likely to be re-employed than their younger counterparts. Exploring
the link between labor market conditions and retirement over the past thirty years, Coile and Levine
(2011a and 2011b) show that recessions are associated with systematically increased rates of
1

In contrast to this finding, Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) indicate that job displacement of long-tenured men
increases mortality in both the short and long-term. We describe this work in more detail subsequently.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 2
retirement, particularly at exact age 62, when individuals first become eligible for Social Security
retirement benefits. They also provide suggestive evidence that subsequent retirement income may
be reduced for these groups, presumably because of the reduced Social Security benefits resulting
from early retirement.
Compounding the effects of reduced employment and income, the employer-provided nature
of health insurance in the United States suggests that older individuals affected by the recession may
lose their health insurance as well. The potentially long duration of their unemployment spells means
that the period of lost coverage may be quite lengthy, for some lasting until Medicare eligibility at
age 65. The loss of health insurance, and any resulting reduction in health care utilization, could
pose a serious health risk for older workers, who often have chronic health problems and frequently
experience health shocks such as a heart attack or new cancer diagnosis (Coile, 2004).
Taken as a whole, the lost income during unemployment and retirement, in addition to
decreased access to health insurance and health care in the years leading up to Medicare eligibility,
could plausibly have a negative long-term impact on health outcomes. In principle, these effects
could reverse the contemporaneous health gains that accompany a recession.
The purpose of this paper is to study the impact of recessions on subsequent mortality,
focusing specifically on those workers approaching retirement age when the recession hits. We
closely follow the empirical strategy in much of the existing literature, using unemployment rates as
our key measure of recessions, and relying on variation across states and over time in the
unemployment rate to identify their impact. We begin our analysis by constructing state- and agespecific survival rates between the ages of 55 and 79 from Vital Statistics Mortality data for a
number of birth cohorts. We use these data to trace out the impact of a higher unemployment rate at
each age on contemporaneous survival and on survival at subsequent ages. We go on to explore

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 3
plausible mechanisms that could generate long-term health effects, including employment, health
insurance, and health care losses, using data from the 1980 through 2010 March Current Population
Surveys (CPS) and the 1991 through 2010 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS)
surveys.
Our results indicate that for workers in their late 50s and through age 61, any short-term
positive health benefits associated with a recession are temporary and, ultimately, are more than
offset by subsequent health deterioration. Interestingly, this pattern is not present for cohorts that
face recessions starting at age 62, the age of early entitlement to Social Security. We also find that a
recession leads to lengthy periods of unemployment and to financial barriers to health care due to
lower rates of health insurance coverage, lasting through the ages of early entitlement to Social
Security and Medicare eligibility, respectively. Our results suggest that these programs might buffer
the long-term negative health consequences of recessions. Although we cannot definitively
determine that reduced employment, insurance coverage, and health care use are the mechanisms
underlying our mortality findings, we view all of them as plausible. Regardless of the mechanism,
our findings underscore the fact that the contemporaneous effect of recessions on health – which has
been the focus of a substantial and important literature – is only part of the story. For those who are
approaching retirement when a recession hits, an economic downturn can have long-lasting effects
that more than offset the well-known contemporaneous health benefits of recessions.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
As we briefly referenced earlier, a substantial body of research has emerged that focuses on
the contemporaneous effect of economic conditions on health outcomes. Ruhm (2000) was the first
entry into this literature, showing that mortality rates fall when the economy deteriorates. This
finding holds for a broad range of causes of death, including heart disease, flu and pneumonia,

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 4
vehicle accidents, and infant and neonatal mortality. In subsequent work, Ruhm (2003) shows that
economic downturns improve other measures of health, such as the prevalence of chronic conditions,
and Ruhm (2005) shows that higher unemployment is related to reduced smoking, increased physical
activity, and reduced obesity. 2
More recent work by Miller et al. (2009), however, argues that the observed short-term effect
of economic conditions on mortality must be driven by external factors rather than by changes in
health behaviors among job losers, because the mortality effects are largest among the elderly
population, which is unlikely to be directly affected by unemployment. Stevens et al. (2011) extend
this work, providing evidence that improved nursing home staffing during recessions may be an
important mechanism for the improved mortality among the elderly. All of these papers focus on the
contemporaneous impact of high unemployment and do not address the potential long-term impact
on health outcomes.
The long-term impact of job loss on displaced workers is examined by Sullivan and Von
Wachter (2009), who present evidence that job loss is associated with both higher short-term and
long-term mortality. They find that, even twenty years after losing a job, displaced workers continue
to have higher mortality rates. The authors posit that the long-term mortality effect that they observe
among displaced workers may be attributable to the long-term reduction in earnings associated with
job loss. These findings are an interesting counter-point to the rest of the literature, because they
indicate that, even if recessions improve health on average, there are important subpopulations for
whom recessions may worsen health. They also raise the possibility that the short-term mortality

2

Several recent studies have also examined the impact of recessions on health-related behavior. For example, using data
from Iceland, Asgeirsdotter et. al. (2011) find that the Great Recession led to reductions in health-compromising
behaviors and increases in some health-promoting behaviors. In the United States, using data from the American Time
Use Survey, Aguiar et. al. (2011) find that unemployment is associated with more time spent on TV-watching and
sleeping, as well as home production and leisure activities.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 5
gains that are present on average could be offset over time, as the contemporaneous benefits of
recessions on non-workers dissipate and the long-term effects of job loss on a subset of the
population becomes more prominent. Reconciling our findings with those from these two disparate
streams of research is a critical task that we undertake subsequently.
A related literature focuses on the impact of income changes on the health status of retirees.
Snyder and Evans (2006) examine the impact of the “Social Security notch” on the mortality rates of
retirees. The Social Security notch was created by a mistake incorporated into legislation that led to
the double indexation of Social Security benefits to inflation. When the mistake was fixed, it led to a
“notch,” where a certain cohort of retirees received lower Social Security benefits than those retirees
who immediately preceded them. Snyder and Evans find that additional income in retirement leads
to higher mortality rates and they argue that social isolation among retirees may be responsible.
Although this analysis provides an interesting experiment related to the effects of an income shock,
the shock generated by an unemployment spell may not necessarily have the same impact.
In related work focusing on recessions and older workers, Coile and Levine (2010, 2011a,
and 2011b) address the impact of a weak labor market on retirement decisions and subsequent retiree
income. They find that higher unemployment leads older workers to “retire” (i.e. completely
withdraw from the labor force) beginning at age 62. This suggests that Social Security may provide a
lifeline to older workers who experience an employment shock, struggle to find new work, and
finally withdraw from the labor force (albeit with reduced benefits) once they make it to that age.
Consistent with this evidence, they also provide suggestive evidence that subsequent Social Security
income is lower when unemployment is high in the period leading up to retirement. These results
indicate that approaching retirement at the time of a recession can have important consequences for

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 6
subsequent labor market activity and income. An obvious extension of this work is to examine
whether approaching retirement at the time of a recession also has health effects.

III. EFFECTS ON MORTALITY
A. Empirical Approach
Our empirical strategy is designed to build on the foundations set by Ruhm (2000, 2003,
2005a, and 2005b), Miller, et al. (2009), and Stevens, et al. (2011), all of whom use the same basic
methodological framework for their analyses. Specifically, they estimate regression models of the
form:3
lnMjt = Xjt·β + URjt·γ + αt + ϕj + ϕjT + εjt

(1)

where ln M is the natural log of the mortality rate in state j and year t, X is a vector of demographic
controls, and UR is the state unemployment rate. The vector of year specific fixed effects,

,

captures national time effects, and the vector of state specific indicator variables, ϕ , controls for
time-invariant state characteristics. State-specific time trends, ϕ T, are also included. The main
source of identification in this model is state and year level variation in the unemployment rate. A
specification like this is the starting point for our analysis; as we show subsequently, we are able to
largely replicate the main features of the results from these previous studies.
We then extend this approach by altering the focus from a point-in-time analysis to a
lifecycle analysis.

As described earlier, our goal is to estimate the long-term health effects

associated with experiencing a recession in the period leading up to retirement. We introduce an
empirical specification that begins with the contemporaneous positive health shocks that occur in
response to a rise in unemployment and then examines whether those effects persist, fade away, or
3

This notation is largely the same as in Stevens, et al. (2011), but has been modified slightly to clarify the distinctions
between their model and the one we specify subsequently.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 7
even reverse course over time. To estimate these dynamic effects, we revise the estimation strategy
to focus on the probability of survival as one ages as a function of the labor market shock
experienced in an earlier period. As we move to survival analysis, the relevant form of data switches
from pooled cross-sections to cohorts. We aim to answer the question: what was the effect on
subsequent survival of nearing retirement in differing economic environments?
The model we estimate to formally incorporate these ideas takes the form:
Sjca = URjcA·γAa + αc + ϕj + ϕjT + εjca

(2)

The first main change as we move from Equation (1) to Equation (2) is that the dependent variable is
now the survival probability (S), measured in levels, not in logs. If we are to track the absolute
impact on survival over time (i.e. determine whether the positive immediate impact on survival
returns to zero or even turns negative over time), survival rates in levels are the appropriate outcome.
Second, we are still indexing observations by state of residence, j (although we will provide
additional discussion of this subsequently), but now we are tracking cohorts, c, measured at different
ages, a, starting from age A, the year in which the shock occurs, and continuing to age 79, the oldest
age at which we track survival probabilities. In other words, if a particular cohort experiences an
increase in the unemployment rate at, say, age 60 (age A), what impact does that have on survival
probabilities between ages 60 and 79 (ages a)? Note that when a = A (i.e. at age 60), this model is
very similar to Equation (1), where the probability of survival through age 60 is one minus the
mortality rate in that year. This interpretation also highlights why the coefficient on the
unemployment rate, γ, is subscripted by A and a, because the impact of the age 60 unemployment
rate is estimated for survival to ages 60 through 79, or 20 times.
A third difference between this specification and Equation (1) is that we have dropped
population characteristics, labeled X in the earlier model. We made this decision partly because it is

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 8
not clear at what age to capture those characteristics in the context of a survival model and partly
because of issues in gathering these data; no obvious source provides large samples at each exact age
over the relevant time period. As we show subsequently, omitting those explanatory variables from
Equation (1) does not alter the qualitative nature of earlier findings.
Fourth, we have changed our notation to indicate that we are controlling for cohort fixed
effects (αc) rather than year fixed effects (αt) because this is a cohort-based model. This change is
merely a notation change and is not empirically relevant, since these age-specific regressions make
year fixed effects identical to cohort fixed effects.
Our approach has the advantage of allowing us to confirm earlier findings and then extend
them to focus on our question, but it comes with disadvantages as well, which are largely a result of
data limitations. The first limitation is our inability to track migration as people age. Our goal is to
estimate the effect of a one percentage point increase in the age 60 unemployment rate in, say,
Missouri, on an individual’s subsequent survival. Unfortunately, however, we can only determine
state of residence at the time of death from our data, not state of residence at some earlier age. If the
Missourian moved to Florida at, say, age 68, we would inadvertently associate her death with the
Florida cohort and not the Missouri cohort. Migration at these ages is reasonably prevalent,
particularly in some states. Using data from the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses, we estimate that 5
percent of those between the ages of 60 and 70 moved across state lines in the preceding five years.
For those residents of Arizona and Florida at these ages, 20 and 12 percent, respectively, lived in a
different state five years ago.
Although it would be ideal to perfectly track state of residence over the relevant age ranges,
we do not believe that this limitation will substantively alter the results of our analysis. First,
migration to improve one’s job-finding prospects seems unlikely at these ages, so movement

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 9
between states is likely to introduce classical measurement error that would introduce a downward
bias in our estimates. To the extent that we obtain results that are statistically different than zero,
then this is just an understatement of the true effect. Second, we have re-estimated all the models
reported below excluding Arizona and Florida, the main states that experience substantial migration
inflows, and we obtained very similar results.
A second limitation of our approach is that the data requirements are formidable. We define
“nearing retirement” as being between the ages of 55 and 65.

Our goal is to track survival

probabilities through age 79. This means that we need to calculate survival probabilities for upwards
of 25 years for each cohort, which requires mortality data in each of those years. Although we have
available the universe of death certificates from the United States Vital Statistics system, these data
are available beginning only in 1968 and through 2008 at the time of this analysis.4 Population data
by state and exact age are available (from the National Cancer Institute, available at seer.cancer.gov)
beginning only in 1969, making that the first year for which we can calculate survival rates. We
focus on the 1910 through 1929 birth cohorts, for whom we are able to calculate a complete set of
survival rates for ages 59 through 79 (the 1910 birth cohort was age 59 in 1969 and the 1929 birth
cohort was 79 in 2008). To expand the age range to earlier ages, we must reduce the number of
cohorts we examine. For instance, to start the survival analysis at age 58, the 1911 birth cohort is the
first one we can use. To go back to an age 55 starting age, we focus on the 1914 through 1929 birth
cohorts. We prefer this approach (using a slightly smaller number of cohorts when examining

4

State identifiers in Vital Statistics Mortality data are available publicly through 2004, but then require permission from
the Centers for Disease Control to use them in more recent years. These more recent data are treated as confidential and
we are unable to share them.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 10
survival rates at ages 55 to 59 but making use of the 1910 through 1914 cohorts in the rest of the
analysis) because of the additional power available.5
One additional consideration in the specification of this model is the inclusion of the
unemployment rate associated with the base age (A) only. In theory, survival in each year between,
say, ages 60 and 74 might be affected by the unemployment rates in each of the intervening 15 years.
Our specification omits the unemployment rates in the intervening years, focusing on labor market
conditions at the base age (i.e. age 60). Our decision to exclude all of these other unemployment
rates was made to focus on the subsequent effect of an initial shock. Unemployment rates tend to be
serially correlated over short periods of time, but not over longer periods of time.6 This means that
excluding a considerably more recent unemployment rate (i.e. excluding the age 70 unemployment
rate in a specification focused on the effect of unemployment at age 60) will not introduce omitted
variable bias in the coefficient on the base age unemployment rate, while including it will reduce the
precision of the estimate. We chose to omit the unemployment rate from neighboring years (i.e. the
age 61 unemployment rate) because it will be serially correlated with the base age unemployment
rate, standard errors will be inflated, and we will have difficulty interpreting the results. If we
include only the age 60 unemployment rate, part of the effect we estimate may be capturing the fact
that the high unemployment rate lingered for another year.

5

We do not view this as being

We have also estimated all models using the smaller sample of 1914 through 1929 birth cohorts for survival between
ages 55 and 79 as well as the 1914 through 1933 birth cohorts for survival between ages 55 and 75. In each case, we
obtained qualitatively similar results (which are available upon request).
6
In a simple analysis, we find that a state unemployment rates is positively related to unemployment rates in the same
state from each of the prior three years, after controlling for state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Not surprisingly,
the relationship is strongest for the unemployment rate in the immediate prior year. This relationship does not hold for
unemployment rates that are more than three years apart.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 11
problematic for our purposes, as it is the cumulative effect of a recession that we are trying to
capture.7
This discussion clarifies the nature of the data we use in this analysis. As we already
highlighted, we use Vital Statistics Mortality microdata between 1969 and 2008, making use of the
age at death, the birth year, and the state of residence. We augment this with the SEER estimated
population data by state and age from the National Cancer Institute to create annual mortality rates
by birth cohort and state of residence. We treat state of residence as a constant. This enables us to
convert these mortality rates to survival rates; we do this for the 1910 through 1929 birth cohorts and
estimate survival from ages 59 through 79. We estimate survival rates beginning at ages 55, 56, 57,
and 58 by restricting the birth cohorts further, starting in 1914, 1913, 1912, and 1911, respectively.
State unemployment rates are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics starting in 1976. For
earlier years, we use the state unemployment rates available from the U.S. Department of Labor in
their series, Manpower Reports of the President (various years).8

7

To further address this specification issue, we estimated analogous models as in equation 2, but we aggregated the
unemployment rate into averages over three year windows (starting with age 55-57 average unemployment and survival
through age 57). We replicated the specification in equation 2 using these averaged unemployment rates and we obtained
similar results to those reported below. Then we continued including average unemployment rates over subsequent three
year intervals (i.e. at 58-60, 61-63, 64-66, …) to examine the impact of the full time series path of labor market
conditions, but reducing the influence of serial correlation. As we add unemployment rates at subsequent ages in the
model, our estimates on the base period unemployment rate become somewhat less precise, but the magnitudes are
similar to those we report below. The coefficients on the unemployment rates at subsequent ages, however, start
becoming erratic as more years of unemployment rate data are included (these results are available on request). We
believe that these results affirm our more parsimonious model specification.
8
The source of state unemployment rates from Manpower Reports of the President in the years earlier than 1976 is not
clear. The only detail provided in these reports are table notes indicating their source as “state employment security
agencies cooperating with the U.S. Department of Labor.” To assess the value of these data, we have compared their
means to national averages, compared state patterns/values in the years just before 1976 to values just after, examined
cyclical patterns by state (looking for greater cyclical responsiveness in Michigan, for instance), and compared their
values to measures of the insured unemployment rate (which are traditionally lower). All of these comparisons suggest
that these data represent meaningful measures of labor market conditions in a state that are comparable to BLS data for
subsequent years. We have also conducted our analyses using only data beginning in 1976 and obtained results that were
qualitatively similar, although less precise, than those we report here.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 12
B. Replication Exercise
Before presenting the results of our survival analysis, we first present Table 1, which shows
the results of our replication analysis addressing contemporaneous mortality based on the work of
Stevens, et al. (2011).9 We begin by attempting to replicate the results that Stevens, et al. present in
their Figure 2, which displays the impact of a one percentage point increase in the unemployment
rate on contemporaneous mortality by exact age.10 Replicating their results by exact age is
appropriate since the remainder of our analysis focuses on outcomes by exact age. To reduce the
amount of material to report, in Table 1 we have chosen to provide the results at exact ages between
55 and 75 in five year intervals. The first two columns of the table provide mean mortality rates over
the 1969 through 2008 sample period (Column 1) and for the 1910 through 1929 birth cohorts
(Column 2) at each age. These statistics are presented for purposes of comparison with coefficient
estimates presented subsequently to provide some context for their magnitude.
We begin reporting the results of our replication attempt in Columns 3 and 4, which display
the results from Stevens, et al. (2011), and our attempt to replicate those estimates. As the second
line of the table indicates, we use the 1978 through 2006 sample years for all available birth cohorts
in those years, as they do. Our findings are not identical to theirs, but the differences are very small;
in each case, they differ by less than 0.1 of a standard deviation. Based on this, we are confident in
proceeding.11

9

Stevens, et al. (2011) also successfully replicated the findings in Ruhm (2000), making our analysis a third generation
replication.
10
We are grateful to the authors of this paper for sharing the publicly available parts of their data with us along with their
detailed results so that we could have access to the exact coefficients and standard errors for the points listed in their
Figure 2.
11
After examining our underlying data (through 2004, since subsequent data are confidential) and statistical code, we are
able to detect very small differences in the data in both population counts and the number of deaths beginning in the year
2000. This is likely attributable to minor revisions in these data that were made between the times they were
downloaded for use in the two studies.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 13
The remainder of the table is designed to translate our specification from that expressed in
Equation (1) to that expressed in Equation (2). As we described earlier, it is unclear how to
incorporate the explanatory variables (other than the fixed effects) in a longitudinal analysis, so the
next thing we do is test the sensitivity of our results to dropping these variables. The results in
Column (5) are similar to those in Column (4), so we do not believe that we are imparting bias by
dropping these variables. In Column (6) we extend our sample to include mortality and labor market
outcomes between 1969 and 2008, adding nine years of data before and two years of data after that
used by Stevens, et al. This change has a bigger impact on the results. In general, we observe a
stronger negative relationship between unemployment and mortality; the magnitude of these
differences is up to a full standard deviation. The sensitivity of the results to the sample period is a
finding that Stevens, et al. (2011) report as well, so we are not surprised by this finding.
The next change that we make is to restrict the data to focus on the 1910 through 1929 birth
cohorts. Those results are reported in Column (7). For the most part, this alteration does not have
much of an impact other than to inflate standard errors somewhat, as one would expect when we
reduce the amount of data used in estimation. The one change of significance is observed for
mortality at age 75. For workers at that age, focusing on the 1910 through 1929 birth cohorts
eliminates a negative and statistically significant impact. One possible cause of this is that these birth
cohorts hit age 75 between 1985 and 2004. This means that these cohorts did not experience the
major recession of the early 1980s at that age, meaning that the variation in the data used to estimate
this model is largely based on the two mild recessions in the early 1990s and early 2000s. If we
replicate the Stevens, et al. model using post-1985 data, we similarly observe a large reduction in the
point estimate. As a result, we believe that this sensitivity is also attributable to the sample window
used for estimation.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 14
The final change that we make in Column (8) is to convert the dependent variable from
mortality measured in logs to levels. This change has very little impact on the results. This can be
seen by comparing t-statistics between Columns (7) and (8) or by comparing the ratio of the Column
(8) to Column (2) statistics to create percentage change effects and then comparing that to the results
in Column (7). Either way, it is clear that estimating the model in levels or logs provides the same
substantive results. The results in column (8), which show the same basic pattern of results as the
previous literature on the contemporaneous effects of recessions, constitute estimates of Equation (2)
for five cases where A=a. These results are the starting point for our analysis of long-term survival
effects.
B. Results of Survival Analysis
This section reports the results of estimating statistical models of the form represented by
Equation (2). In order to better interpret these findings, we first present some descriptive statistics on
aggregate survival rates beginning at age 55 and continuing through age 79. The age 55 survival rate
is the probability of surviving through age 55 conditional on having survived up to age 55, so it is a
number slightly less than one. Survival rates at subsequent ages are the probability of surviving
through that age conditional on surviving up to age 55. Appendix Table 1 provides a full set of
survival probabilities. For simplicity, we present in Figure 1 these survival rates for the 1915 and
1925 birth cohorts to demonstrate not just the patterns by age, but the general patterns across cohorts
as well. Among members of the 1915 birth cohort who survived to age 55, the probability of
surviving to age 79 is 49.7 percent. Members of the 1925 birth cohort live longer, unsurprisingly,
surviving to age 79 at the rate of 54 percent.
The full set of results from estimating Equation (2) is presented in Appendix Table 2. The
number of regressions that are inherent in that model is somewhat overwhelming. For

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 15
unemployment shocks experienced at each age between 55 and 79, we estimate the impact on
survival probabilities at each age between the base age and age 79. This means that our full set of
results contains 435 regressions. Even reporting just the key unemployment rate coefficient and its
standard error from each regression is overwhelming in any traditional format.
Instead, we adopt the following approaches to reduce the extent of reporting. First, we
provide Appendix Table 2, which reports a complete set of results for all models in which the
unemployment shock is measured between ages 55 and 65. These are the ages leading up to
retirement that are the focus of this analysis. Second, we present two figures that show coefficients
from selected regressions and are designed to capture the critical features of these results. Estimated
effects that are statistically significant at the 5 percent level are indicated by diamonds on the
figures.
Figure 2 displays the contemporaneous effects, meaning the impact on current age survival of
an increase in the unemployment rate at that age. This analysis is virtually identical to that reported
for selected ages in Column 8 of Table 1 (although mortality there is converted to survival here, so
negative mortality effects become positive survival effects). These results indicate that higher
unemployment increases survival probabilities across all of our age groups at a roughly similar rate.
Specifically, a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate increases one-year survival
probabilities by around 0.0005, or by 0.05 percentage points. With mortality rates that average
around three percent, this 0.05 percentage point increase in the one-year survival rate reflects about a
1.7 percent decrease in mortality rates. A larger impact is observed around age 70. Again, these
results are generally consistent with the findings in Stevens, et al., with perhaps the exception of
those in their late 70s. As described earlier, this exception is likely a result of different sample
periods.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 16
Figure 3 displays the long-term effects, meaning the impact of an increase in the
unemployment rate at some specified age on the path of survival rates from that age through age 79.
Rather than provide these effects for unemployment rate increases at each possible age, which would
be overwhelming, we selected five specific base ages (55, 58, 60, 62, and 65) that provide an
adequate characterization of the complete set of results. Note that the first point on each line is the
contemporaneous effect, as reported in Figure 2 for the relevant age. Other points on the line show
subsequent effects on survival, as measured at the ages that are denoted on the horizontal axis. To
condense the necessary content of these figures as much as possible, we again use a diamond on
each line to reflect those effects that are statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
As we reported in Figure 2, the contemporaneous effects are typically small and positive,
indicating that survival rates increase when the unemployment rate goes up. None of these
contemporaneous effects displayed are statistically significant, but Figure 2 shows that they are at
some ages.

One interesting extension of these results is that the positive effect on survival

probabilities may even increase in the few years following the rise in unemployment.
The issue upon which we would prefer to focus, however, is what happens subsequently, and
particularly as workers age into their retirement years. For those who experience a weaker labor
market at age 55, the positive impact on survival quickly fades and becomes insignificantly different
from zero through their 70s. Similarly, for those who experience higher unemployment at ages 62
and 65, we see no statistically significant longer-term impact on survival. For those who experience
a weak labor market at ages 58 or 60, however, an increase in the unemployment rate has long-term
deleterious effects on survival probabilities. Within five or so years after the labor market shock,

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 17
these cohorts have lower survival rates than others who did not experience a shock, and those lower
survival rates are statistically significant and continue throughout most, if not all, of their 70s.12
The magnitude of these effects indicates that a one percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate when an individual is in his or her late 50s reduces the probability of survival
into his or her 70s by 0.0003 to 0.0004 percentage points. A major recession that increases the
unemployment rate by 5 percentage points (as we experienced in the early 1980s and in 2008),
would have a 0.0015 to 0.0020 percentage point impact on survival. Although these effects might
appear to be incredibly small, it is important interpret them within the context of the number of
workers who lose their jobs during a recession, the number who may lose health insurance, and then
the number of those whose health may be seriously affected as a result. We place these estimates
into this broader context subsequently.
IV. EFFECTS ON HEALTH CARE USE, HEALTH INSURANCE, AND EMPLOYMENT
A. Data and Empirical Strategy
In this section of the paper, we explore potential mechanisms for the long-term increase in
mortality associated with recessions that occur when cohorts are in their late 50s and very early 60s.
We specifically examine the short- and long-term impacts of recessions on access to health care,
health insurance coverage and labor market outcomes. The best data source for examining insurance
coverage and employment over a long period of time is the March CPS; we pool data from the 1980
to 2010 surveys for our analysis. Although the CPS is available for earlier years, health insurance
variables are not defined consistently prior to 1980, so we choose to limit our sample to these 31
12

We have examined these effects separately by gender and find that the point estimates are very similar for males and
females. We would prefer to also distinguish the data by level of education, but we are unable to do so since Vital
Statistics mortality data only began recording the education level of the deceased in 1989 and because population
estimates by exact age, state, and education level are not available to be able to create the mortality rates that serve as
inputs to the survival rate. We also considered incorporating cause of death into the analysis, but our focus on survival
rather than mortality complicates such an analysis.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 18
survey years.13 For health care use, we provide evidence from the BRFSS, pooling the 1991-2010
survey years for our analysis. While the BRFSS survey collects more information on health
behaviors than on health care utilization, it does include a question about whether, during the past 12
months, the respondent needed to see a doctor, but did not because of cost. We use this question to
construct our key measure of health care access/use. 14
Ideally, we would use exactly the same empirical strategy examining these outcomes as we
did for mortality in the previous section. Those regression models, however, impose formidable data
requirements. We were able to meet those requirements in our analysis of survival probabilities,
because of the availability of Vital Statistics data, which include the universe of deaths. In contrast,
survey data sets such as the BRFSS and CPS introduce some limitations and therefore require
modifications to our empirical strategy.
The first limitation is that we are no longer able to follow a fixed panel of birth cohorts, as
we do in Vital Statistics data. The BRFSS and CPS both provide repeated cross-sections so, of
course, we are not able to follow the same individuals as they age from their 50s into their 70s. In
addition, we could only follow a small number of fixed birth cohorts over the twenty year period
from their 50s into their 70s. For example, we could follow only the 1925 through 1932 birth
cohorts in the 31 years of Current Population Surveys.

Therefore, we choose to include all

observations between the ages of 53 and 79 who appear in these surveys, regardless of birth cohort.15

13

Even within these 31 survey years, health insurance variables are not entirely consistent. We have tested the
sensitivity of our results to using a narrower sample period with more consistently-defined measures of health insurance.
We obtain qualitatively similar results, but with less precision.
14
We have also examined health care utilization variables (and health outcome measures) in the National Health
Interview Survey (NHIS) and the BRFSS, including outcomes like doctor visits in the past 2 weeks and hospital days.
Unfortunately, it became obvious to us that these sources of data did not contain sample sizes large enough to provide
the necessary power to draw strong conclusions from these analyses.
15
For some of the observations on the oldest individuals in the 1980 through 1985 CPS surveys, we do not observe the
unemployment rates that they faced in their early and mid-50s, because our unemployment data do not extend earlier
than 1960. We have re-estimated our CPS regressions excluding the 1980-1985 surveys and find that our results are not

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 19
The second limitation is that these data sets are too small to precisely identify the impact of
the unemployment rate at a single age on outcomes at a single age. Therefore, we pool the data into
nine three-year age groups, from ages 53-55 to ages 77-79. We calculate the average unemployment
rates for a cohort and state across each three-year age group and use that average as the key
independent variable in our regressions. Our regression equation builds on that in Equation (2), but
incorporates these modifications. It takes the form:
Yijtg = URjtG·γGg + δt + ϕj + ϕjT + λa + εijtg

(3)

where Y is an outcome, such as insurance coverage or employment, for individual i in age group g in
state j and year t. URjtG is the average unemployment rate that would have faced an individual in
state j and survey year t when they were in age group G. The regression is estimated separately for
each combination of age groups g and G. Like the survival models, these regressions control for a
full set of state fixed effects and state-specific linear trends. Whereas the survival regressions
included cohort fixed effects, these regressions include survey year fixed effects. The only other
difference is that these regressions include fixed effects for the exact year of age, a, since each
regression includes three ages. The key regressors of interest are the  gG coefficients. As with
mortality, our results are most easily seen graphically, but we are also able to present them in tables
given the smaller number of results. Standard errors are clustered on state.
B. Results
The first set of results shows the impact of recessions on access to health care.

The

dependent variable is an indicator for whether, during the past 12 months, the respondent did not see
a doctor, when needed, due to cost. The coefficients are reported in Table 2 and shown graphically in
materially affected. Also, for the 2009 and 2010 surveys, there are observations in our sample for whom we have not yet
observed all of the relevant unemployment rates for calculation of the three-year average unemployment rate in their age
group. Again, we have re-estimated our regressions excluding the 2009 and 2010 survey years and find that the results
are qualitatively similar.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 20
Figure 4, with diamond markers denoting any coefficients that are statistically significant at the 5
percent level. These results suggest that increases in the unemployment rate are associated with
contemporaneous increases in the probability of missing a doctor’s appointment due to cost, for
recessions that occur before age 65, the age of Medicare entitlement.

The magnitude of the

contemporaneous effect ranges from a 0.181 to a 0.457 percentage point increase in the probability
of a missed doctor’s visit for a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate.
Interestingly, our results suggest that the elevated probability of a missed doctor visit associated with
a recession persists for three to six years after the recession, suggesting that the impact of recessions
on access to health care use may extend for a number of years. This long-term effect on access to
care provides a plausible mechanism for recessions to have longer-term negative consequences for
health. It is also worth noting that we see some evidence of increased access to care six to nine
years after a recession, although of a smaller magnitude than the initial decrease. In the next set of
results, we explore potential explanations for these patterns.
We next turn to measures of health insurance coverage as dependent variables. We use two
measures of health insurance coverage: an indicator for having any health insurance coverage, and
an indicator for having any private health insurance coverage. The health insurance questions in the
CPS are intended to elicit information about insurance coverage in the prior year. However, survey
respondents have a tendency to provide health insurance information about the survey year instead
of the prior year (Swartz, 1986). Indeed, in our sample, reported Medicare coverage spikes from 16
percent among 64-year-old survey respondents to 83% among 65-year-old survey respondents. This
spike would not occur (or would be much smaller), if people were actually reporting their insurance
status in the prior year. In light of this information, we treat the insurance data as if they apply to the
survey year.

Although this approach may introduce a bit of downward bias attributable to

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 21
measurement error, the year-to-year serial correlation in unemployment likely dampens the
magnitude of this problem. The coefficients are, again, shown graphically in figures, with diamond
markers denoting any coefficients that are statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
Figure 5 shows coefficients in models where the dependent variable is an indicator for
coverage by any form of insurance (Table 3 reports the same coefficients with corresponding
standard errors). Not surprisingly, there is a large decline in the probability of any insurance
coverage in periods of elevated unemployment for all age groups below the age of Medicare
eligibility. The magnitude of the contemporaneous decline in the probability of insurance coverage
ranges from 0.18 to 0.39 percentage points for a one percentage point increase in unemployment.
These results are consistent with earlier findings on the contemporaneous effect of unemployment on
health insurance coverage (Cawley and Simon, 2005; and Gruber and Levitt, 2002).16
Interestingly, Figure 5 also shows that the largest decline in insurance coverage, based on
point estimates, is seen in the time period that is approximately 3 years after the recession. This lag
is long enough that it is probably not attributable to serial correlation in unemployment rates, but it
might reflect the fact that COBRA coverage mitigates the loss of health insurance in the first 18
months after a job loss.17 While the other coefficients are generally not statistically significant, the
point estimates suggest that, for individuals who experience a labor market downturn at ages 53-55,
it can take nearly a decade – until Medicare become available at age 65 – for insurance coverage to
return to its pre-recession level. The fact that Medicare eligibility begins at age 65 ensures that those
who experience recessions at ages 62 to 64 experience substantially shorter spells of uninsurance.
16

The estimates by Gruber and Levitt (2002), like ours, are based on the CPS; they estimate effects that are slightly larger
than ours (0.43 to 0.57), but this difference is likely attributable to the older population in our sample. In more recent
work using the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Cawley et. al. (2011) estimate larger effects of the Great
Recession on insurance coverage than those implied by earlier studies.
17
COBRA coverage was introduced by legislation beginning in 1985, so that it is available for most of our sample
period.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 22
Recessions occurring after that age lead to no deficit in insurance coverage. These age patterns are
quite consistent with the pattern of effects on financial access to care in the BRFSS and, therefore,
may help to explain the finding that recessions are associated with a reduction in long-term survival
when they coincide with an individual’s late 50s and very early 60s but not if they occur at older
ages.
Figure 6 focuses on private health insurance coverage (Table 4 shows the same coefficients
and corresponding standard errors).18 For those under the age of 65, private insurance is likely to be
the individual’s primary source of insurance; for those over the age of 65, private insurance is likely
to be a supplemental insurance policy that covers copayments and deductibles for Medicare. About
half of these supplemental insurance policies are purchased through former employers, and the other
half are purchased individually on the Medigap market.

Given the prevalence of private

supplemental policies, it is not surprising that average private insurance coverage does not fall off
very much at the age of Medicare eligibility; in our data, it falls from 78 percent at ages 62 to 64 to
71 percent at ages 65 to 67. In Figure 6, we see that the decline in insurance coverage associated
with higher unemployment is, not surprisingly, driven by declines in private health insurance
coverage. As with the overall insurance coverage results, the largest impact on private health
insurance coverage (based on point estimates) occurs with a lag of approximately three years, after
COBRA coverage expires. The other notable result in this panel is the statistically significant
increase in private health insurance coverage among those aged 68-70 associated with recessions
that occurred when those individuals were in their mid-50s. One possible explanation for this result
is that it is the result of increased labor market participation at older ages by those who experienced

18

We have also examined the effect of recessions on public health insurance coverage. We find no statistically
significant effect, which is not surprising given the eligibility rules for Medicare and Medicaid. We do not report these
results in figures or tables.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 23
recessions in their 50s and may feel they need to work longer to make up for lost income and
pension contributions. This finding may also explain the decreased financial barriers to health care
that we found among those aged 68-73 associated with recessions that occurred when those
individuals were in their mid-50s.
These results suggest the possibility of longer-term employment effects; we next examine
labor market outcomes as a function of the unemployment rate at various ages.19 Our data set and
empirical framework is identical to that for our insurance coverage regressions, but we now estimate
linear probability models using an employment indicator as our key dependent variable. The results
of this analysis are reported in Figure 7 and Table 5. All age groups, of course, experience a
contemporaneous decline in employment when unemployment rates are high. Specifically, we find
that a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate is associated with a contemporaneous
0.3 to 0.5 percentage point decline in the probability of employment in our sample. The fact that
there is not a one-for-one relationship between the unemployment rate and employment in our
sample is likely related to the fact that older workers are typically less likely to lose their jobs during
recessions than younger workers.20 The magnitude of the effect diminishes over time, but remains
apparent in the data for 6 to 9 years.
Interestingly, we also observe a statistically significant increase in the probability of
employment in an individual’s late 60s and early 70s, lasting approximately 6 years, for those

19

Although we are primarily interested in analyzing employment in order to put our other results into context, we
acknowledge that retirement itself could have direct effects (either positive or negative) on physical and/or mental health.
Unfortunately, it is difficult to estimate this empirically, since the potential for endogeneity is so great. For two recent
examples from this literature, see Bound and Waidmann (2007) and Coe and Zamarro (2011).
20
For example, Johnson and Butrica (2012) report that, in the most recent recession, during a period when the monthly
employment rate for 25-to-34-year-olds was, on average, 9.4 percent, the unemployment rate for 50-to-61-year-olds was,
on average, only 6.1 percent.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 24
cohorts that experienced recessions between the ages of 53 and 64.21 This increase in employment
after the age of normal retirement is shorter and less pronounced for those who experience
recessions between the ages of 62 and 64.22 This effect could suggest that some of those who
experience a recession in their 50s need to remain in the labor force longer or return there later in
life, to make up for lost incomes, pension accrual, or Social Security accrual. Those who experience
a recession after they have reached the early entitlement age for Social Security, on the other hand,
experience less loss of income and less loss of pension and Social Security accrual, and therefore do
not increase their employment at older ages by as much.23 We have repeated this exercise using the
natural log of total personal income in the CPS as the dependent variable and obtained patterns very
similar to those described regarding employment, as one would expect.
V. DISCUSSION
Our results indicate that experiencing a recession in the years preceding retirement results in
a short period in which mortality is lower, but a longer period in which mortality is higher, resulting
in lower survival rates at older ages. A plausible mechanism for this longer-term finding is the long
period of lower rates of employment, health insurance coverage, and access to health care that we
find comes with exposure to an economic downturn in one's late 50s or early 60s. These effects

21

This increase in employment appears to explain a portion of the increase in private health insurance coverage between
the ages of 65 and 70. When we use an indicator for having private health insurance and being employed as our
dependent variable, we obtain coefficients that are similar to, but somewhat smaller than, those in Table 3.
22
We have examined health insurance and employment outcomes by gender. We find some differences in point
estimates, with generally larger health insurance effects for women and larger employment effects for men. However,
these differences are not statistically significant.
23
It is worth noting that these effects are generally at least an order of magnitude larger than the effects on survival
probabilities, so these results are not explained by selection bias due to the deaths of the individuals who were least
likely to remain in the labor force at older ages. Working longer in response to experiencing a recession in the late 50s
and very early 60s could have a positive or negative potential impact on long-term mortality. If it were negative, this
could be a potential mechanism driving our mortality effects. We are unaware of any literature that directly addresses the
link between labor market longevity and longer-term survival probabilities.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 25
could go on for several years for affected workers and appear to be ameliorated by eligibility for
Social Security and Medicare at ages 62 and 65, respectively.
One useful exercise that would help support the plausibility of these findings is a comparison
of the relative magnitudes of their effects. We begin with the employment effects, which should be
the largest in magnitude. As described earlier, a one percentage point increase in the unemployment
rate at, say, ages 56-58 reduces the likelihood of any employment at those ages by 0.5 percentage
points. The less than point-for-point impact makes sense because older workers do not suffer as
much job loss as the average worker when a recession hits; furthermore, since the relevant outcome
is any employment, workers whose unemployment spells are short would not be captured here. This
effect does not dissipate by ages 59-61 but falls by about half at ages 62-64 (after Social Security
becomes available) and then falls again to roughly zero by 65-67 (after the Social Security normal
retirement age passes). We believe these results are plausible and suggestive of long-term
employment losses for many older workers who experience a job loss.
The estimated effects on health insurance coverage suggest that the same one percentage
point increase in the unemployment rate at ages 56-58 reduces private health insurance coverage by
around 0.25 percentage points from those ages through ages 62-64 (although the effect is only
statistically significant at 59-61, suggesting the power of this analysis is somewhat limited). This
indicates that roughly half of those with long-term employment losses also lose access to private
health insurance. Spousal coverage is likely to account for those who do not, as well as COBRA
coverage in the short run; there is also no loss in insurance for those job losers who were uninsured
even when working. The impact on any health insurance coverage could also be mitigated if
unemployed older workers apply for and receive Social Security disability insurance (cf. Autor and
Duggan, 2003), although Medicare coverage is only available starting two years after the onset of

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 26
the disability. The magnitude of the estimated effect on reporting missing a doctor visit due to cost is
similar to the magnitude of the effect on insurance coverage, which would indicate that almost all of
those who lose health insurance coverage experience financial barriers to care. This seems plausible,
especially for an age group where doctor visits are quite common.
In terms of survival probabilities, we find that a one percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate at, say, age 58 reduces the likelihood of surviving through age 79 by 0.045
percentage points. This means that if the entire impact on survival is generated from those initial
workers who suffered long-term unemployment resulting from a recession, an additional one in ten
of those workers would not survive to age 79 as a result of the labor market downturn. An
alternative way to interpret these numbers is to estimate the impact on life expectancy assuming that
all of the survival effect was transmitted through employment reductions. These calculations suggest
that a worker who lost their job at age 58 as a result of a recession could be expected to live three
fewer years (19 years instead of 22) as a result. It is important to interpret these numbers with some
caution. First, lost employment does not need to be the only mechanism for such an effect, as
Miller, et al. (2009) and Stevens, et al. (2011) indicate, which would result in overstated effects on
job losers. Second, standard errors are associated with each of these estimates, suggesting that some
confidence interval exists around these estimates. Nevertheless, incorporating these caveats, we
believe that these magnitudes are plausible.
Another critical element in interpreting our results is the relationship between our findings
and those of past analyses that have examined similar questions. As we described earlier, there are a
number of relevant previous studies and their findings are not obviously consistent with each other.
Ruhm (2000) found a general reduction in contemporaneous mortality associated with an economic
downturn. Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) find that job displacement among long-tenured men

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 27
increased mortality in the short- and long-term, particularly for those at prime working age. Miller,
et al. (2009) show that higher unemployment rates generate reduced contemporaneous mortality,
particularly for elderly individuals. We find negative short-term mortality effects that are consistent
with Miller, et al. (2009) for workers in their late 50s and very early 60s, but then we find reduced
longevity for these workers. Taken at face value, virtually all of these results appear to contradict
each other.
These conflicts have been noted by the authors of previous studies and several explanations
have been offered. Sullivan and von Wachter (2009) make a distinction between the average worker
who loses his or her job in a recession and the high-tenure displaced workers that they study, who
presumably suffer a considerably more severe economic shock resulting from their unemployment.
In their view, the differential effects between the two groups (the former being considerably larger)
are reasonable, so there is no conflict with Ruhm (2000). Miller, et al. (2009) argue that the
differences in their findings as compared to those of Ruhm (2000) result from the fact that health
improvements observed during a recession are not the result of changes in own labor force status,
but are attributable to external factors, which they go on to explore in more detail in Stevens, et al.
(2011).
Our own evidence builds on some of these arguments, but other discrepancies between our
findings and the more recent entries into this literature also need to be reconciled. In comparing our
results with those of Miller, et al./Stevens, et al., the main distinction is in terms of interpretation;
they argue that the main effect of a recession is external to the employment relationship. That may
be true for the short-term impact and our short-term results are very similar to their findings. On the
other hand, we believe that our findings are consistent with reduced employment, health insurance
coverage, and health care access plausibly explaining a significant portion of the long-term negative

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 28
health impact. Since their analysis never focuses on these long-term effects, there is no direct
conflict in our interpretations.
Our primary result – that recessions have negative long-term effects on survival for those
approaching retirement – is also mainly consistent with the key findings of Sullivan and von
Wachter (2009). One place where the papers may appear to diverge is in the relative effect of
unemployment at different ages. We find that unemployment shocks at ages 57 to 61 have the
biggest long-term effect on survival, while shocks at earlier (ages 55 to 56) or later (ages 62 to 65)
ages have no significant long-term effect. Sullivan and von Wachter find that shocks occurring at
younger ages (before age 45 or between ages 45 and 54) have a bigger effect than those at older ages
(age 55 and above). Yet since we do not study the effect of shocks at younger ages, the two sets of
results are not directly comparable; Sullivan and von Wachter do not provide results by exact age
that could be compared against our results. A second point of divergence between the two papers is
that we find positive effects of unemployment shocks on survival in the short run, while they find
negative effects in both the short- and long-term. As already discussed, the effect of unemployment
on an average worker may be different from that on a high-tenure worker.

For example,

employment and income losses may be less severe for average workers. As a result, average
displaced workers may be spared the negative short-term mortality effects that plague those
displaced from long-tenured positions, but both groups appear to suffer negative long-run health
consequences.
Overall, our findings suggest that experiencing a recession in one’s late 50s or early 60s is
bad for health in the long run. Interestingly, we find that unemployment shocks at or after age 62
have no long-term negative health effects.

The availability of Social Security at age 62 and

Medicare at age 65 may play an important role in this finding. These programs serve as a buffer

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 29
against the income and health insurance losses that often accompany unemployment. Indeed, we
find that unemployment shocks trigger lengthy reductions in employment and income for older
workers; Social Security starts filling in the income gap at age 62. These shocks also trigger lengthy
reductions in insurance coverage and increased difficulty in accessing health care; these effects
disappear once individuals reach age 65 when Medicare begins.24 As policy makers contemplate
possible changes to Social Security and Medicare to restore them to stronger financial footing, such
as raising the age of eligibility for these programs, it will be important to develop a better
understanding of the role that these programs may play in mitigating the negative effects of an
unemployment shock.

24

The fact that the impact on mortality ends at age 62 may simply mean that gaps in insurance coverage of a year or two
may not substantively alter subsequent mortality.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 30

REFERENCES
Aguiar, Mark, Erik Hurst, and Loukas Karabarbounis (2011). “Time Use During Recessions,”
NBER Working Paper 17259.
Asgeirsdottir, Tinna, Hope Corman, Kelly Noonan, Porhilder Olafsdottir, Nancy Reichman (2011).
“Are Recessions Good for Your Health Behaviors? Impacts of the Economic Crisis in Iceland,”
NBER Working Paper 18233.
Autor, David and Mark Duggan (2003). "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 157 - 206.
Bound, John and Timothy Waidmann (2007). “Estimating the Health Effects of Retirement,”
Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper WP 2007-168.
Cawley, John, Asako Moriya, and Kosali I. Simon (2011). “The Impact of the Macroeconomy on
Health Insurance Coverage: Evidence from the Great Recession,” NBER Working Paper 17600.
Cawley, John and Kosali I. Simon (2005). “Health Insurance Coverage and the Macroeconomy,”
Journal of Health Economics, 24(2): 299-315.
Coe, Norma and Gema Zamarro (2011). “Retirement Effects on Health in Europe,” Journal of
Health Economics 30(1):77-86.
Coile, Courtney C. (2004). “Health Shocks and Couples’ Labor Supply Decisions,” NBER
Working Paper 10810, October.
Coile, Courtney C. and Phillip B. Levine (2010). Reconsidering Retirement: How Losses and
Layoffs Affect Older Workers. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Coile, Courtney C. and Phillip B. Levine (2011a). “Recessions, Retirement, and Social Security,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 101(3): 23-28.
Coile, Courtney C. and Phillip B. Levine (2011b). “Recessions, Reeling Markets, and Retiree WellBeing,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy (Contributions): 11(1): Article 22.
Government Accountability Office (2012). Unemployed Older Workers: Many Experience
Challenges Regaining Employment and Face Reduced Retirement Security. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Accountability Office.
Gruber, Jonathan and Larry Levitt (2002). “Rising Unemployment and the Uninsured,” Kaiser
Family Foundation Publication #6011.
Johnson, Richard W. and Barbara Butrica (2012). “Age Disparities in Unemployment and
Reemployment During the Great Recession and Recovery,” Urban Intitute Issue Brief #3,
Downloaded from http://www.urban.org/publications/412574.html on May 15, 2012.

Coile, Levine, and McKnight: p. 31

Lahey, Joanna N. (2008). "Age, Women, and Hiring: An Experimental Study." Journal of Human
Resources 43(1): 30-56.
Miller, Douglas L., Marianne E. Page, Ann Huff Stevens, and Mateusz Filipski (2009). “Why are
Recessions Good for Your Health?” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 99(2): 122127.
Ruhm, Christopher J. (2000). “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 115(2): 617-650.
Ruhm, Christopher J. (2003). “Good times Make You Sick,” Journal of Health Economics 22(4):
637-658.
Ruhm, Christopher J. (2005). “Healthy Living in Hard Times,” Journal of Health Economics 24(2):
341-363.
Snyder, Stephen E. and William N. Evans (2006). "The Effect Of Income On Mortality: Evidence
From The Social Security Notch," Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3): 482-495.
Stevens, Ann Huff, Douglas L. Miller, Marianne E. Page, Mateusz Filipski (2011). “The Best of
Times, The Worst of Times: Understanding Pro-cyclical Mortality,” NBER Working Paper #17657.
Sullivan, Daniel and von Wachter, Till (2009). “Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using
Administrative Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3): 1265-1306.
Swartz, Katherine (1986). “Interpreting the Estimates from Four National Surveys of the Number of
People without Health Insurance,” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 14(3): 233-42.
U.S. Department of Labor (various years). Manpower Reports of the President. Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Labor.

Table 1: Impact of Changes in Structure of Data on the Relationship between Contemporaneous Unemployment Rates on Mortality
(coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)

Replication
(4)

Drop
Explanatory
Variables
(5)

Expand to
All Years
(6)

Focus on
Birth
Cohorts
(7)

Convert mortality
rate from
logs to levels
(8)

1978-2006/
variable
-0.019
(0.236)

1978-2006/
variable
-0.048
(0.240)

1978-2006/
variable
-0.020
(0.259)

1969-2008/
variable
-0.237
(0.187)

Variable/
1910-1929
-0.246
(0.223)

Variable/
1910-1929
-0.0025
(0.0021)

1.45%

0.148
(0.168)

0.128
(0.166)

0.079
(0.172)

-0.013
(0.154)

0.039
(0.145)

-0.0013
(0.0020)

1.88%

1.99%

-0.189
(0.169)

-0.162
(0.170)

-0.255
(0.159)

-0.417
(0.116)

-0.324
(0.140)

-0.0062
(0.0028)

Age 70

2.80%

2.78%

-0.599
(0.143)

-0.614
(0.146)

-0.572
(0.205)

-0.670
(0.147)

-0.757
(0.244)

-0.0221
(0.0067)

Age 75

4.21%

3.96%

-0.300
(0.152)

-0.308
(0.152)

-0.148
(0.110)

-0.229
(0.105)

0.034
(0.171)

-0.0036
(0.0067)

Mean
Mortality Rate
(1)

Mean
Mortality Rate
(2)

Stevens, et al.
(2011)
(3)

1969-2008/
variable
0.80%

Variable/
1910-1929
0.98%

Age 60

1.24%

Age 65

Survey Years/
Birth Cohorts:
Age 55

Notes: Every cell in the table represents the coefficient on the unemployment rate in a model where the dependent variable is
measured in natural logs (except where noted) and that also includes year or birth cohort fixed effects, state fixed effects, and statespecific linear trends. In cohort models, ages 55 through 58 uses all available cohorts, which do not go as far back as 1910 (i.e. for
those age 55, the 1914 birth cohort is the first available). Regressions weighted by state/year/age population.

Table 2: Impact of Unemployment Rates at Specific Age Groups
on Skipping Doctor Visits Due to Cost in the Past 12 Months at Different Ages
Any Insurance at Age:
Unemp. Rate
at Age
53-55

53-55
0.457**
(0.086)

56-58

56-58
0.328**
(0.134)

59-61
-0.167
(0.148)

62-64
-0.238**
(0.099)

65-67
-0.183*
(0.099)

68-70
-0.105
(0.063)

71-73
0.108*
(0.062)

74-76
-0.018
(0.056)

77-79
-0.051
(0.061)

0.196
(0.124)

0.225**
(0.102)

-0.003
(0.135)

-0.041
(0.102)

-0.158*
(0.086)

-0.041
(0.088)

0.117
(0.081)

-0.051
(0.070)

0.364**
(0.100)

0.197*
(0.112)

0.240**
(0.101)

-0.175*
(0.100)

-0.202**
(0.078)

0.050
(0.075)

-0.023
(0.068)

0.181**
(0.081)

0.061
(0.095)

0.060
(0.094)

-0.011
(0.093)

-0.053
(0.113)

-0.026
(0.073)

0.126
(0.081)

-0.035
(0.094)

0.058
(0.110)

-0.026
(0.111)

-0.020
(0.081)

59-61

62-64

65-67

N
Mean of
Dependent
Variable

210,803

227,861

217,473

205,682

200,904

178,795

159,516

143,812

124,055

0.131

0.119

0.108

0.100

0.064

0.047

0.043

0.040

0.037

Notes: Every cell in the table represents the coefficient on the unemployment rate in a linear probability model that also includes
year fixed effects, state fixed effects, and state-specific linear trends. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100. As
noted in the text, the number of observations varies slightly in some specifications. The number of observations here is the most
common number of observations. A double (single) asterisk represents a coefficient that is significant at the 5 (10) percent level.

Table 3: Impact of Unemployment Rates at Specific Age Groups
on Any Health Insurance Coverage at Different Ages
Any Insurance at Age:
Unemp. Rate
at Age
53-55

53-55
-0.213**
(0.108)

56-58

56-58
-0.352**
(0.127)

59-61
-0.128
(0.119)

62-64
-0.032
(0.151)

65-67
0.05
(0.035)

68-70
-0.02
(0.041)

71-73
-0.008
(0.045)

74-76
-0.019
(0.043)

77-79
-0.008
(0.027)

-0.208
(0.134)

-0.121
(0.122)

-0.068
(0.156)

-0.009
(0.045)

0.019
(0.048)

0.01
(0.039)

0.028
(0.035)

-0.074**
(0.028)

-0.176*
(0.104)

-0.386**
(0.135)

-0.029
(0.050)

0.005
(0.041)

-0.037
(0.024)

0.002
(0.036)

-0.054**
(0.022)

-0.393**
(0.145)

-0.01
(0.065)

-0.029
(0.055)

0.024
(0.032)

-0.006
(0.043)

-0.014
(0.033)

0.082
(0.075)

0.041
(0.035)

0.025
(0.039)

-0.016
(0.038)

-0.003
(0.033)

59-61

62-64

65-67

N
Mean of
Dependent
Variable

136,133

132,182

117,873

102,652

93,036

81,333

70,886

61,633

51,637

0.88

0.88

0.88

0.88

0.98

0.99

0.99

0.99

0.99

Notes: Every cell in the table represents the coefficient on the unemployment rate in a linear probability model that also includes
year fixed effects, state fixed effects, and state-specific linear trends. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100. As
noted in the text, the number of observations varies slightly in some specifications. The number of observations here is the most
common number of observations. A double (single) asterisk represents a coefficient that is significant at the 5 (10) percent level.

Table 4: Impact of Unemployment Rates at Specific Age Groups
on Private Health Insurance Coverage at Different Ages
Any Insurance at Age:
Unemp. Rate
at Age
53-55

53-55
-0.087
(0.117)

56-58

56-58
-0.335**
(0.157)

59-61
-0.128
(0.165)

62-64
-0.149
(0.200)

65-67
0.416
(0.284)

68-70
0.470**
(0.188)

71-73
0.309
(0.269)

74-76
-0.120
(0.247)

77-79
-0.349
(0.217)

-0.209
(0.142)

-0.323**
(0.150)

-0.235
(0.191)

0.314
(0.237)

0.646**
(0.188)

0.420
(0.257)

0.035
(0.287)

-0.479**
(0.198)

-0.302**
(0.135)

-0.368**
(0.154)

0.057
(0.216)

0.008
(0.214)

0.105
(0.297)

-0.112
(0.322)

0.134
(0.272)

-0.311*
(0.164)

-0.222
(0.237)

-0.510**
(0.188)

0.054
(0.250)

0.110
(0.267)

0.418*
(0.230)

-0.156
(0.307)

-0.334
(0.273)

-0.241
(0.295)

0.221
(0.205)

0.325
(0.216)

59-61

62-64

65-67

N
Mean of
Dependent
Variable

136,133

131,454

117,058

101,731

90,587

78,810

68,747

59,686

50,082

0.82

0.82

0.81

0.79

0.71

0.70

0.68

0.67

0.66

Notes: Every cell in the table represents the coefficient on the unemployment rate in a linear probability model that also includes
year fixed effects, state fixed effects, and state-specific linear trends. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100. As
noted in the text, the number of observations varies slightly in some specifications. The number of observations here is the most
common number of observations. A double (single) asterisk represents a coefficient that is significant at the 5 (10) percent level.

Table 5: Impact of Unemployment Rates at Specific Age Groups
on Employment at Different Ages
Any Employment at Age:
Unemp. Rate
at Age
53-55

53-55
-0.550**
(0.104)

56-58

56-58
-0.242*
(0.135)

59-61
-0.207
(0.209)

62-64
0.246
(0.149)

65-67
0.157
(0.155)

68-70
0.268**
(0.122)

71-73
0.546**
(0.149)

74-76
-0.030
(0.124)

77-79
-0.080
(0.120)

-0.500**
(0.139)

-0.614**
(0.189)

-0.256*
(0.148)

-0.035
(0.149)

0.373**
(0.112)

0.503**
(0.140)

0.087
(0.128)

0.057
(0.103)

-0.258
(0.163)

-0.333*
(0.169)

-0.297**
(0.141)

0.073
(0.129)

0.227*
(0.116)

0.185*
(0.108)

-0.099
(0.104)

-0.541**
(0.181)

-0.522**
(0.147)

-0.313**
(0.117)

-0.003
(0.140)

0.182**
(0.068)

0.055
(0.111)

-0.148
(0.168)

-0.314**
(0.151)

-0.275**
(0.120)

-0.058
(0.125)

0.166
(0.100)

59-61

62-64

65-67

N
Mean of
Dependent
Variable

153,389

153,624

140,041

126,213

117,267

104,256

91,875

79,506

65,348

0.73

0.66

0.57

0.39

0.25

0.18

0.13

0.09

0.07

Notes: Every cell in the table represents the coefficient on the unemployment rate in a linear probability model that also includes
year fixed effects, state fixed effects, and state-specific linear trends. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100. As
noted in the text, the number of observations varies slightly in some specifications. The number of observations here is the most
common number of observations. A double (single) asterisk represents a coefficient that is significant at the 5 (10) percent level.

Figure 1: Survival Rates from Age 55, by Birth Cohort

1

0.9

Survival Rate

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4
55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

1915 Birth Cohort

66

67 68
Age

69

70

71

1925 Birth Cohort

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

Impact of 1 pp increase in Unemployment Rate

0.0003

Figure 2: Impact of Unemployment Rate
on Same Year Survival Probability, by Exact Age

0.0002

0.0001

0.0000

-0.0001
55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79
Age
note: diamonds represent statistically significant (at the 5% level) estimates.

0.0003

Figure 3: Impact of Unemployment Rate at Various Ages
on Subsequent Survival Probabilities

Impact of 1 pp increase in Unemployment Rate

0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
-0.0001
-0.0002
-0.0003
-0.0004
-0.0005
-0.0006
55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79
Survival at Age
Unemployment Rate Measured at Age:

55

58

note: diamonds represent statistically significant (at the 5% level) estimates.

60

62

65

Appendix Table 1: Survival Probabilities
Exact

Survival Through Age:

Age

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

55

0.990

0.980

0.969

0.957

0.945

0.932

0.918

0.903

0.888

0.872

0.855

0.838

0.820

0.989

0.978

0.966

0.954

0.940

0.926

0.911

0.896

0.880

0.863

0.845

0.827

0.989

0.976

0.964

0.950

0.936

0.920

0.905

0.889

0.871

0.853

0.834

0.987

0.975

0.961

0.946

0.930

0.914

0.898

0.880

0.862

0.843

0.987

0.973

0.958

0.942

0.925

0.909

0.890

0.872

0.852

0.986

0.971

0.954

0.938

0.921

0.902

0.883

0.864

0.985

0.968

0.951

0.934

0.916

0.896

0.876

0.983

0.966

0.949

0.930

0.910

0.890

0.983

0.965

0.945

0.926

0.905

0.982

0.962

0.942

0.921

0.980

0.959

0.938

0.979

0.957

56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79

0.978

Appendix Table 1 (continued): Survival Probabilities
Survival Through Age:
Exact Age

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

55

0.800

0.780

0.759

0.737

0.714

0.689

0.665

0.639

0.613

0.585

0.557

0.528

56

0.807

0.786

0.765

0.743

0.719

0.695

0.669

0.644

0.617

0.589

0.561

0.531

57

0.814

0.794

0.772

0.749

0.725

0.700

0.675

0.649

0.622

0.594

0.565

0.535

58

0.822

0.801

0.779

0.756

0.732

0.707

0.681

0.654

0.627

0.598

0.569

0.539

59

0.832

0.810

0.788

0.764

0.740

0.714

0.688

0.661

0.633

0.604

0.575

0.544

60

0.843

0.821

0.799

0.775

0.750

0.724

0.697

0.670

0.641

0.612

0.582

0.551

61

0.855

0.833

0.810

0.786

0.761

0.734

0.707

0.679

0.651

0.621

0.591

0.559

62

0.868

0.846

0.823

0.798

0.772

0.746

0.718

0.690

0.661

0.630

0.600

0.568

63

0.883

0.860

0.836

0.811

0.785

0.758

0.730

0.701

0.672

0.641

0.610

0.577

64

0.898

0.875

0.851

0.826

0.799

0.771

0.743

0.714

0.684

0.652

0.620

0.587

65

0.915

0.892

0.867

0.841

0.814

0.786

0.757

0.727

0.696

0.664

0.632

0.598

66

0.934

0.910

0.885

0.858

0.830

0.801

0.772

0.741

0.710

0.678

0.644

0.610

67

0.954

0.929

0.903

0.876

0.848

0.819

0.788

0.757

0.725

0.692

0.658

0.623

68

0.976

0.951

0.924

0.896

0.867

0.837

0.806

0.775

0.742

0.708

0.673

0.637

0.974

0.947

0.919

0.889

0.858

0.826

0.794

0.760

0.725

0.690

0.653

0.972

0.943

0.912

0.881

0.848

0.815

0.780

0.744

0.708

0.670

0.970

0.938

0.906

0.872

0.838

0.802

0.765

0.728

0.689

0.967

0.934

0.899

0.864

0.827

0.789

0.750

0.710

0.965

0.929

0.893

0.855

0.815

0.775

0.734

0.963

0.925

0.885

0.845

0.803

0.760

0.960

0.919

0.877

0.834

0.789

0.957

0.913

0.868

0.822

0.954

0.907

0.858

0.950

0.900

69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79

0.946

Appendix Table 2: Impact of Unemployment Rates at Specific Ages on Survival Rates at Different Ages
Unemp.

Survival to Age:

at Age:

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

55

0.0025

0.0061

0.0112

0.0131

0.0130

0.0132

0.0083

0.0070

0.0002

-0.0045

-0.0056

-0.0012

(0.0021)

(0.0030)

(0.0044)

(0.0051)

(0.0053)

(0.0065)

(0.0074)

(0.0076)

(0.0086)

(0.0089)

(0.0104)

(0.0115)

0.0043

0.0117

0.0121

0.0107

0.0101

0.0032

0.0038

-0.0060

-0.0122

-0.0158

-0.0148

(0.0025)

(0.0042)

(0.0055)

(0.0061)

(0.0073)

(0.0074)

(0.0073)

(0.0078)

(0.0087)

(0.0099)

(0.0114)

0.0068

0.0067

0.0066

0.0042

-0.0018

-0.0028

-0.0118

-0.0190

-0.0227

-0.0205

(0.0028)

(0.0049)

(0.0061)

(0.0080)

(0.0077)

(0.0075)

(0.0073)

(0.0069)

(0.0076)

(0.0091)

0.0031

0.0051

0.0026

-0.0062

-0.0141

-0.0217

-0.0287

-0.0298

-0.0307

(0.0026)

(0.0041)

(0.0059)

(0.0068)

(0.0075)

(0.0084)

(0.0089)

(0.0084)

(0.0081)

0.0088

0.0083

0.0027

-0.0071

-0.0167

-0.0270

-0.0272

-0.0311

(0.0025)

(0.0039)

(0.0057)

(0.0072)

(0.0088)

(0.0103)

(0.0097)

(0.0095)

0.0013

0.0003

-0.0059

-0.0099

-0.0184

-0.0186

-0.0235

(0.0020)

(0.0039)

(0.0054)

(0.0073)

(0.0094)

(0.0101)

(0.0107)

0.0023

0.0003

0.0002

-0.0077

-0.0114

-0.0143

(0.0022)

(0.0037)

(0.0059)

(0.0080)

(0.0090)

(0.0103)

0.0016

0.0054

0.0016

0.0022

0.0036

(0.0025)

(0.0040)

(0.0058)

(0.0059)

(0.0073)

0.0089

0.0100

0.0141

0.0193

(0.0025)

(0.0047)

(0.0050)

(0.0068)

0.0039

0.0093

0.0160

(0.0032)

(0.0046)

(0.0057)

0.0062

0.0120

(0.0028)

(0.0051)

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

Notes: coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100.

Appendix Table 2 (continued): Impact of Unemployment Rates at Specific Ages on Survival Rates at Different Ages
Unemp.

Survival to Age:

at Age:

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

55

-0.0038

-0.0066

-0.0081

-0.0079

-0.0032

0.0013

0.0063

0.0064

0.0090

0.0129

0.0146

0.0173

0.0178

(0.0127)

(0.0142)

(0.0148)

(0.0158)

(0.0160)

(0.0164)

(0.0175)

(0.0196)

(0.0192)

(0.0211)

(0.0215)

(0.0231)

(0.0231)

-0.0165

-0.0222

-0.0215

-0.0260

-0.0227

-0.0190

-0.0146

-0.0133

-0.0133

-0.0125

-0.0136

-0.0079

-0.0053

(0.0133)

(0.0140)

(0.0148)

(0.0157)

(0.0153)

(0.0155)

(0.0165)

(0.0173)

(0.0173)

(0.0193)

(0.0198)

(0.0203)

(0.0196)

-0.0205

-0.0231

-0.0236

-0.0288

-0.0273

-0.0251

-0.0201

-0.0221

-0.0209

-0.0196

-0.0208

-0.0139

-0.0112

(0.0107)

(0.0114)

(0.0121)

(0.0135)

(0.0129)

(0.0133)

(0.0134)

(0.0143)

(0.0152)

(0.0167)

(0.0176)

(0.0183)

(0.0192)

-0.0339

-0.0355

-0.0359

-0.0474

-0.0496

-0.0507

-0.0488

-0.0499

-0.0494

-0.0503

-0.0514

-0.0474

-0.0448

(0.0087)

(0.0102)

(0.0108)

(0.0114)

(0.0114)

(0.0116)

(0.0122)

(0.0134)

(0.0140)

(0.0156)

(0.0175)

(0.0186)

(0.0197)

-0.0344

-0.0332

-0.0330

-0.0447

-0.0503

-0.0511

-0.0520

-0.0510

-0.0503

-0.0497

-0.0467

-0.0451

-0.0418

(0.0092)

(0.0104)

(0.0115)

(0.0128)

(0.0141)

(0.0143)

(0.0147)

(0.0151)

(0.0157)

(0.0173)

(0.0193)

(0.0200)

(0.0214)

-0.0255

-0.0235

-0.0216

-0.0273

-0.0348

-0.0352

-0.0378

-0.0365

-0.0355

-0.0389

-0.0353

-0.0339

-0.0293

(0.0104)

(0.0107)

(0.0111)

(0.0122)

(0.0140)

(0.0140)

(0.0142)

(0.0144)

(0.0157)

(0.0177)

(0.0190)

(0.0200)

(0.0215)

-0.0189

-0.0142

-0.0157

-0.0170

-0.0211

-0.0232

-0.0282

-0.0288

-0.0277

-0.0276

-0.0244

-0.0258

-0.0247

(0.0107)

(0.0110)

(0.0118)

(0.0118)

(0.0131)

(0.0131)

(0.0134)

(0.0129)

(0.0147)

(0.0165)

(0.0166)

(0.0175)

(0.0192)

0.0025

0.0064

0.0049

0.0029

0.0041

0.0036

0.0004

-0.0030

-0.0019

-0.0015

0.0001

-0.0070

-0.0104

(0.0081)

(0.0091)

(0.0098)

(0.0108)

(0.0113)

(0.0108)

(0.0121)

(0.0124)

(0.0127)

(0.0141)

(0.0139)

(0.0150)

(0.0157)

0.0208

0.0241

0.0221

0.0220

0.0254

0.0237

0.0231

0.0171

0.0143

0.0134

0.0127

0.0056

-0.0035

(0.0086)

(0.0095)

(0.0098)

(0.0103)

(0.0108)

(0.0107)

(0.0119)

(0.0121)

(0.0125)

(0.0132)

(0.0133)

(0.0141)

(0.0139)

0.0207

0.0239

0.0216

0.0234

0.0297

0.0254

0.0263

0.0182

0.0143

0.0114

0.0086

0.0009

-0.0101

(0.0076)

(0.0086)

(0.0096)

(0.0103)

(0.0118)

(0.0124)

(0.0139)

(0.0145)

(0.0150)

(0.0157)

(0.0155)

(0.0165)

(0.0166)

0.0175

0.0204

0.0157

0.0185

0.0234

0.0193

0.0186

0.0116

0.0092

0.0050

-0.0009

-0.0077

-0.0183

(0.0071)

(0.0082)

(0.0096)

(0.0109)

(0.0132)

(0.0147)

(0.0159)

(0.0169)

(0.0181)

(0.0193)

(0.0195)

(0.0201)

(0.0207)

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

Notes: coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100.

