NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPANDING SCHOOL RESOURCES AND INCREASING TIME ON TASK:
EFFECTS OF A POLICY EXPERIMENT IN ISRAEL
ON STUDENT ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT AND BEHAVIOR
Victor Lavy
Working Paper 18369
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18369

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

Special thanks go to Adi Shani, Netta Porzycki, Asaf Kott and Boaz Abramson for outstanding
research assistance. I benefited from comments and suggestions by Arthur Blouin, S. Dynarski,
Brian Jacob, Karen Brandon, Michael Freedman, Daniele Paserman, Yona Rubinstein, Tali
Regev, Analia Schlosser, four anonymous referees of this journal and seminar participants at
Hebrew University, ITAU conference in Rio de Janeiro, LSE, Spain Ministry of Education in
Madrid, National University of Singapore, Paris School of Economics, Tel Aviv University,
University of Barcelona, and University of Warwick. I acknowledge financial support for this
project from the European Research Council through ERC Advance Grant 323439, CAGE at
Warwick and the Falk Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2012 by Victor Lavy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Expanding School Resources and Increasing Time on Task: Effects of a Policy Experiment
in Israel on Student Academic Achievement and Behavior
Victor Lavy
NBER Working Paper No. 18369
September 2012, Revised July 2016
JEL No. I21,J18,J24
ABSTRACT
This paper uses a natural experiment in Israel to assess the impact of school teaching resources
and how it is used, ‘time-on-task’, on academic achievements and non-cognitive outcomes. It
exploits variation induced by a change in the funding formula that reduced instructional resources
funding for some schools and increased them for others. The results suggest that increased school
resources and students' spending more time at school and on key tasks all lead to increased
academic achievements with no behavioral costs. Separate estimations of the effect of increasing
subject-specific instructional time per week also show positive and significant effects on math,
science, and English test scores. However, there are no cross effects of additional instructional
time across subjects. This evidence is robust to using different identification strategies. The
evidence also shows that a longer school week increases the time that students spend on
homework without reducing social and school satisfaction and without increasing school
violence.

Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
and Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and also NBER
v.lavy@warwick.ac.uk

I. Introduction
Questions about how students' academic achievements are affected by school instructional
resources, such as the amount of time they spend in school and the amount of time they devote to specific
subjects, are of compelling interest for policymakers. Research on these questions is important since
marginally increasing instructional time is relatively simple to do, and the potential to make such changes
would seem to be possible in many countries. This is reflected in international statistics on the annual
number of school days and on the distribution of weekly instructional time across subjects which reveal
large differences among and within countries.1 For example, one of the main educational strategies of the
“No Excuses” charter schools in New York, Boston and other places in the US is to emphasize the
importance of increased instructional time (Angrist et al 2011, Dobbie and Fryer 2011).2 In addition,
evidence on these questions is valuable for improving the efficiency of school resource allocation, in
particular the instruction budgets of schools across various subjects and activities.
While an extensive literature exists regarding the effects of school resources on student outcomes,
much of the evidence is inconclusive.3 For example, regarding the impact of school resources, Hanushek
(2006) notes in an extensive survey that “the evidence – whether from aggregate school outcomes,
econometric investigations, or a variety of experimental or quasi-experimental approaches – suggests that
pure resource policies that do not change incentives are unlikely to be effective. Importantly, the results
appear similar across both developed and developing countries”. In addition, specific evidence on time use
in schools is limited largely to the effect of the number of school days per year on student's achievements. 4
The OECD Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2003, 2006, and 2009 data reveal the great extent
of these differences among the more than 60 countries that participated in this project. The reaction to these
differences suggests that political leaders do pay attention to the results. For example, President Barack Obama cited
the gap between the length of the school year in the United States and other countries as one reason he advocates the
expansion of U.S. schools’ instruction time among his key educational policy goals (March 10, 2009, at a speech to
the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce).
2
“No Excuses” schools are loosely defined as schools that emphasize strict discipline, extended time in school, and
an intensive focus on building basic reading and math skills. Thernstrom and Thernstrom (2004) and Whitman (2008)
argue that the “No Excuses” schools are more effective due to more instructional time, a zero tolerance disciplinary
code, high academic expectations for all students, and an emphasis on teaching basic math and reading skills.
However, these impressions are based on correlative analysis which does not permit causal interpretation.
3
For instance, in a French program that allocates extra financial resources to schools in disadvantaged zones,
Benabou et al. (2009) find that this allocation has no significant impact on student outcomes. Häkkinen et al. (2003)
uses the dramatic changes in the school spending caused by the 1990s recession in Finland and finds that changes in
teaching expenditure did not have a significant effect on the test scores. Hanusheck (2003) report that inputs based
schooling policies in the US failed to improve students' test scores. Lavy (2002) finds that providing resources to
high schools led to significant gains in test scores and lower dropout rates. Focusing on labor market outcomes, Card
and Krueger (1996) find positive effects of school resources on earnings, whereas Heckman et al. (1996) do not find
significant effects, and Betts (2001) finds mixed results.
4
For example, Grogger (1996), and Eide and Showalter (1998) estimated the effect of the length of the school year
in the United States and found insignificant effects, perhaps due to selection and omitted variables. Card and Krueger
(1992) and Betts and Johnson (1998) used state-level data in the United States to examine the same effect and found
positive and significant effects on earnings which converge to zero once school quality is added as a control in the
1

1

Thus, this evidence does not tell us much about the effect of the number of hours children spend in school
every week; or the time they spend in specific activities, such as math or reading; or whether there is a
complementarity or a spillover effect across subjects.
In this paper, I investigate the causal effect of school instructional resources – the total teaching
budget per class – on pupils' achievements.5 I then examine how this instructional budget is used in terms
of the number of hours that children spend weekly in school and the amount of time devoted to core
subjects, and how these inputs affect cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes of children in school. For these
objectives I exploit a unique school finance policy experiment that changed the formula used to determine
the teaching budget for primary schools in Israel. Until 2003, almost 90 percent of schools’ funding was
based on the number of classes, irrespective of class size, and an additional 10 percent was based on schools
socio-economic deprivation index. In September 2004, the funding rules were changed and from then on
schools received funding per student enrolled where a modified deprivation index was used to determine
the amount of each “student voucher,” with more money channeled toward students from the lowest
economic and educational backgrounds.6 This experimental reform generated a sharp and exogenous
change in the teaching budget of many schools. Some schools gained resources while other schools
experienced no change or even a decline in resources. Naturally, schools with a high proportion of students
from a deprived background or with large classes were the main beneficiaries from this reform. Given that
the instructional budget is in ‘kind’ and not in money implies that the only thing schools could do in the
short term is adjust instruction time, lower the student teacher ratio, or ‘buy’ in school teachers’ training.
However, in the next section I provide evidence that schools did not change class size, or cut/expand
extracurricular programs and in school teachers’ training but I show significant and positive “first stage”
relationship between the change in instructional resources and length of the school week and time on tasks
of core subjects.
For estimation, I use data from 2002-2005 for fifth-grade pupils for all the schools in the country.
I observe each school twice, either in 2002 and 2004 or in 2003 and in 2005. The key feature of these data
is that they present an opportunity to observe each school under the two different funding systems. This

regression. Pischke (2007) used a natural experiment in West Germany and found that a shorter school year increased
grade repetition and lowered enrollment in higher school tracks, but it had no effect on earnings and employment
later in life. Based on school day cancelations due to snow, Hansen (2008) reports that more instructional time
increases student performance, and Marcotte and Hemelt (2008) find that years with substantial snowfall are
associated with lower pupil performance. Goodman (2014) suggests that the mechanism through which weather
affects achievements is students’ absences and not school closures.
5
Therefore this paper is more in the spirit of the education production function literature that looks at
the effects of specific inputs, such as class size and teacher quality on outcomes and not about what happens when
schools are given more money and are allowed to spend it as they will (in the spirit of the “does money matter”
literature).
6
In 2009, the funding rules were changed again to a system very similar to that used prior to September 2004.

2

allows one to estimate the resulting changes in the instructional time budget per class, the length of the
school week, and weekly instructional time by subject.
I employ three identification strategies in the paper. The first identification strategy compares
schools in the years before and after the reform. The advantage of this school fixed effect strategy is that
it guarantees that no other fundamental changes occurred in schools during this period. Based on this
method I estimate the effect of total teaching budget and total teaching budget per class on the average
scores in math, science, English and Hebrew. The second identification strategy uses the predicted change
in funding as an instrumental variable for the actual change in funding. Since the exact pre- and postreform funding formulas are not known, I compute the instrumental variable based on an approximation
of the funding formula in each period and use for prediction the pre-reform rank of schools in terms of the
deprivation index so as to neutralize any school level demographic changes between the two periods.7 I
use this IV method to re-estimate the impact of total teaching budget and total teaching budget per class
on the average score of the four main academic subjects. The two totally different identification strategies
yield very similar results regarding the impact of school instructional resources on students’ achievements.
In the next step I use the school fixed effect method to estimate the effect of two additional key schooling
inputs: the length of the school week and the instructional time of math, science, English and Hebrew.
Finally, I use a third identification strategy that exploits variation in the instructional time of different
subjects, permitting therefore to estimate the effect of instructional time of these four subjects. I compare
the various relevant estimates based on the three identification methods, show that they are consistent, and
discuss the implications for the quality of identification of each of these estimates. In terms of identification
I distinguish between the well identified estimates of the effect of school teaching resources and the
estimates of time on task which rely on additional assumptions for identification. I also evaluate the effect
of instructional time on students’ homework time allocation, on their overall satisfaction with school, on
their social satisfaction in class, on their involvement in violent behavior, and on their fear of school
bullying. These topics offer an indication as to whether social factors and student behavior are affected by
the length of time that students spend in school during the day and week.
The results presented in this paper show that more school resources and a longer school week has
positive and significant effects on students' academic achievements. However, any additional instructional
budget per class beyond those used to determine the length of the school week has a much lower effect on
students’ learning outcomes. Furthermore, additional instructional time spent on the different subjects have
In the pre-reform period funding was a function of the ‘predicted’ number of classes’ (based on the rule that class
size cannot exceed 40 and on each grade enrollment rate), of the school decile rank based on its score in the
deprivation index and some other discretionary rules. Following the funding reform, a school budget was a function
of its enrollment (instead of number of predicted classes) and of its decile rank based on its score in the deprivation
index. All other funding rules were eliminated. More on this in the data section.

7

3

positive and significant effects on students' academic achievements. These estimates are in contrast to the
“naïve” OLS estimates which are actually negative, reflecting a negative selection pattern of allocating
higher instructional budgets to potentially low achieving schools (low SES). This is the first paper to show
that the biased estimated effects of school resources and instructional time are reversed from negative to
positive once potential selection and endogeneity of school resources are fully accounted for.8 The
estimates of the effect of the length of the school week and of instructional time in each subject are mutually
consistent and yield very similar elasticities of test scores with respect to these measures of instruction
time at school. The estimates show that the boost in test scores is modest. Allowing for treatment
heterogeneity, the growth in test scores is similar for boys and girls and not systematically different for
pupils from different socioeconomic statuses. Overall, the main results presented in the paper are very
robust to a variety of robustness checks with respect to their identification assumptions and to threats to
their validity. Further, the alternative identification strategy based on pupil fixed effect and on variation in
time of instruction across-subjects yields surprisingly identical results. It is remarkable that the two
identification methods which are based on different assumptions yield such strikingly similar results. These
estimates are also identical to estimates that I obtained using PISA data of all OECD countries and another
sample of all East European countries where the identification strategy was based on pupil fixed effect and
variation in time of instruction across subjects (Lavy 2015).
The funding reform was also used to study how additional time spent on instruction affects several
behavioral outcomes of students. The results suggest that increasing instruction time in different subjects
also increases modestly the time students spend doing homework. Furthermore, even with the additional
time spent at school and at doing homework, students’ overall satisfaction from school and from its social
environment was unaffected. In particular, increasing the length of the school week did not have any effect
on these behavioral outcomes; resulting in no change in students’ satisfaction from school and its social
environment, on their violent behavior, or on their fear of bullying. This is the first paper to show evidence
of school resources and instruction time on behavioral outcomes of students.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents background on the reform. Section
III presents the data and section IV presents our empirical strategy and results. Section V presents the
conclusions.
II. The 2004 Funding Reform

Angrist and Lavy (1999) show a similar reversal in sign with respect to the effect of class size. The “naïve” OLS
estimates of class size were actually positive, reflecting a negative selection of allocating smaller class size to
potentially low achieving schools (low SES). This is consistent with the negative selection pattern of allocating more
instructional budget to low achieving schools that I identify in this paper.
8

4

As noted in the introduction section, I will use three separate identification strategies in this paper,
the first two are based on policy induced variation in school resources, time at school and on different
tasks. The third strategy is based on variation induced by the degree of flexibility that schools have beyond
the compulsory curriculum that dictates minimum standards for time children spend at school and on
learning core subjects. In this section I provide the institutional background necessary to understand the
variation for both approaches.
The budget for primary schools in Israel comes from two sources: the local municipal authority
and the Ministry of Education. The local authority funds all the administrative costs of the school such as
the costs of secretaries, school supplies, and building maintenance. The Ministry of Education funds all
the teaching and other educational activities in schools. This funding is provided in ‘kind’ in terms of
number of instruction hours, which is measured in units of one hour of instruction per week for the whole
school year. It is intuitive to think about this part of the school budget as a voucher that funds all teaching
instruction costs, as well as the cost of internal (within school) and external (outside of school) teachers’
training. Schools are informed about the size of their voucher during the summer break and they decide on
how to allocate the voucher to the different inputs that can be purchased with it. The Ministry of Education
then pays the monetary equivalent of the voucher value directly to the providers of these inputs. For
example, all primary schools teachers, including schools’ principals, are government employees and
receive salary directly from the Ministry of Education. Teachers’ compensation typically accounts for 80
percent of the overall voucher of the school’s instructional budget. Schools are also allowed to use the
instructional voucher to pay teachers for tasks other than classroom teaching such as coordinating a school
wide activity such as field trips coordinator or a grade coordinator. The instruction budget also funds in
school teachers’ training. Some providers of teachers’ training are government employees and are paid by
the Ministry of Education through the school instruction voucher. Schools can also ‘buy’ in school
teachers’ training from private providers which is also funded from the instruction voucher and the actual
payment is done by the Ministry of Education. Similar arrangements apply for paying with the school
instructional time voucher to private providers of all kind of school extracurricular activities such as
educational trips, science or other educational clubs, and other educational activities in school that are
beyond the compulsory national curriculum. Schools can also use this voucher to fund the addition of a
teacher aid in some classes or lessons but it is not usually sufficiently large to reduce class size throughout
the school week. However, in recent years the Ministry rules were relaxed to allow the parents association
in a school or in a given grade to top the Ministry allocation with additional resources that can permit
reducing class size.
In the 2004 school year, the Ministry of Education introduced a school finance reform as a policy
experiment that changed the formula used to determine the instruction time budget of primary schools in

5

Israel. Until 2003, schools were funded based on the number of classes, irrespective of class size. The
number of classes used for budgeting was predicted based on the rule of maximum 40 students per class
and grade specific enrollment rates, and not based on actual number of classes. Schools also received an
additional instruction budget based on their score in a deprivation index. The index was a function of
students’ and schools’ average characteristics, in particular average parental education, number of siblings,
family income and number of immigrant students. Using the distribution of this index schools were divided
into deciles. Schools in higher deciles received more resources. The overall instructional budget of this
differential component amounted to about 10 percent of the overall funding of primary schools in the
country but the exact rule that these resources were allocated is not made known to the public. In addition
schools received additional instruction budget based on other criterions, for example, in lieu of number of
immigrant students in school, or to split classes by gender in religious schools, but the information about
these rules is also not available.
In September 2004, the funding rules were changed and from then on schools received funding
per student enrolled. In the new system all other sources of funding were cancelled and schools received
their central government funding based on one formula. A modified deprivation index featured more
prominently in the new funding formula. Schools were divided again to deciles and received instruction
time funding per student. The ‘voucher’ for schools in the 10th decile was highest, and it was about 70
percent higher than the voucher for schools in 1st decile. The needs based deprivation index was again a
function of students and school characteristics, with an added ‘national priority’ criteria, prioritizing
schools located near the country’s borders, and a ‘periphery’ location criteria. The criteria that formed this
index and their weights are as follows: mother's years of schooling (15%), father's years of schooling
(15%), number of siblings (10%), new immigrant status (20%) and immigrant from developing countries
status (10%), national priority status (20%), and periphery location status (10%). Most of the weights were
derived from a variance decomposition regression that examines the correlation between students'
background characteristics and students' achievement. Since the deprivation index in the post-reform
period was very similar to the one used before the reform, almost all schools had their decile rank
unchanged.
The new funding formula implied large resource changes for some schools. The Ministry of
education decided to converge to the new steady state level of funding gradually, reducing or increasing
resources while imposing a maximum to the change that schools experience in a given year. However,
there is no information available about this convergence process to the steady state funding level for each
school but the funding that each school received every year is available to us. Even though gradual, this
experimental reform still generated a sharp and exogenous change in the teaching budget of many schools.
Schools with a large enrollment of students with a high deprivation index and schools with large classes

6

gained resources, while others schools lost resources. The reform was intended to produce no changes in
the overall resource distribution among schools in the Jewish public school system. However, the reform
was designed to allow for an increase of about 15 percent to 20 percent in the overall budget of the Arab
schooling sector, as this sector includes a much higher share of students with high deprivation index
estimates and is characterized by larger classes. The schools that gained resources had on average lower
pre-reform budgets per class while those who lost resources had higher pre-reform budgets per class. This
experimental reform lasted until 2008 when it was changed again to a new system that was more similar
to the pre-2004 rules.
While there are several inputs that may be affected by a change in a school's budget, I find that the
budget per class is highly correlated with the length of the school week and with instructional time of math,
science, and English and not with other inputs such as class size, in school teachers’ training or
extracurricular activities. For instance, the regression coefficient of budget per class on length of the school
week is 0.280 (se=0.017) and it is very similar for schools that gained resources (0.242, se=0.023) and for
schools that lost resources (0.324, se=0.019) due to the reform. The regression coefficient of budget per
class on instructional time of the four main academic subjects is 0.085 (se=0.009) and it is almost identical
for schools that gained resources (0.087, se=0.012) and for schools that lost resources (0.097, se=0.012)
due to the reform.9 These relationships seem stable and yield the same estimates when estimated separately
based on the pre and post reform samples. At the same time, the estimated coefficient of the budget per
class on class size is -0.011 (se=0.034) suggesting that this is not a channel that schools used for spending
their teaching voucher. This conclusion is also evident when comparing the estimated effect of the budget
per class on weekly hours of instruction or on core subjects instructional time obtained from two subsamples stratified by actual class size or predicted class size (based on maximum class size of 40, see
Angrist and Lavy, 1999). For example, the estimated coefficient of the school budget on the length of the
school week is 0.269 in the sample of above the mean predicted class size and it is 0.276 in the sample of
schools with below the mean predicted class size. Similar lack of correlation is obtained when I estimate
such relationship for extracurricular activities and for teachers’ training in school.
III. Data
The data I use in this study are based on the Growth and Effectiveness Measures for Schools
(GEMS - Meizav in Hebrew) datasets for the years 2002-2005. The GEMS was administered for the first
time in 2002 and it includes a series of tests and questionnaires administered by the Division of Evaluation

9

These results are not presented in the paper and are available upon request from the author.

7

and Measurement of the Ministry of Education.10 The GEMS is administered towards the end (from midMay to mid-June) of each school year to a representative 1-in-2 sample of all elementary and middle
schools in Israel, so that each school participates in GEMS once every two years. The GEMS data include
test scores of fifth- (primary school) and eighth- (middle school) grade students in math, science, Hebrew,
and English. In principle, all students except those in special education classes are tested and the proportion
of students tested is above 90 percent. The raw test scores used a 1-to-100 scale that I transform into zscores to facilitate interpretation of the results. In this study I use only primary school data since the funding
reform only affected primary level schools.
The test scores for the years 2002-2005 are linked to student administrative records collected by
the Israel Ministry of Education. The administrative records include student demographics that I use to
construct all measures of students’ background characteristics. Using the linked datasets, I build a panel
for elementary schools with test scores for the years 2002-2005. The sample is restricted to Jewish public
schools that follow the same national curriculum and participate in the GEMS national testing. For these
reasons I exclude the religious Orthodox Jewish schools and the Arab schools. There are 939 elementary
schools with test score data. Since every school is sampled once in two years, I have two observations of
the same school for more than 90 percent of the schools.
The GEMS also includes interviews with all teachers and the school principal. The questionnaire
for ‘home class’ teachers11 of all classes included questions about classroom instructional time in each
subject and the total instructional time per week. I use teachers’ responses to these items to compute the
school average for fifth-grade instructional time in each subject. Though there was very little difference
between or among fifth-grade classes in a school in these time inputs, I still prefer to use the school-level
mean per grade to avoid any biases that might be caused by sorting of students into certain classrooms and
setting time allocations for given academic subjects according to those students’ particular strengths and
weaknesses. In any case, the grade- and class-level measures of these time inputs are very highly correlated.
I also use items from the GEMS student questionnaire that address various aspects of the school and their
learning environment. I concentrate on two sections of the questionnaire: the first provides information on
student satisfaction in school and on the violent behavior of other students, and the second provides data
on student allocation of time for homework by subject. In the first section students are asked to rate the
extent to which they agree with a series of statements on a six-point scale ranging from “strongly disagree”
The GEMS is not administered for school accountability purposes and only aggregated results at the district level
are published. For more information on the GEMS see the Division of Evaluation and Measurement website (in
Hebrew): http://cms.education.gov.il/educationcms/units/rama/odotrama/odot.htm.
11
A ‘home class’ teacher in primary school in Israel teaches most weekly sessions of his class, and has additional
duties such as taking attendance registers, acting as intermediary in cases of conflict, collating other teachers’
impressions of the class and of individual students in preparation for the quarterly report, liaising with parents and
various other administrative tasks.
10

8

to “strongly agree”. These items include: (1) “There are many fights among students in my classroom”;
(2) “Sometimes I’m scared to go to school because there are violent students”; (3) “I am often involved in
violent activities in school”; (4) “I feel well-adjusted socially in my class”; and (5) “I am satisfied in
school”. I transformed students’ responses to these items into standardized z-scores.12 In the second section
of the questionnaire, students are asked to report the number of hours per week that they spend at home
doing homework in each of three subjects (math, science and English).
In Table 1, I present summary statistics for the variables used in the analysis. Column 1 lists the
results for our key variables in the pre-reform period of 2002-2003 and column 2 lists the results for the
post-reform period of 2004-2005. Panel A presents the results for the budget per class and instructional
time variable, all measured in terms of weekly hours of instruction. According to the table, the mean budget
per class is the same in both periods, suggesting that the reform had no impact on the mean level of
resources for the Jewish secular schools. The length of the school week is on average 35 hours, implying
that 76 percent of the teaching budget of schools is used for classroom instruction. The rest of the teaching
budget is used to fund teachers’ training, to pay personnel for extracurricular activities in school, and after
school remedial education programs. The average instructional time of the four core academic subjects is
19.3-19.7 hours a week, almost a third of it used for math instruction, thirty percent of it is used for Hebrew
instruction and the rest divided almost equally between the other two subjects. Overall, there seems to be
little difference in instructional time in the years before and after the reform. Panel B presents the means
for the average test scores for each subject. Panel C presents the means for student characteristics. Panel
D presents the means for school characteristics, which are almost identical over the two periods,
respectively.
IV. Empirical Strategies and Results
A. School Fixed Effect Framework
The effects of unobserved correlated factors usually confound the effect of school budget or
instructional time on student outcomes. Such correlations could result if self-selection and sorting of
students across schools are affected by school resources, or if there is a correlation between school
instructional time and other characteristics of the school that may affect student outcomes. The structure
of the GEMS allows me to use an identification strategy that overcomes this potential problem because it
is based on observing schools and their students at two points of time: before the funding reform (in 2002
or 2003) and after the funding reform (in 2004 or 2005). I take advantage of this feature and construct a
I experimented with binary versions of these variables denoting above median answers and also using them linearly
and the results were not different, reassuring that the evidence regarding these variables is not a feature of this
particular transformation of the data.
12

9

longitudinal dataset at the school level to examine how changes in students’ achievements are associated
with changes in instructional time. Note that the change in instructional budget can only be due to the
funding reform because there is no school choice at the primary schooling level in any school district in
Israel and assignment to schools is based on pre-determined rules (mainly the family location of residence).
Also note that the reform and the new budget for each school were announced only very shortly before the
beginning of the school year which left very short time for parents to consider changing residences. It is
also likely that parents of fifth graders will be reluctant to move their children to another school towards
the end of primary school. As a result, the potential for selection bias due to sorting of students across
schools based on instruction budget is very small in this context. Indeed, I find that the proportion of
students in our sample that changed schools between 4th and 5th grade between the 2003 and 2004 academic
years was less than two percent and this rate was not different between schools that gained, lost or had no
change in instructional resources due to the reform. Also, such mobility was not correlated with observed
student’s characteristics such as parental education (this evidence is available from the author on request).
To develop the relationships of interest using the panel data, I first specify the following standard
education production function that links pupils’ achievements and their relevant determinants:
Yij0 αjγ Wj0Xij0 Sj0 uij0

(1)

Where Yij0 is the average achievement of the ith student in math, science and English, in the jth school in
period zero (pre-reform), Wj0 is the total budget of instructional time or the budget of instructional time per
class in the jth school in pre-reform period. Xij0 is a vector of characteristics of the ith student, Sj0 is a vector
of time varying characteristics of the jth school, αjis a school fixed effect that captures everything about
the school that is not observed and does not vary between the two years that each school is observed (2002
and 2004 or 2003 and 2005) and uij0 is the unobserved error term. Observing schools in more than one time
period allows expanding equation (1) to the post reform period in the following equation:
Yij1 αjγ Wj1Xij1 S j1 uij1

(2)

Where 1 denotes the post reform period. Differencing equations (1) and (2) yields a first difference
equation that is equivalent to the following school fixed effect model that we can estimate with a panel
data on schools:
Yijt αjγ WjtXijt S jt uijt

(3)

Where t denotes the time period. In this model, the identifying assumption is that the change in Wjt is
uncorrelated with any elements of the error term uijt for any reason. This assumption is satisfied if changes
in Wjt between the two periods for each school could result only because of the change in the funding rules
and that the average value of the 𝑋’s (which are used to compute the deprivation index) remained
unchanged. This assumption holds in the current context because the decile rank of the deprivation index

10

of schools remained unchanged after the revision of this index following the funding reform. Therefore,
conditional on a school fixed effect, the change in Wjtis not correlated with the change in uijt.
Are the schools that gained or lost resources due to the reform observationally equivalent? Here I
test directly whether the students in schools that gained and lost resources due to the reform are statistically
indistinguishable in terms of their observed characteristics for two pre-reform cohorts (2002 and 2003),
and for the post-reform cohorts (2004 and 2005). Column 1 of Table 2 shows that student background
characteristics are very similar in high and low gain (of instructional budget) schools in the sample of
schools that gained resources. Column 2 of Table 2 shows that student background characteristics are very
similar in high and low loss (of instructional budget) schools in the sample of schools that lost resources.
In columns 3 and 4 I present estimates of the indicators of gain and loss (of instructional budget) schools
where they are both included in the regression on students’ characteristics while using all schools and
students in the sample. The estimates present the difference relative to the group of schools that
experienced no change in resources. Very few estimates (4 out of 22) are statistically significant and in
these cases the estimates have the same sign and are equally significant for both the gain and lost groups.
I conclude that students in schools that gained or lost resources due to the funding reform are similar in
their mean background characteristics.
Were schools that gained or lost resources due to the reform different in their pre-reform time
trends? Since there are no test score data for years prior to 2002, I use instead pre-reform students’
characteristics data for grades 1st to 6th in 2002-03 to estimate differential trends in these characteristics for
schools that gained resources versus schools that lost resources due to the reform. These characteristics are
correlated with test scores and they should pick up some signs of evidence of differential time trends in
test scores. The unit of observation in this analysis is the school-grade. I estimate a model that includes a
series of grade (cohort) dummies and include in the regression an interaction of each of these grade
dummies with the two indicators of increase and decrease of school resources. Main effects of these two
indicators as well as for each grade are also included in these regressions. I focus on the three main
characteristics: fathers' year of schooling, mothers’ years of schooling and number of siblings. These
results are presented in Table 3. There are 30 differential trend parameter estimates reported in the table
and all of them are small and not statistically different from zero.
Empirical Results - Effect of School Resources: The first row of Table 4 presents the baseline results
regarding the relationship between total school instruction budget and students’ average achievement in
math, science, English, and Hebrew. The second row presents the evidence for the effect of the school
instruction budget per class. We use predicted number of classes and not actual number of classes as the

11

denominator of this treatment variable. The estimates are based on equation (3) with varying degrees of
control variables. The estimates presented in column 1 are from OLS regressions which include only
subject and year fixed effects as controls. The estimates presented in column 2 are from regressions that
include also school fixed effects. Column 3 also controls for student characteristics and column 4 controls
for time varying school characteristics. The school instruction budget is measured in weekly instruction
hours and its mean is 35.1 (sd=3.21). Similarly, instructional budget per class is measured in weekly
instruction hours and its mean is 46.6 (sd=5.99). The OLS estimate in the first row of column 1 is negative
(-0.0001) and marginally significant (se=0.0001) which means that school resources and test scores are
negatively correlated. Similarly the OLS estimate in the second row and column 1 is also negative (0.0157) and significant (se=0.0016). These two estimates reflect a pattern common in many previous
studies upon which a claim is made that school resources have no positive effect on learning outcomes.
This are most likely biased estimates since schools with lower potential outcomes receive compensatory
resources. The bias could also result from omitted variables that are correlated with student performance.
However, adding the school fixed effect reverses the sign of the estimates to be positive, and in the second
row it is even statistically significant. These estimates are unchanged in the other two specifications
(columns 3 and 4). This suggests that conditional on the school fixed effects, the instructional budget per
class is not correlated with student and time varying school characteristics such as enrollment. This
confirms the identification assumption that the school characteristics that form the deprivation index that
is used in the budget formula have not changed during the two years between the pre- and post-funding
reform. Therefore, we can be confident that the change in the school instructional budget reflects only the
change in the weights of the decile rank in the funding rules.13
It should be noted that these results estimate the effects of the reform only one or two years after
its implementation. Therefore, a valid question is whether the changes we observe in schools and the
estimates of the effect of school resources are representative of a longer run effect. By ‘long run’ I mean
that the level of instructional time has been in effect for some time so the adjustment by school, pupil and
parents have been completed. Two pieces of evidence suggest that the estimates in the first row of Table
4 do reflect longer term adjustments. First, estimating the effect of school resources separately based on
the contrast of 2002-2004 and 2003-2005 yield almost exactly the same estimates, suggesting that the
estimated effect based on experiencing one or two years of reform is the same. Second, the results of the
third alternative identification strategy which is based on cross section data analysis and reflects long term
estimates (See Table 8) are identical to those presented in Table 4.

Note that equation (3) can also be estimated as a regression in changes, which also allows adding pre-program
characteristics to account for the possibility that trends in achievement differ by school characteristics. This
specification yields very similar results to those reported in Table 2.
13

12

Another possible concern is whether the results from Table 4 are biased due to the convergence of
underachieving schools towards the level of high performing schools. In other words, if schools with a
lower than average budget per class (who benefited more from the funding reform and presumably had
lower average test scores in the pre-reform period) had a higher improvement rate of test scores due to a
convergence effect, such convergence would be positively correlated with the resource gain from the
funding reform and therefore will bias upward the estimated effect of the budget per class on test scores.
To check the extent of this possible bias, I divided the sample into two groups based on budget per class
in the pre-reform period and re-estimated equation (3) in each of these samples separately. The estimated
effect of budget per class on the average test score obtained from the sample of schools with above average
budget per student is 0.008 (se=0.006). The respective estimate obtained from the sample of schools with
below mean budget per student is 0.006 (se=0.003). Stratifying the sample into four groups based on
budget per student yields a similar pattern. This evidence suggests that it is very unlikely that the resource
effect that we estimated reflects test score convergence. This evidence is also reassuring that the effect of
the changes in the allocation of time is not confounded with underlying differential trends in achievement
by level of disadvantage.
To examine these potential threats further, I replicated the estimation of the effect of the budget
per class by stratifying the sample based on the average test score in the first period. The estimated effects
from the first and third quartiles are identical (0.007, se=0.004), and those obtained from the second and
fourth quartiles are lower. Even though it is not statistically correct to stratify the sample based on an
endogenous variable (school average test score), these estimates also suggest no difference in the estimated
effect of budget per class in high- and low-achieving schools.14
B. Instrumental Variables Approach
As an alternative and complementary strategy for identifying the effect of school resources, I also
use an instrumental variable approach. The instrumental variable is the predicted change in the total or per
class instruction time budget. I compute the predicted change in resources for each school by first
predicting each school pre- and post-reform budget based on each period’s approximated (‘not exact’)
formula, and then computing the difference between these two predictions for each school. I use this
variable as an instrument for the actual change in funding. The prediction regression for the pre-reform
period is the following:
WjαπCj µdDjd ƛj

14

Results are available upon request.

13

Where Cj is the number of predicted classes in school j and Djd is a dummy indicating the decile rank of
the school based on its deprivation index. π is the budget in lieu of each predicted class and µd is the
additional instruction budget that a school in decile 𝑑 receives. ƛj captures sources of other funding, some
ad hoc. The budget prediction regression for the post-reform period is the following:
Wjαβ Nj µdDjd ƛj
Where Nj is the number of students in school j. This equation includes the enrollment and the decile rank
of schools as a determinant of funding.
The estimated parameters of these two prediction equations are presented in Table A1 in the online
appendix. I note that the R2 in each of these prediction equations is over 0.8. While these predictions do
not yield the exact formula as implemented by the Ministry of Education, the predicted difference still
satisfies the conditions for a valid instrument. I use this instrument in the following 2SLS model:
First Stage:

ΔWjᵠ0ᵠ1ΔWpj  ᵠ2Cj ᵠ3dNjd ᵠ4Xij1 +€ij

Second Stage:

ΔYj ᵟ0ᵟ1ΔŴj  ᵟ2Cj ᵟ3dNjd ᵟ4Xij1 +ᶹij

Where, Wpj is the instrumental variable (the change in the predicted instruction budget for school j between
the pre- and post-reform period), ΔWj is the change in the actual instruction budget of school j, and ΔŴj is
the instrumented change of the instruction budget of school j. The first stage regression includes as control
variables the determinants of the post-reform budget (enrollment and a dummy indicator of the decile rank
of school). Also included in the equation as control variables are all the student’s background
characteristics noted by Xij1. The identifying assumption is that the predicted change of resources is
uncorrelated with the error term in the regression, conditional on the included control variables, in
particular the elements of the post-reform budget formula.
Empirical Results - Effect of School Resources: In Table 5, I present the results from the 2SLS
estimation. Columns 1-2 present the first stage estimates, columns 3-4 the reduced form estimates and
columns 4-6 the 2SLS estimates. The first stage estimates show a strong relationship between the predicted
change in school instructional resources, total or per class, and the actual respective changes. The R2 in the
first two regressions is relatively high, 0.65 and 0.57, respectively. The estimated reduced form effects are
positive and significantly different from zero. The 2SLS estimates are also positive and statistically
significant at the 5 percent level of significance. They are also almost equal to the respective ratio between
the reduced form and first stage estimates. The remarkable pattern of these estimates is that they are very
similar to the respective estimates presented in Table 4. The IV estimate of the effect of the school total
instructional budget on the average test score is 0.0005, just marginally higher than 0.0004, the estimate
obtained while using the school fixed effect estimation strategy (the estimate presented in column 4 of
Table 4). The IV estimate of the effect of the instructional budget per class on the average test score is

14

0.0055 versus 0.0065, the school fixed effect estimate presented in the 2nd row and 4th column of Table 4.
The similarity between the IV estimates and the estimates obtained from the schools’ first difference
regression are again reassuring that our identifying assumptions hold and that the changes in school
resources is due to changes in the funding formula and not due to changes in school characteristics. Further
important results are that when we account for the average number of predicted classes per school (14.0)
the two 2SLS estimates reflect similar effect size: multiplying 0.0005 by 14 yields an effect size of 0.007,
not much different from 0.0055. In the next section, I estimate some particular channels through which
school instructional resources affect student performance, in particular the length of the school week and
classroom study time of core subjects.
C. Identification and Estimation of Time on Task
A school's instructional budget is largely spent on the length of the school week. Thus, I estimate
equation (3) by replacing the instruction budget per class with the length of weekly school instruction (in
terms of hours per week). The weekly instructional time is divided among different subjects. For this
reason, I also estimate equation (3) where the sum of weekly hours of instruction of the three core subjects
(math, science and English) or of the four core subjects (including Hebrew as well) is the treatment
measure. One possible problem with this approach is that these two measures of instructional time are
choice variables and, therefore, could be endogenous in equation (3). If the choice made by schools of how
much to allocate from the instructional budget to any of these two measures is only a function of fixed
characteristics of the school, then the school fixed effect model will identify the causal effect of any of
these two treatment measures. However, if these choice decisions are correlated with the error term in
equation (3), our results might be biased. I discuss this issue in greater detail in my Table 6 results.
In the first row of Table 6, I present the estimated effects of the length of the school week (number
of weekly hours in school) on the average test score. The mean number of weekly hours in school is 35.0
(sd=3.2). Similar to the pattern observed in Table 4, the OLS estimate is initially negative (-0.0181) and
statistically significant (se=0.0029), and becomes positive (0.0062, se=0.0049) once schools fixed effects
are added to the regression. In addition, the estimates in columns 3 and 4 are nearly identical to that of
column 2, implying that adding the student and school characteristics as controls has no effect on the
estimates and their standard errors. The estimated effect is 0.0069 and it is only marginally significant
(se=0.0048).
We first note that the estimated effect of the length of the school week is only marginally higher
than the two alternative estimates for the effect of the instruction budget per class that I reported in the
previous section. The length of the school week is on average 80 percent of the budget per class and
therefore it is again reassuring that the instrumental variable estimate of the effect of the later variable is

15

not very different from the school fixed effect estimated effect of the former variable. However, I also note
that the estimated effect of the length of the school week and that of the budget per class can be compared
only based on their elasticity with respect to the average test score. The elasticity of the instructional budget
per class is 0.080, and the elasticity of the length of the school week is also 0.079.15 This implies that the
instructional budget per class has an effect on test scores mainly through the increase in length of the school
week. A validation of this result is also shown in the second row of Table 6, where I present estimates of
the effect of the budget of weekly hours of instruction beyond the length of the school week (simply the
difference between the instructional budget per class and the length of the school week) on the average test
score. The mean of this measure is 11 weekly hours and its estimated effect presented in column 4 or 8 is
0.0027 (se=0.0027). Its elasticity with respect to the average test scores is 0.01, confirming that the effect
of class budget on average test scores of the four subjects, beyond what is allocated to the length of the
school week, is indeed very small.
Another important implication of the similarity of the two estimated effects presented in the first
two rows of Table 6 is with regard to the interpretation of the estimated effect of the length of the school
week as causal. Given that the change in the instructional budget per class is exogenous, conditional on
schools’ fixed effects, its estimated effect is clearly unbiased. Therefore, the similarity in the two point
estimates and in their implied elasticities is suggestive evidence that the estimated effect of the length of
the school week is unlikely to be biased due to selection or endogeneity. A related point is that if the effect
of length of the school week was biased, upward or downward, then the effect of the difference between
the instructional budget per class and the length of the school week should have been biased in the opposite
direction. Instead, we find that this estimate is practically zero.
In the third row of Table 6, I present estimates of the effect of the average weekly hours of
instruction on the average score of the four core subjects. The sum of instructional time of these subjects
is 19.3 hours per week in the pre-form period and 19.7 hours per week in the post-reform period. The OLS
estimate in column 1, third row, is positive but imprecise. However adding the school fixed effects to the
estimated equation triples the estimated coefficients, from 0.0154 to 0.0472. Remarkably, however, this
estimate remains unchanged as I add controls to the school fixed-effect regressions: the point estimate in
the third column is 0.0488 (se=0.0214) and it is 0.0498 (se=0.0215) in column 4. This robust estimate
implies that adding one hour of instruction in each of the four subjects raises the average score by 0.05
standard deviations.
Since the mean of the standardized test score is zero, I compute the two elasticities based on estimates of equation
(3) where the dependent variable is the row grade (scale 1 to 100) instead of the z-score. These estimates, not
presented here, show exactly the same pattern that is shown in Table 4. The elasticity of the budget per class is
computed as [0.127 x (46/70)] while the elasticity of the length of the school week is computed as [0.157 x (35/70)],
both equal to 0.079.
15

16

It is interesting to note that this estimated effects of instructional time is very similar to the
estimates that Dobbie and Fryer (2011) obtain from their sample of charter schools in New York City
(NYC). They find that schools that add 25 percent or more instructional time have an annual gain that is
0.059 of a standard deviation higher in math. Note that a one hour increase in instruction time in our sample
is approximately 25 percent (given that the respective mean is 4.6 hours) and our estimated effect is 0.053,
almost identical to the NYC estimate. However, the authors emphasize that their estimates of the
relationship between school inputs – including instructional time – and school effectiveness are unlikely
to be causal given the lack of experimental variation in school inputs. Moreover, the estimate of the effect
of instructional time obtained from a sample of over 50 countries in Lavy (2015) is also similar to the
estimate obtained in this paper and to the effect size presented in Dobbie and Fryer (2011).
Furthermore, this estimate of 0.05 yields an elasticity of 0.20 which is almost identical to the
elasticity of the length of the school week after we adjust for the difference in the means of the two
instructional time measures.16 This result has two important implications. The first is that additional time
that children spend in school during the week in pursuits outside of math, science, and English classes,
does not affect at all their achievement in these subjects. In other words, the effect of the length of the
school week on average test scores is only a reflection of its correlation with the instructional time of these
particular subjects. The implication is that whatever skills students acquire during the time in school spent
outside of the main academic subjects (60 percent of their total school time) are immaterial to their
academic progress in these core subjects, at least as reflected in the short-term test scores. Perhaps we
should not be surprised that knowledge in other subjects, such as history, geography and literature, is
irrelevant for better achievement in math or science. However, students may acquire and enhance noncognitive skills, such as socialization, confidence and determination, during longer school weeks. Thus,
one might have expected potential spillover effects to surface for a wide array of academic pursuits.
The similarity of the estimated effects of the length of the school week and of the instructional
time in the main academic subjects has a second important implication: the effect of instructional time in
these subjects is very unlikely to be biased. If the change in instructional time of these subjects between
2002-3 and 2004-5 were determined selectively with respect to potential outcomes in these subjects, we
would have expected that the estimated effect of the length of the school week and of weekly hours of
instruction of these subjects to be different. Instead, they are almost identical. A validation of this result is
shown in the fourth row of Table 6, which presents estimates of the effect on the average test score of the
number of weekly hours of instruction in all other subjects and activities in school. This measure of
instructional time is simply the difference between the length of the school week and the instructional time
16
Based on estimates using the raw test score data, the elasticity of this time measure is computed as [1.05 x
(13.7/70)].

17

of the four core subjects and its mean is 22 weekly hours (19 hours). Remarkably, the point estimates in
all columns in these two rows are negative but not significantly different from zero. This result confirms
that there are no spillover effects in school in Israel from instruction of all other subjects on achievements
in math, science, English and Hebrew. It also confirms that conditional on school fixed effects, the
allocation of instructional time to each of the core academic subjects, given the length of the school week,
is not correlated with potential outcomes in these subjects. Finally, if the estimated effect of instructional
time of the core subject were biased, upward or downward, we should have expected that the effect of all
other instructional time during the week to be biased. However, I do not observe such bias as the estimated
effect of instruction on non-core subjects on average test scores for core subjects is nearly zero.
D. Estimated effect of instructional time in each subject
In this section, I specify and estimate a school fixed-effect model where both the dependent
variable and the time of instruction per week are subject-specific, as follows:
Ykijt jρ Tkjtη Xijt  εS jt ukijt

(4)

Where Ykijt is the achievement in the kth subject, in the jth school, of the ith student, and Tkjt is instructional
time in the kth subject in the jth school. The unobserved error term ukijt is now subject specific. In addition,
I estimate an alternative specification that also includes the hours of instruction in each of the other two
subjects and the total instructional time of all other subjects as treatments:
Ykijt j ρ Tkjt  ηXijt εS j + λ T2jt θ T3jtσ Tojtukijt

(5)

Where T2jt and T3jt represent instructional time in the other two subjects and Tojt is instructional time in all
other subjects. λ, θ, and σ are the cross subjects parameters. Note that the sum of Tk, T2, T3, and To‘ is equal
to the length of the school week in terms of hours of instruction. By comparing the estimates obtained
using equation (5) to those obtained based on using equation (3) and overall instructional time of the three
subjects, I hope to strengthen the causal interpretation of the evidence.17
In Table 7, I present the results of estimating equations (4) and (5) for each of the four subjects
separately. Each parameter presented in the table is estimated in a separate regression. Each regression
includes as controls school fixed effects, year dummies, student characteristics, and school characteristics.
The four estimates presented in the first row are positive and precisely measured. The effect of an hour of
instruction in math is 0.044 (se=0.018), in science it is 0.0425 (se=0.0169), in English it is higher, 0.0622
(se=0.0204), and in Hebrew it is much lower, 0.0159 (0.0104). The average of the four estimates is 0.0412,
only marginally lower than the estimated average effect (0.0498) reported in the third row of Table 6.

I also compare the estimates of equation (4) to respective parameters based on a completely different identification
methodology (See Table 6).
17

18

Based on the close similarity between the average estimated effect of the four subjects and the
respective estimated effect reported in Table 6, I argue that the allocation of the sum of the total teaching
time in all four subjects, to each of the four subjects is not correlated with potential outcomes. Overall, I
conclude that the estimates based on separate regressions for each subject are fully consistent with the
estimates obtained where the dependent variable is the average test scores of all four subjects and the
treatment measure is the average instructional time in these subjects.
In the second panel, I present the results of estimating equation (5) where each regression includes
all four subjects’ specific weekly hours of instruction as well as the sum of instructional time in all other
subjects. The set of four estimates presented in each column is obtained from one regression. The table
indicates that the estimates of the effect of instructional time of each subject on the same subject test score
are very similar to the respective estimates reported in the first specification. The biggest gap is in Hebrew,
for which the estimate increases by 44 percent, from 0.016 to 0.023. The table also indicates that the cross
effects results are all positive, though very small and not significantly different from zero. For example,
the effects of math and science instructional time on English test scores are, not surprisingly, practically
zero (0.007 and 0.009). The largest cross effect is that of math instructional time on science test score,
0.0298. However, this effect is measured very imprecisely (se=0.0285) and therefore not statistically
significant from zero. In comparison, the reciprocal cross effect of science instructional time on math is
not important as this estimate is 0.0163 (se=0.0140). Interestingly, the table also confirms my earlier
finding that instructional time of non-core subjects (representing 60 percent of the length of the school
week) has no effect on achievements in any of the four core subjects: the estimates in the fourth row of the
second panel of Table 7 are all positive but very small, and they are not significantly different from zero.
This result is also consistent with the evidence presented in Table 6.18
Overall, these findings strengthen my previous results, as I did not find any cross effects within
subjects, and between each of these subjects and instructional time of non-core subjects. This can be
viewed as additional suggestive evidence that the estimated effect of instructional time of each of the
subjects is not biased due to selection or endogenous determination of these educational inputs (that is not
accounted for by our natural experiment and our school fixed effect difference in differences framework).

18

I also examined heterogeneity treatment effect estimates by gender, family education, and by the degree of
heterogeneity in student ability in the classroom. The effect of additional instructional time for math is the same for
boys and girls, but the effect of increasing science and English instructional time is larger for boys. When the sample
is divided by the median value of the sum of one's father’s and mother’s years of schooling (a proxy for
socioeconomic background), the estimated effect of math instruction is larger among children from families with low
levels of parent education though this different is not statistically significant. The effect of science hours of instruction
is also higher for students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, but this gap is not very large. These results are
presented in the online appendix Tables A3-A8.

19

E. An alternative identification strategy: between subjects’ variation in instructional time
In this section, I present additional estimates to those presented above that are based on an
alternative identification method that can account for potential confounding factors in the estimation of
instructional time. Here I rely on within-student variations in instructional time across various subjects of
study to examine whether differences in student performance in three subjects are systematically associated
with differences between subjects in instructional time. The basic identification strategy is that student
characteristics and the school environment are the same for all three subjects except for the fact that some
subjects receive more instructional time. It is important to emphasize that the pupil fixed-effect
identification method proposed here does not exploit any variation in instructional time due to the funding
reform. The variation in hours of instruction of different subjects across schools comes from the discretion
that schools are subject to satisfying the national curriculum requirements of minimum instructional time
in core subjects. I use the cross-section variation since I observe students when they are exposed only to
one regime of funding. Based on this approach I present within student estimates of the effect of
instructional time on individual test scores using the following panel data specification,
Ykij iγ TkjXij S j j k) uijk

(6)

Where Ykij is the achievement in the k subject of the i student in the j school, Tkj is instructional time in
th

th

th

the kth subject in the jth school, X is a vector of characteristics of the ith student in the jth school and Sj is a
vector of characteristics of the jth school. jand k represents the unobserved characteristics of the school
and the subject, respectively, and ukij is the remaining unobserved error term. The student fixed effect i
captures the individual’s family background, underlying ability, motivation, and other constant noncognitive skills. Of course, a specification that includes i will not include the term Xij. Note that the
individual fixed effect absorbs also the school fixed effect j. Therefore, exploiting within-student
variation allows one to control for a number of sources of potential biases related to unobserved
characteristics of the school, the student, or their interaction. One potential source of bias is that students
might be placed or be sorted according to their ability across schools that provide more (or less)
instructional time in some subjects. For example, if more talented students attend better schools that
provide more instructional hours overall in each subject, it would cause γ to be biased downward unless
the effect of student and school fixed effects are accounted for. Similarly, the bias will have an opposite
sign if the less talented students are exposed to more instructional time. Identification of the effect of
instructional time based on a comparison of the performance of the same student in different subjects is
therefore immune to biases due to omitted school level characteristics, such as resources, peer composition
and so on, or to omitted individual background characteristics, such as parental schooling and income.
Equation (6) can be estimated with a single year’s cross-sectional data for each school, or it can be

20

estimated using two years of data for each school. The latter allows including in the model a school fixed
effect in addition to the pupil fixed effect.
This identification strategy is also subject to several key assumptions. First, a necessary
assumption for this identification strategy is that the effect of instructional time is the same for all subjects,
implying that γ cannot vary by subject. This restriction seems plausible if applied to the main academic
subjects as evident from results obtained from the first identification method that I used: when estimating
the treatment effect for these three subjects separately I obtained relatively similar estimates while the
effect for Hebrew instruction time was much lower. I will therefore apply the pupil fixed effect estimation
model while using only these three subjects. Second, the effect of instructional time is “net” of instructional
time spillovers across subjects. This assumption is also supported by the evidence presented in Table 7
which showed that there are no significant cross-subject effects of hours of instruction. Third, this
identification strategy does not preclude the possibility that pupils select or are sorted across schools partly
based on subject-specific instructional time. For example, the results would be biased if students who have
a high ability for math may select or be placed in a school that specializes in math and has more
instructional time in math. However, I believe that this concern is not relevant for three reasons. First, the
pupils in the sample are in fifth grade of primary school in Israel where admission is based on neighborhood
school zones without any school choice. Second, primary schools that specialize in a given subject are very
rare in Israel. Third, tracking within schools is not allowed in primary and middle schools in Israel, and
Ministry circulars reiterate this issue frequently. Even if some schools overlook this regulation and practice
tracking within school, this is not a major concern as I measure instructional time in each subject by the
school-level means and not by the class means or even the within school program-level means. Therefore,
omitted subject-specific student ability will not be correlated with subject instructional time in a given
school.
Table 8 presents the estimates based on the within pupil estimation strategy.19 Two different
specifications are used. The regression results reported in the first column include year fixed effects, pupil
demographic controls, and school characteristics. The regression reported in the second column includes
also pupils fixed effects. In the first row I present estimates based on pooling together all three subjects.
The two estimates are positive and significantly different from zero. The estimate in the second column is
lower than the estimate in the first column, suggesting that the OLS estimates are slightly upwardly biased.
Significantly, the estimated effect when pooling the three subjects is 0.056 (se=0.008), which is very

19

Since the treatment variable, instructional time, is measured at the school level, the error term uijk, is clustered by
school to capture common unobservable shocks to students at the same school.

21

similar to the average (0.050) of the estimates of the three subjects reported in the first row of Table 7.
This is a remarkable outcome since the two estimates are obtained from two very different identification
strategies. As noted, in Tables 6-7 the identifying assumption is the comparison of results within schools
for two adjacent fifth-grade cohorts where nothing has changed except the funding rules, and, therefore
the first difference estimation at the school level is appropriate. In Table 8, the identifying assumption is
that conditional on pupil fixed effects, hours of instruction of each subject are not correlated with the
potential outcome (the error term in equation (5)), and therefore the estimation based on differences of all
variables from pupil level means accounts for all potential omitted variables. The similarity in the estimated
average treatment effect of instructional time suggests that the short-term evidence presented in Table 7 is
close to the estimated longer run effects presented in Table 8.
In the other rows of Table 8, I present estimates based on pooling only two out of three subjects.
This is possible since all that is needed for this identification strategy is at least two or more observations
per student. Remarkably, all three estimates in column 2 are very similar and range from 0.054-0.058,
providing additional proof that the effects of instructional time on each of these three subjects are not very
different. In addition, the average of the three separate effects is 0.056 which is identical to the estimate in
the first row that pools all three subjects.
In separate estimation, I consider non-linearity in the marginal productivity of instructional time
in each of the three subjects. This is an important policy question as this parameter can be useful for
allocating instructional resources across subjects and within schools. I therefore estimated regressions
where the continuous instructional time measure was converted to dummy indicators, each indicator
capturing a range of hours of instruction for each of the subjects. These ranges vary by subject. For
example, the math instructional time ranges from three to 10 hours a week, so it is measured by four such
indicators as follows: five hours or less (mean=4.92), six hours, seven hours, eight hours or more
(mean=8.20). The results from this non-linear specification are reported in the online appendix Table A2.
This estimate in the table suggests evidence of a slight increase in marginal productivity as hours of
instruction increase.
F. Effect of school instructional time on pupils’ homework effort and satisfaction in school
In order to fully assess the overall benefit of an extended school week program or of interventions
that add instructional time to some subjects, it is important to consider other important questions. For
instance, do students who “enjoy” a longer school week study harder at home and spend more time doing
homework? Are they more satisfied in school? Are they better off socially in class? Do they feel more
secured in school and get less involved in violence and bullying?

22

In Table 9, I estimate the effects of classroom instructional time in each of the subjects on
homework time allocation. This estimation is based on the policy variation using equation (3) with different
outcomes as the dependent variables. For each subject I report results from a regression specification that
includes school fixed effects and student and school characteristics as well as the instructional time in each
of the other three subjects. The estimated effect of the latter three variables will measure cross effects of
instructional time of a given subject on the other three subjects’ test scores. Both before and after the
reforms, students spent approximately 3.2 hours per week doing math homework, 2.5 hours doing science
homework, and 3 hours doing English homework.
The evidence presented in Table 9 suggests that homework time in each of the core subjects
increases slightly with the subject’s increased instructional time in school. This effect is significant for
math and English, but it is only marginally significant for science. In addition, the effect sizes are relatively
small. For example, an increase of an hour of school instruction in math or English leads to an average
increase of four to five minutes of homework. Considering that students are engaged in homework for 2
to 3 hours per subject, the changes in students’ time allocation in each of the three subjects are marginal.
The evidence presented in the off-diagonal cells in the first three rows of the table also indicates that the
cross subject instructional time estimated effects are very small and not significantly different from zero.20
These results imply that added school instructional time for any subject does not crowd out the
time that students invest at home for the study of other subjects; to the contrary, it even marginally increases
the overall time spent on homework. The implication is that an increase in instructional time at school
leads to a net expansion of overall study time at home and at school together. Significantly, the additional
time spent on homework is most likely a mechanism for the effect of increased school instructional time
on test scores in math and English while for science this effect is not measured precisely to allow such
conclusion.
An additional question linked to the school reforms concerns whether additional time spent in
school would come at the expense of overall social and school satisfaction. Thus, it is important to assess
and measure these effects for a more general equilibrium evaluation of the effect of extending the length
of the school week. In Table 10, I present estimates of the effect of increased school instructional time per
week on five behavioral outcomes: personal violence in school, mean level of classroom violence, personal
fear of violence in school, satisfaction from school, and social satisfaction in school. The regression

20

I also estimate the effect of instructional time in each of the core subjects on the probability that some students
receive additional instruction from privately funded tutors at home. Private tutors work with 14 percent of the students
in math, 5 percent of students in science, and 27 percent of students in English. Additional school instructional time
in math and science has positive effect on the propensity of getting private tutoring but these effects are small and
insignificant for all three subjects. The estimate for math instructional time is 0.003 (se=0.003), for science 0.002
(se=0.001) and for English precisely zero. Results are available upon request.

23

specification includes school fixed effects and student and school characteristics. Column 1 reports
estimates based on the full sample. In columns 2-3, I stratify the sample by gender. In columns 4-5, I
present the results for the high and low parental education samples, respectively, and in columns 6-7 for
the samples of homogenous and heterogeneous schools samples (as defined in footnote 18). The table
indicates that there is no systematic pattern of an effect of the length of the school week on any of the five
behavioral measures, and none of the five reported estimates in the first column is significantly different
from zero.21 The conclusion, therefore, is that extending the school week carries no negative repercussions
in terms of satisfaction of students from school, the class social environment, or levels of school violence.
V. Conclusions
In this paper, I estimate empirically the effect of school resources and various measures of
increased instructional time in school on students’ academic performance and behavior. In particular, I
analyze the effects of the total instruction budget in a school, instructional budget per class, the length of
the school week, and the instructional time of the main academic subjects on test scores in these subjects
and on homework time of students. I also assess students’ school satisfaction, social acclimatization,
violence, and fear of bullying. I take advantage of a policy reform in Israel that began in 2004 which
changed the rules of funding public primary schools. The system changed from funding based on number
of classes to a system based on number of students, weighted to take into account their average
socioeconomic status. The results based on fifth-grade students’ test scores clearly indicate that school
resources, total or per class, and the length of the school week have a positive and significant effect on
pupils’ performance in core subjects. Importantly, the effects of increasing or decreasing school resources
or the length of the school week are fully symmetric, as they are identical in absolute terms though opposite
in sign. The evidence also consistently shows that increasing the amount of instructional time of math,
science, or English positively impacts test scores in that subject. The effect of changing hours of Hebrew
instruction is much lower. Here as well, the effect of increasing or decreasing instructional time in the core
subjects is symmetric. An alternative identification strategy based on a pupil fixed-effect estimation that
exploits variation of time of instruction in different subjects yields exactly the same results. The evidence
also strongly suggests that increased achievement in a given subject is the result of increased time on that
particular arena of study alone. Results show that cross effects – the benefits of additional instructional

It should be noted that there are some results that are significant such as the negative estimated effect for boys on
school satisfaction. In addition, three other statistically significant parameter estimates in Table 10 are: the negative
effect of the length of the school week on classroom violence in heterogeneous school, the positive effect on personal
violence in homogenous schools, and the negative effect on school satisfaction in homogenous schools. These
however are very small effects and therefore not economically meaningful.
21

24

time in one subject upon the achievements in another – are negligible. There is no spillover effect on math
and English from increased instructional time in other subjects, and only modest increases in science, with
the slight benefit stemming from increased math instructional time. In addition, there are no apparent cross
effects from instructional time spent engaging in all other subjects such as history, geography, literature,
and social studies on the main academic subjects’ test scores. Increasing instructional time in math, science
or English actually leads to an increase in the time at home that students spend on homework. Finally, the
evidence suggests that expanding the school week does not diminish the school and social satisfaction of
students.
This is the first paper that provides such detailed evidence on the causal effects of the school
instructional time, in particular the length of the school week, and of instructional time in different subjects
on students’ academic performance and on important behavioral outcomes. The results are based on a
sample that includes all the primary schools in Israel (with the exception of Arab and religious Orthodox
Jewish schools). In this sample the means of the length of the school week and the time of instruction in
the main academic subjects in Israel are very similar to the respective means of the OECD countries as
observed in the PISA data from its various rounds in the previous decade. These two aspects provide an
external validity appeal to the evidence presented here because they are relevant to many countries that
seek ways to improve their education system. The evidence presented in the paper can also serve as a good
benchmark for evaluating the effect and the cost-benefit of many “traditional” school interventions such
as reducing class size, increasing teachers’ training, and tracking student by ability. It can also serve as a
benchmark for evaluating more recent popular “progressive” interventions in schools such as pay for
performance for teachers or for students, or using computer added instructions in the classroom.
VI. References
Angrist J., A. Abdulkadiroglu, S. Dynarski, T. Kane, and P. Pathak, “Accountability and Flexibility in
Public Schools: Evidence from Boston's Charters and Pilots”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
August 2011.
Angrist J. and V. Lavy. (1999). "Using Maimonides' Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size on Children's
Academic Achievement." Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1999, 533-579.
Benabou, R., Kramarz, F. and Prost, C. (2009). "The French Zones d’Education Prioritaire: Much Ado
about Nothing." Economics of Education Review, 28(3), pp. 345-356.
Betts, J. R. and Johnson, E. (1998). “A Test of Diminishing Returns to School Spending.” mimeograph,
University of California San Diego.

25

Betts, J. R. (2001). "The impact of school resources on women’s earnings and educational attainment:
findings from the National Longitudinal Survey of young women." Journal of Labor Economics,
19(3), pp. 635–57.
Card, D. and Krueger, A. (1992). “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the
Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 1-40.
Card, D. and Krueger, A. B. (1996). ‘School Resources and Student Outcomes: An Overview of the
Literature and New Evidence from North and South Carolina’, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
10(4), pp. 31–50.
Dobbie, Will and Roland G. Fryer, Jr. (2011) “Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective Schools: Evidence
from New York City”, Harvard University.
Eide, E. and Showalter, M.H. (1998). “The Effect of School Quality on Student Performance: A Quantile
Regression Approach,” Economics Letters, 58, pp. 345-50.
Goodman Joshua. “Flaking Out: Student Absences and Snow Days as Disruptions of Instructional Time”,
NBER Working Paper No. 20221, 2014.
Grogger, J. (1996). “Does School Quality Explain the Recent Black/White Wage Trend?” Journal of Labor
Economics, 14, pp. 231-53.
Häkkinen, I., T. Kirjavainen and R. Uusitalo (2003). “School resources and student achievement revisited:
new evidence from panel data”, Economics of Education Review, 22(3), pp. 329–335.
Hanushek. E. A (2003) “The Failure of Input Based Schooling Policies”, Economic Journal 113: F64-98.
Hanushek, E. A (2006). “School Resources”, In Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch (Eds.), Handbook of
the Economics of Education, Volume 2, pp. 865-908.
Hansen, Ben. (2008). “School Year Length and Student Performance: Quasi-Experimental Evidence”,
University of California Santa Barbara.
Heckman, J., Layne-Farrar, A. and Todd, P. (1996). "Does Measured School Quality Really Matter? An
Examination of the Earnings-Quality Relationship", in Burtless, G. (ed.), Does Money Matter? The
Effect of School Resources on Student Achievement and Adult Success, Brookings Institution Press.
Lavy, Victor. (2002). “Evaluating the Effect of Teachers’ Group Performance Incentives on Pupils’
Achievements”, Journal of Political Economy, 1286-1317.

26

Lavy, Victor. (2015) "Do Differences in School’s Instruction Time Explain International Achievement
Gaps in Math, Science, and Reading? Evidence from Developed and Developing Countries."
Economic Journal, November Issue.
Marcotte, Dave E. and Steven Hemelt (2008). “Unscheduled Closings and Student Performance.”
Education Finance and Policy, 3(3), pp. 316-38.
Pischke, J. S. (2007) “The Impact of Length of the School Year on Student Performance and Earnings:
Evidence from the German Short School Years,” Economic Journal, 117(523), pp. 1216-1242.
Thernstrom, Abigail, and Stephan Thernstrom. (2004). “No Excuses: Closing the Racial Gap in Learning.”
Simon & Schuster.
Whitman, David. (2008). “Sweating the Small Stuff: Inner-City Schools and the New Paternalism.”
Thomas B. Fordham Institute.

27

Table 1: Descriptive statistics: Instruction Time, Test Scores, Students' and schools'
Characteristics
Years

A. Instruction time
Instruction budget per class
(in weekly hours)
Length of the school week
(in weekly hours)
Weekly instruction hours of math,
science and English
Weekly instruction hours of math,
science, English, and Hebrew

2002-2003

2004-2005

46.63
(5.99)

45.69
(5.86)

13.68
(1.67)

13.88
(1.72)

35.06
(3.21)

34.76
(3.14)

Weekly instruction hours in:

19.33
(2.33)

Science

6.00
(0.79)

6.12
(0.81)

4.07
(0.69)

4.15
(0.70)

Math

English
Hebrew
B. Test scores
Average test scores (math, science
and English)
Average test scores (math, science,
English, and Hebrew)
Math
Science
English
Hebrew

3.60
(1.09)
5.65
(1.29)

19.67
(2.48)

3.60
(1.05)
5.80
(1.32)

70.93
(15.42)

75.14
(14.47)

72.34
(19.16)

71.97
(16.96)

71.27
(14.15)
65.74
(17.79)
73.23
(20.73)
70.99
(15.99)

74.58
(13.79)
77.14
(15.86)
75.00
(21.58)
71.90
(16.76)

Notes: The table presents means and standard deviations for instruction hours, test scores,
students' and schools' characteristics. Standard deviations are presented in parenthesis. The
sample includes all fifth grade students from Jewish secular and religious state schools. This
sample includes over 60 percent of the schools and students in the country. Column 1 presents
statistics for fifth grade students in 2002-2003, and column 2 presents similar statistics for
fifth grade students in 2004-2005. Panel A presents instruction time means (in hours) for
different subjects. Panel B presents average test scores for different subjects. Panels C and D
present students' and schools' characteristics, respectively.

Table 1: Continued
Years

C. Student Characteristics
Boys
Father's years of schooling
Mother's years of schooling
Number of siblings
Immigrant indicator
Native indicator (born in Israel)
Former USSR ethnics origin
Asia and Africa ethnics origin
Europe or America ethnics origin
Ethiopian ethnics origin
Other ethnics origin
D. Schools' Characteristics
Enrollment
Class size
Religious school
Number of schools
Number of students
Notes: See first page.

2002-2003

2004-2005

0.50
(0.50)

0.50
(0.50)

12.87
(3.24)

12.89
(3.44)

12.65
(3.64)
2.40
(1.45)

12.63
(3.81)
2.37
(1.46)

0.113
(0.316)

0.083
(0.276)

0.160
(0.367)

0.152
(0.359)

0.789
(0.408)
0.162
(0.368)
0.106
(0.308)
0.034

0.795
(0.403)
0.105
(0.306)
0.087
(0.282)
0.029

0.017
(0.131)

0.024
(0.153)

441.65
(154.07)

440.78
(154.53)

0.22
(0.41)

0.22
(0.41)

28.11
(4.10)
920

53,981

27.96
(4.04)
927

55,633

Table 2: Balancing Tests of Students' Characteristics with Respect to Whether a School Gained or Lost Instrucion Hours Due to the 2003 Funding Reform
Schools for whom instruction budget
increased

Sample
Schools for whom instruction budget
decreased

Male Indicator (1 = Yes, 0 = No)

0.012
(0.011)

-0.013
(0.009)

Mother's Years of Education

-0.044
(0.119)

0.177
(0.097)

Father's Years of Education

Number of Siblings

Immigrant Indicator

Native indicator (born in Israel)
Other ethnics origin
Former USSR ethnics origin
Ethiopian ethnics origin
Asia and Africa ethnics origin
Europe or America ethnics origin

Number of Observations

(1)

0.053
(0.126)
-0.036
(0.054)
0.004
(0.007)
-0.010
(0.013)
0.000
(0.002)
0.013
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.017
(0.006)
0.011

(0.006)
22,096

(2)

Increase Effect
(3)

0.216
(0.104)

0.063
(0.127)

0.030
(0.045)
0.003
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.011)
0.002
(0.002)
0.000
(0.011)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.009
(0.006)
0.014

(0.006)
32,977

-0.013
(0.011)
-0.029
(0.119)
-0.042
(0.054)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.010
(0.013)
0.001
(0.002)
0.014
(0.013)
-0.004
(0.005)
-0.017
(0.006)
0.011

(0.006)
45,713

Full Sample

Decrease Effect
(4)
-0.013
(0.009)
0.189
(0.104)
0.154
(0.096)
0.024
(0.045)
0.003
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.011)
0.002
(0.002)
0.001
(0.011)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.008
(0.006)
0.013

(0.006)
45,713

Notes: The table presents balancing tests of students' characteristics with respect to gain or loss of instrucion hours due to the 2002 funding reform. Column 1 presentes the estimates from a sample of schools that gained
resources and the determinant is the size of this gain. Column 2 presents the respective estimates in a sample that lost resources follwoing the reform. In colums 3-4, I present estimates based on the full sample and
balancing regressions including two determinants, the indicators of gaining or loosing resources. All samples include students from years 2004-2005. Standard errors are presented in parentheses and are clustered at the
school level.

Table 3: Estimated Differential Trends in Students' Charactersitics
Students' Characteristics

Father's Average Years of Education

Mother's Average Years of Education

Average Number of Siblings

Increase

0.356
(0.204)

0.417
(0.194)

-0.045
(0.083)

Grade 2

-0.113
(0.103)

-0.157
(0.085)

0.133
(0.044)

Decrease

Grade 3
Grade 4
Grade 5
Grade 6

Grade 2 X Increase
Grade 3 X Increase
Grade 4 X Increase
Grade 5 X Increase
Grade 6 X Increase

Grade 2 X Decrease
Grade 3 X Decrease
Grade 4 X Decrease
Grade 5 X Decrease
Grade 6 X Decrease

(1)

-0.384
(0.188)
-0.018
(0.102)
0.075
(0.095)
0.179
(0.094)
0.167
(0.101)
-0.062
(0.123)
0.048
(0.126)
0.015
(0.121)
-0.146
(0.119)
-0.101
(0.129)
0.045
(0.113)
0.059
(0.111)
-0.020
(0.105)
-0.056
(0.104)
-0.044
(0.113)

(2)

-0.256
(0.180)
0.032
(0.098)
0.038
(0.089)
0.181
(0.100)
0.162
(0.094)
-0.060
(0.109)
-0.117
(0.121)
-0.072
(0.111)
-0.216
(0.122)
-0.211
(0.123)
0.071
(0.095)
-0.030
(0.107)
-0.058
(0.096)
-0.137
(0.109)
-0.110
(0.106)

(3)

0.019
(0.078)
0.253
(0.047)
0.185
(0.043)
0.255
(0.044)
0.242
(0.045)
-0.011
(0.056)
-0.126
(0.057)
0.040
(0.055)
0.024
(0.058)
0.049
(0.058)
0.032
(0.049)
-0.037
(0.052)
0.060
(0.048)
0.000
(0.050)
0.019
(0.051)

Notes: The table presents the estimated cohort trends in students' characteristics and the differential trend by whether a school had experienced an increase
or a decrease in instruction hours due to the 2002 funding reform. The student charcteristics used are parental years of schooling and number of siblings.
Each column presents the estimates for one of these three student's characteristics. The grade variables are dummies for each relevant elementary school
grade. Standard errors are presented in parentheses and are clustered at the school level.

Table 4: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time on the Average Composite Score

Instruction budget (in weekly
hours)
Instruction budget per class (in
weekly hours)
Number of schools
Number of sudents

School Fixed
Effect,
Student's and
school's
Characteristics

Year Control
Only

School
Fixed Effect

School Fixed
Effect and
Student's
Characteristic

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0003
(0.0002)

0.0003
(0.0002)

0.0004
(0.0003)

-0.0157
(0.0016)

0.0067
(0.0030)

0.0064
(0.0030)

0.0065
(0.0032)

79,772

79,772

79,254

79,254

887

887

887

887

Notes: Each estimate presented in columns (1)-(4) is from a different regression. Each row specifies a different
independent variable that is included in the regression. The dependent variables are avergae standardized scores in math,
science, English and Hebrew. All specifications include year fixed effects. Student characteristics include: gender
dummy, both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and ethnic origin indicators. School
characteristics include: enrollment and and enrollment squared. Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are
clustered at the school level.

Table 5 : First Stage, Reduced Form and 2SLS Estimates
First stage

Predicted change in instruction
budget (in weekly hours)
Predicted change in instruction
budget per class (in weekly hours)

R2

Instruction
budget (in
weekly
hours)

Instruction
budget per
class (in
weekly
hours)

(1)

(2)

-

Reduced form

2SLS

Average Composite
Score

Average Composite
Score

-

(3)

0.0004
(0.0002)

(4)

-

0.8346

(0.0305)

-

0.6476

0.5887

0.9031
(0.0272)

-

(5)

0.0005
(0.0002)

(6)

-

0.0062

(0.0031)

-

-

0.0055

(0.0027)

0.2382

0.2387

0.2301

0.2271

-

Notes: Each estimate presented in columns (1)-(6) is from a different regression. Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are
clustered at the school level. See Table 4 for sample size (number of schools and number of students).

Table 6: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time Inputs on the Average Composite Score

Length of the school week (in weekly hours)

Difference between instruction budget per
class and length of school week
Average weekly instruction hours of math,
science, English, and Hebrew
Weekly instruction hours of all other subjects

Year
Control
Only

School
Fixed
Effect

School Fixed
Effect and
Student's
Characteristic

School Fixed
Effect,
Student's and
school's
Characteristics

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0181
(0.0029)

0.0062
(0.0049)

0.0070
(0.0048)

0.0069
(0.0048)

0.0154
(0.0170)

0.0472
(0.0212)

0.0488
(0.0214)

0.0498
(0.0215)

-0.0142
(0.0019)

-0.0180
(0.0025)

0.0032
(0.0027)

-0.0041
(0.0047)

0.0027
(0.0026)

-0.0038
(0.0047)

0.0027
(0.0027)

-0.0041
(0.0047)

Notes: Each estimate presented in columns (1)-(4) is from a different regression. Each row specifies a different
independent variable that is included in the regression. The dependent variables are avergae standardized scores in
math, science, English and Hebrew. All specifications include year fixed effects. Student characteristics include:
gender dummy, both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and ethnic origin indicators.
School characteristics include: enrollment and and enrollment squared. Standard errors are presented in parenthesis
and are clustered at the school level. See Table 4 for sample size (number of schools and number of students).

Table 7: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time by Subject on Test Score
Test Score

Specification I:
Only
own subject hours of instruction is included
as treatment

Specification II:
All
four subjects' hours of instruction and total
of other subjects' hours of instruction are
included as treatments
Math instruction hours
Science instruction hours
English instruction hours
Hebrew instruction hours
Other subjects' total weekly instruction hours

Math

Science

English

Hebrew

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.044
0.018

0.0425
(0.0169)

0.0622
(0.0204)

0.0159
(0.0104)

0.0433
(0.0191)

0.0298
(0.0285)

-0.0016
(0.0227)

0.0110
(0.0216)

0.0163
(0.0140)

(0.0066)
(0.0215)

0.0062
(0.0114)

-0.0002
(0.0071)

0.0420
(0.0174)

0.0087
(0.0214)

0.0049
(0.0125)

-0.0013
(0.0071)

0.0013
(0.0145)

0.0651
(0.0206)

0.0042
(0.0125)

0.0048
(0.0078)

0.0171
(0.0145)

-0.0405
(0.0199)

0.0226
(0.0114)

0.0044
(0.0070)

Note: The table presents the estimated effects of various school instruction variables on test scores. All specifications
include year fixed effects, student and school characteristics. Student's characteristics include a sex dummy, both parents'
years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and five indicators of ethnic origin. The school characteristics
are enrollment and enrollment squared. Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are clustered at the school level.
See Table 4 for sample size (number of schools and number of students).

Table 8: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time on Test Score Based on
Within Pupil Regressions and Assuming that the Effect of Instruction Time is
the Same for all Subjects
OLS regressions
with Pupil and
Regressions with
School
Pupil Fixed Effect
Characteristics
Subjects Combination
(1)
(2)

Math + Science + English

0.068
(0.007)

0.056
(0.008)

Math + Science

0.074
(0.008)

0.054
(0.010)

0.055
(0.008)

0.058
(0.013)

Math + English
Science + English

Number of schools

0.079
(0.011)

882

0.057
(0.016)

882

Notes: The table presents the estimated effects of school instruction time of test scores
based on within-pupil regressions assuming similar effect of instruction time for all
subjects. All specifications include year fixed effects. Student's characteristics include a
gender dummy, father and mother years of schooling, number of siblings, an indicator
of immigration status and five ethnic origin indicators. The school characteristics are
enrollment and enrollment squared. Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and
are clustered at the school level.

Table 9: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time by Subject on Home Work Hours

Math
(mean=3.19, sd=1.55)

Science
(mean=2.48, sd=1.55)

English
(mean=3.00, sd=1.60)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Math instruction hours

0.041
(0.022)

0.005
(0.022)

0.012
(0.023)

Science instruction hours

-0.012
(0.014)

0.024
(0.015)

-0.011
(0.015)

English instruction hours

-0.008
(0.019)

0.000
(0.019)

0.044
(0.019)

Other subjects' total weekly
instruction hours

-0.005
(0.007)

0.004
(0.007)

-0.008
(0.008)

Note: The table presents the estimated effects of school instruction time by subject on home-work hours. All specifications include
year fixed effects, student's and school's characteristics. Student's characteristics include a sex dummy, both parents' years of
schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and five indicators of ethnic origin. The school indicators are the enrollment and
squared enrollment. Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are clustered at the school level. See Table 4 for sample size
(number of schools and number of students).

Table 10: Estimated Effect of Length of School Week on Violence and Student's Satisfaction.
Sample
Gender

Personal violence

(mean=1.97, sd=1.43)

Class Violence

(mean=3.62, sd=1.54)

Fear from violence at School

(mean=2.02, sd=1.55)

School Satisfaction

(mean=5.18, sd=1.25)

Social Satisfaction

(mean=5.16, sd=1.24)

Family's Education

School Homogenity

Full Sample

Boys

Girls

High Education

Low Education

Hetrogenous
Schools

Homogenous
Schools

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.000
(0.004)

-0.007
(0.006)

0.006
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.004)

0.004
(0.006)

-0.004
(0.008)

0.011
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.005)

-0.006
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.004
(0.008)

-0.001
(0.007)

-0.006
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.004)
0.000
(0.004)

-0.009
(0.008)

-0.015
(0.006)
0.000
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.008)

0.004
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.005)

0.002
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.006)
-0.003
(0.005)

-0.009
(0.008)

-0.006
(0.006)
0.001
(0.005)

-0.029
(0.014)

0.003
(0.009)
0.003
(0.008)

0.001
(0.010)

-0.017
(0.007)
-0.007
(0.007)

Notes: The table presents the estimated effects of the length of school week on different measures of violence and student's satisfaction. All specifications include year fixed effects, student's
and school's characteristics. Student's characteristics include: gender dummy, both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and ethnic origin indicators. School's
characteristics include: enrollment and squared enrollment. Each parameter presented in the table is from a different regression. The values assumed by the violence and student's satisfaction
raw variables range between lowest 1 to highest 6. The estimation results presented in columns (1)-(3) are based however on these variables' z scores. Standard errors are presented in
parenthesis and are clustered at the school level. See Table 4 for sample size (number of schools and number of students).

ONLINE APPENDIX
NOT FOR PUBLICATION

Table A1: Prediction Regression of School Instruction Budget
School Instruction budget (in Weekly hours)

Predicted number of
classes
Students' enrollment

Decile dummy
1st

2002-2003
(1)

2004-2005
(2)

48.063
(0.912)

-

-

1.231
(0.020)

-23.759
(10.744)

-134.445
(12.314)

2rd

(omitted)

3rd

14.378
(10.835)

4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th

R2
Number of schools

18.512
(10.699)
55.736
(12.538)
85.421
(12.204)
90.967
(11.389)

-107.0518
(12.962)
-91.445
(13.144)
-84.202
(12.832)
-52.133
(13.759)
-34.302
(12.865)
-19.950
(13.023)

110.455
(12.299)

(omitted)

190.405
(15.743)

71.225
(17.001)

131.182
(12.547)

18.723
(13.480)

0.812

0.8381

884

825

Notes: Predicted number of classes is based on the rule of a maximum of
40 students per class and on grade specific enrollent rates.

Table A2: Estimated Non-Linear Effect of School Instruction Time by Subject on Test Score
Test Scores
Math

Science

English

Grouping Hours

Proportion in
Sample

Estimate

Grouping Hours

Proportion in
Sample

Estimate

Grouping Hours

Proportion in
Sample

Estimate

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

19.07%

-

15.01%

-

14.52%

-

5 hours or less
(mean=4.92)

2 hours or less
(mean=1.95)

3 hours or less
(mean=2.94)

6 hours

59.70%

0.047
(0.027)

3 hours

31.62%

-0.001
(0.037)

4 hours

62.25%

0.068
(0.035)

7 hours

15.78%

0.080
(0.041)

4 hours

35.80%

0.066
(0.042)

5 hours

19.73%

0.079
(0.045)

8 hours or more

5.45%

0.090

5 hours or more

17.57%

0.105

6 hours or more

3.50%

0.130

(mean=8.20)

(0.064)

(mean=5.33)

(0.055)

(mean=6.12)

(0.071)

Note: The table presents the estmated non-linear effects of school instruction time by subject on test score. All specifications include year fixed effect, student's and
school's characteristics. Student's characteristics include both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and five indicators of ethnic origin. The
school characteristics are enrollment and squared enrollment. Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are clustered at the school level. See Table 4 for sample
size (number of schools and number of students).

Table A3: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time by Subject on Test Score, by Gender
Test Scores
Math

Specification I:
Only the subject's hours of instruction are
included as treatment
Specification II:
Own subject's instruction time and instruction
budget per class (in hours per week) are
included as treatment
Subject's instruction hours
Instruction budget per class (in hours per week)
Specification III:
All
three subjects' hours of instruction and total of
other subjects' hours of instruction are
included as treatments
Math instruction hours
Science instruction hours
English instruction hours

Science

English

Boys

Girls

Boys

Girls

Boys

Girls

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.049

0.042

0.056

0.029

0.080

0.046

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.018)

(0.019)

(0.022)

(0.025)

0.049

0.042

0.054

0.025

0.075

0.041

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.023)

(0.026)

0.002
(0.005)

0.002
(0.005)

0.007
(0.005)

0.015
(0.005)

0.008
(0.005)

0.010
(0.005)

0.053
(0.021)

0.041
(0.021)

0.038
(0.031)

0.028
(0.030)

-0.017
(0.024)

0.019
(0.025)

0.027
(0.017)

0.020
(0.023)

0.006
(0.016)

-0.003
(0.025)

0.057
(0.019)

0.011
(0.023)

0.026
(0.019)

0.011
(0.025)

0.015
(0.016)

0.081
(0.023)

-0.013
(0.016)

0.051
(0.025)

Other subjects' total weekly instruction hours

0.006
(0.008)

-0.003
(0.008)

0.002
(0.007)

-0.003
(0.009)

0.005
(0.009)

0.005
(0.009)

Number of students

41,646

42,132

41,646

42,132

41,646

42,132

Note: Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are clustered at the school level. All specifications include year fixed effects, student's and school's
characteristics. Student's characteristics include both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and five indicators of ethnic
origin. The school's characteristics are enrollment and squared enrollment.

Table A4: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time on Test Score, by Subject and by Family Education
Test Scores
Math

Specification I:
Only the subject's hours of instruction are
included as treatment

Science

English

High
Education

Low
Education

High
Education

Low
Education

High
Education

Low
Education

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.020

0.060

0.033

0.050

0.068

0.057

(0.019)

(0.022)

(0.018)

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.026)

0.021

0.060

0.031

0.048

0.062

0.054

Specification II:
Own subject's instruction time and instruction
budget per class (in hours per week) are
included as treatment
Subject's instruction hours
Instruction budget per class (in hours per
week)

(0.019)

(0.022)

(0.018)

(0.020)

(0.020)

(0.026)

0.003
(0.005)

0.000
(0.005)

0.010
(0.005)

0.009
(0.005)

0.007
(0.005)

0.010
(0.005)

Math instruction hours

0.023
(0.020)

0.060
(0.023)

0.019
(0.030)

0.037
(0.032)

0.011
(0.022)

-0.014
(0.028)

Science instruction hours

0.018
(0.015)

0.021
(0.018)

0.034
(0.018)

0.048
(0.022)

-0.001
(0.014)

-0.001
(0.019)

English instruction hours

0.008
(0.020)

0.008
(0.029)

0.014
(0.020)

0.005
(0.029)

0.068
(0.021)

0.061
(0.027)

Other subjects' total weekly instruction hours

0.006
(0.007)

-0.003
(0.009)

0.003
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.009)

0.001
(0.007)

0.005
(0.010)

Number of students

39,608

44,688

39,608

44,688

39,608

44,688

Specification III:
All
three subjects' hours of instruction and total
of other subjects' hours of instruction are
included as treatments

Note: Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are clustered at the school level. All specifications include year fixed effects, student's and school's
characteristics. Student's characteristics include a sex dummy, both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and five indicators
of ethnic origin. The school characteristics are enrollment and enrollment squared.

Table A5: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time on Test Score in Heterogeneous and Homogenous Schools
Test Scores
Math

Specification I:
Only the subject's hours of instruction are
included as treatment

Science

English

Heterogeneous
Schools

Homogenous
Schools

Heterogeneous
Schools

Homogenous
Schools

Heterogeneous
Schools

Homogenous
Schools

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.025

0.041

0.027

0.043

0.046

0.062

(0.027)

(0.030)

(0.037)

(0.023)

(0.029)

(0.038)

Specification II:
Own subject's instruction time and instruction
budget per class (in hours per week) are
included as treatment
Subject's instruction hours

0.027

0.041

0.025

0.041

0.030

0.061

(0.027)

(0.030)

(0.035)

(0.023)

(0.030)

(0.037)

Math instruction hours

0.025
(0.029)

0.035
(0.031)

0.083
(0.063)

-0.020
(0.032)

-0.014
(0.031)

-0.057
(0.040)

Science instruction hours

0.010
(0.026)

0.009
(0.023)

0.014
(0.037)

0.039
(0.024)

0.002
(0.028)

-0.024
(0.022)

English instruction hours

0.019
(0.029)

0.003
(0.041)

0.036
(0.037)

-0.015
(0.032)

0.049
(0.031)

0.065
(0.037)

Other subjects' total weekly instruction hours

0.001
(0.015)

-0.013
(0.010)

-0.012
(0.017)

-0.005
(0.011)

0.004
(0.013)

0.001
(0.012)

Number of students

42,174

42,171

42,174

42,171

42,174

42,171

Instruction budget per class (in hours per week)
Specification III:
All
three subjects' hours of instruction and total of
other subjects' hours of instruction are
included as treatments

0.009
(0.009)

0.002
(0.006)

0.027
(0.008)

0.004
(0.006)

0.018
(0.008)

0.003
(0.006)

Note: Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are clustered at the school level. All specifications include year fixed effect, student and school characteristics .
Student's characteristics include a sex dummy, both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and five indicators of ethnic origin. The
school characteristics are enrollment and enrollment squared.

Table A6: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time on Home Work Hours, by Subject and by Gender
Home Work Hours
Boys
Math

Science

English

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.039
(0.032)

0.038
(0.032)

0.030
(0.032)

-

0.000
(0.031)

-0.003
(0.031)

-

0.026
(0.032)

0.014
(0.034)

Science instruction hours

-

-0.019
(0.020)

-0.028
(0.021)

0.009
(0.021)

0.008
(0.021)

0.005
(0.021)

-

-0.002
(0.022)

-0.015
(0.022)

English instruction hours

-

-0.031
(0.026)

-0.039
(0.027)

-

0.006
(0.026)

0.004
(0.027)

0.071
(0.027)

0.071
(0.027)

0.061
(0.028)

Other subjects' total weekly instruction
hours

-

-

-0.014
(0.010)

-

-

-0.005
(0.010)

-

-

-0.020
(0.011)

Math instruction hours

Number of schools

880

880

880

Number of students

38,104

38,086

38,070

Girls
0.062
(0.031)

0.063
(0.031)

0.056
(0.032)

-

0.013
(0.027)

0.016
(0.028)

-

0.017
(0.029)

0.009
(0.030)

Science instruction hours

-

0.023
(0.019)

0.016
(0.020)

0.058
(0.019)

0.056
(0.019)

0.059
(0.021)

-

0.008
(0.020)

-0.002
(0.021)

English instruction hours

-

0.011
(0.029)

0.005
(0.029)

-

0.025
(0.025)

0.028
(0.025)

0.059
(0.026)

0.057
(0.027)

0.049
(0.027)

Other subjects' total weekly instruction
hours

-

-

-0.011
(0.010)

-

-

0.005
(0.010)

-

-

-0.015
(0.010)

Math instruction hours

Number of students

38,714

38,653

38,652

Note: Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are clustered at the school level. All specifications include year fixed effects, student and school characteristics. Student's characteristics include both parents'
years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and five indicators of ethnic origin. The school characteristics are enrollment and enrollment squared.

Table A7: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time on Home Work Hours, by Subject and by Family Education
Home Work Hours
High Education
Math

Math instruction hours
Science instruction hours
English instruction hours
Other subjects' total weekly instruction
hours

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.040
(0.000)

0.040
(0.032)

0.035
(0.032)

-

-0.016
(0.031)

-0.016
(0.032)

-

0.018
(0.031)

0.012
(0.032)

-

-0.005
(0.027)

-0.010
(0.027)

-

0.014
(0.027)

0.014
(0.027)

0.077
(0.026)

0.074
(0.026)

0.068
(0.027)

-

-

English instruction hours
Other subjects' total weekly instruction
hours
Number of students

-0.008
(0.020)
-

892

Number of students

Science instruction hours

English

(1)

Number of schools

Math instruction hours

Science

-0.014
(0.021)

0.036
(0.021)

-0.009
(0.010)

-

0.053
(0.030)

-

-0.020
(0.026)

-0.028
(0.026)

-

40,598

0.000
(0.011)

-

-

0.017
(0.019)
-

892

0.010
(0.020)

-0.011
(0.011)

36,139

Low Education

0.062
(0.029)

-

0.034
(0.022)

36,134

0.061
(0.029)

0.013
(0.018)

-

892

36,177

-

0.035
(0.021)

-

0.015
(0.027)

0.012
(0.027)

-

0.022
(0.030)

0.008
(0.031)

-

0.011
(0.025)

0.008
(0.025)

0.047
(0.026)

0.048
(0.026)

0.036
(0.026)

0.003
(0.020)

0.027
(0.019)

-0.015
(0.010)

-

0.027
(0.019)
-

40,563

0.024
(0.019)

-0.005
(0.009)

-

-

-0.014
(0.022)
-

40,540

-0.030
(0.022)
-0.025
(0.010)

Note: Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are clustered at the school level. All specifications include year fixed effects, student and school characteristics. Student's characteristics include a sex
dummy, both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and five indicators of ethnic origin. The school characteristics are enrollment and enrollment squared.

Table A8: Estimated Effect of School Instruction Time on Home Work Hours, by Subject and by School Homogenity
Home Work Hours
Hetrogenous Schools
Math

Science

English

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.035
(0.044)

0.035
(0.043)

0.019
(0.044)

-

-0.013
(0.040)

-0.013
(0.040)

-

0.007
(0.041)

-0.007
(0.042)

Science instruction hours

-

-0.001
(0.028)

-0.024
(0.032)

0.046
(0.026)

0.045
(0.027)

0.045
(0.029)

-

-0.018
(0.031)

-0.037
(0.034)

English instruction hours

-

-0.041
(0.033)

-0.060
(0.034)

-

0.007
(0.034)

0.007
(0.035)

0.085
(0.034)

0.088
(0.035)

0.072
(0.036)

Other subjects' total weekly instruction
hours

-

-

-0.032
(0.017)

-

-

0.001
(0.016)

-

-

-0.026
(0.017)

Math instruction hours

Number of schools

572

572

572

Number of students

38,267

38,231

38,230

Homogenous Schools
0.032
(0.040)

0.030
(0.040)

0.007
(0.041)

-

-0.007
(0.040)

-0.014
(0.042)

-

0.025
(0.041)

0.006
(0.044)

Science instruction hours

-

0.015
(0.021)

-0.006
(0.022)

0.049
(0.025)

0.049
(0.025)

0.043
(0.026)

-

0.033
(0.026)

0.015
(0.025)

English instruction hours

-

0.025
(0.043)

0.016
(0.042)

-

-0.004
(0.039)

-0.007
(0.039)

0.057
(0.037)

0.051
(0.038)

0.044
(0.037)

Other subjects' total weekly instruction
hours

-

-

-0.030
(0.011)

-

-

-0.009
(0.014)

-

-

-0.025
(0.014)

Math instruction hours

Number of students

38,508

38,466

38,449

Note: Standard errors are presented in parenthesis and are clustered at the school level. All specifications include year fixed effects, student and school characteristics. Student's characteristics include a sex
dummy, both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status and five indicators of ethnic origin. The school characteristics are enrollment and enrollment squared.

