NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOME PRODUCTION, LABOR WEDGES, AND INTERNATIONAL REAL BUSINESS
CYCLES
Loukas Karabarbounis
Working Paper 18366
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18366
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

I thank Gianluca Benigno, Ariel Burstein, Emmanuel Farhi, Gita Gopinath, Jonathan Heathcote, Chang-Tai
Hsieh, Erik Hurst, Oleg Itskhoki, Ellen McGrattan, Jaromir Nosal, Fabrizio Perri, Andrea Raffo, and
seminar participants at Brandeis, Brown, Chicago Booth, Columbia GSB, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, Federal Reserve Board, Harvard, LSE, Penn State, Stockholm IIES, UCLA Anderson,
and University of Iowa for useful conversations and constructive comments. Summer financial support
from Chicago Booth is acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Loukas Karabarbounis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Home Production, Labor Wedges, and International Real Business Cycles
Loukas Karabarbounis
NBER Working Paper No. 18366
September 2012
JEL No. E32,F41,F44,J22
ABSTRACT
This paper explores implications of non-separable preferences with home production for international
business cycles. Home production induces substitution effects that break the link between market consumption
and its marginal utility and help explain several stylized facts of the open economy. In an estimated
two-country model with complete asset markets in which home production generates a labor wedge
that mimics its empirical counterpart, output is more correlated than consumption across countries,
labor inputs and labor wedges are positively correlated across countries, and relative market consumption
is negatively related to the real exchange rate. International time use surveys corroborate predictions
of the model, showing a significant relationship between time spent on home production, labor wedges,
and real exchange rates, both at business cycle frequencies and in the cross section of countries. By
contrast, non-separabilities based on leisure do not help explain variations in labor wedges or real
exchange rates.
Loukas Karabarbounis
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
loukas.karabarbounis@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

This paper introduces home production in a two-country dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model to explore the role of non-separable preferences for international business cycles.
As in this paper, some international macroeconomists have hypothesized that taste shocks and
non-separabilities in preferences may help explain the low degree of international risk sharing
observed in the data.1 However, whether such features actually improve the performance of
international business cycle models remains an open question, as it has been difficult to interpret, discipline, and test models with non-separable preferences. In this paper, I propose
two strategies that discipline the non-separability in preferences induced by home production.
I show that the implied restrictions on preferences help explain a number of puzzles in open
economy macroeconomics.
The model economy is a frictionless international business cycle model in which each country
has a market and a home sector. Goods produced in the home sector enter in a non-separable
way in the utility function with goods produced in the market sector. In the home sector,
consumers produce home goods with home time and capital, as in Benhabib, Rogerson, and
Wright (1991). Home goods are substitutable to domestic market goods, but they are not
tradeable in the market. In the market sector, firms produce specialized market inputs with
market time and capital, as in Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994, 1995). The two countries
trade specialized market inputs and a complete set of financial securities. International business
cycles are driven by productivity shocks in the market and the home sector.
The first strategy to discipline the non-separability in preferences builds upon a recent
literature in the closed economy that organizes aggregate data in terms of time-varying wedges
from the first-order conditions of the neoclassical growth model. Of particular interest to
macroeconomists is the behavior of the “labor wedge,” which is defined as the gap between
the marginal product of labor and the marginal rate of substitution of leisure for market
consumption (Hall, 1997; Shimer, 2009). Under this view, successful models of the business
cycle – including international business cycle models – must be able to generate volatile and
countercyclical labor wedges (Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2007).
The proposed strategy is to estimate the non-separability in the utility function from the
behavior of the labor wedge as measured in the data. Then, I ask whether the two-country
model generates business cycles consistent with stylized facts of international data. I estimate
1

For other models with non-separable preferences or taste shocks, see Devereux, Gregory, and Smith (1992);
Stockman and Tesar (1995); Lewis (1996); Canova and Ubide (1998); Heathcote and Perri (2008); Raffo (2010).
For alternative approaches to explaining the low degree of international risk sharing, see Baxter and Crucini
(1995); Kollmann (1996); Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000); Heathcote and Perri (2002); Kehoe and Perri (2002);
Ghironi and Melitz (2005); Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2008); Fitzgerald (Forthcoming).

1

a high elasticity of substitution between market and home goods, moderately persistent but
volatile productivity shocks in the home sector, and highly correlated productivity innovations
between the home and the market sector. These parameters allow the model to generate a labor
wedge which is as volatile and persistent as the labor wedge measured for several countries.
In addition, these parameters allow the model to match the negative correlation of the labor
wedge with output and the positive correlation of the labor wedge with market productivity
observed in the data.
Under the same parameters that restrict moments of the labor wedge in the model to match
moments of the labor wedge in the data, the two-country model is consistent with salient
features of international business cycles. The “quantity anomaly” is that, contrary to most
theoretical models, market output correlates more than market consumption across countries
(Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland, 1995). The model accounts for the “Backus and Smith (1993)
puzzle” which states that the correlation between relative market consumption and the real
exchange rate is negative in the data, but positive and high in most theoretical models. In
addition, the model generates countercyclical real net exports and a positive comovement of
labor inputs and labor wedges across countries. I stress that, contrary to the labor wedge, open
economy features of the data are not targeted when estimating the model. Therefore, matching
these features through the endogenous response of the labor wedge validates externally the
home production theory of the labor wedge.
Two key efficiency conditions allow home production to explain international macro puzzles
through endogenous movements in the labor wedge. The first condition expresses the measured
labor wedge as an increasing function of time spent on home production relative to time spent
on leisure. Intuitively, households allocate an increasing fraction of their time to produce in the
home sector in recessions when market consumption and market work are low. Since the two
sectors are substitutes, the marginal utility of market consumption remains relatively low which
increases the measured labor wedge during recessions. In a model without home production
and complete asset markets, productivity shocks induce strong wealth effects that imply a
negative comovement of labor and output across countries. By contrast, home production
increases the willingness of households to substitute time in response to productivity shocks,
which implies that labor and output correlate positively and more across countries than market
consumption.
The second condition, the Backus and Smith (1993) condition, sets the real exchange rate
proportional to the ratio of marginal utilities of market consumption across countries. Given
that home production is substitutable to market consumption, the Backus-Smith condition
implies that countries spending relatively more time on home production tend to experience

2

real exchange rate depreciations. Therefore, in states in which domestic market consumption
is lower than foreign market consumption, the real exchange rate tends to depreciate because
of the increase in relative domestic home production time.
The second strategy uses evidence from international time use surveys to test these two
efficiency conditions and to corroborate the mechanism induced by home production. I test the
relationship between labor wedges and home production using both business cycle and cross
country variation. The lack of long time series on time use categories other than market work
hours is a major challenge in relating non-separabilities in preferences to the labor wedge at
business cycle frequencies. This is what necessitates my alternative approach of substituting
out changes in home production time and changes in leisure time with an estimated function
of changes in market work time. To do so, I use recent findings of Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011) who, to overcome the difficulty of the short time series, estimate the sensitivity of
changes in alternative time use categories with respect to changes in market work hours using
a panel of U.S. states between 2003 and 2010. As I show, the home production model implies
that the cyclical component of the labor wedge is proportional to the difference between the
cyclical component of time spent on home production and the cyclical component of time spent
on leisure. Therefore, the micro-level estimates in Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011)
for the U.S. can be used to evaluate the model-generated labor wedge in the data at business
cycle frequencies. Doing so, I find that the labor wedge generated by home production tracks
closely the measured labor wedge for a number of countries at business cycle frequencies.
Next, using time use data for various countries and years from the Multinational Time
Use Survey (MTUS), I explore the relationship between cross country differences in changes in
labor wedges and cross country differences in changes in time use. The evidence shows a strong
relationship between increasing labor wedges and increasing time spent on home production.
Instead, I find no evidence that labor wedges are induced by mis-specifications of the leisure
component of preferences. This finding suggests that it is crucial to differentiate between home
production time and leisure time in testing for non-separabilities in the utility function.
To explore the role of non-separabilities for real exchange rates, I focus on the wedge between
the real exchange rate and the difference of foreign from domestic market consumption scaled
by the coefficient of relative risk aversion. As the Backus-Smith puzzle suggests, the “BackusSmith residual” is significant at business cycle frequencies and volatile. As with the labor
wedge, to construct the model-generated analog of the Backus-Smith residual at business cycle
frequencies I substitute out changes in time spent on home production and changes in time
spent on leisure with an estimated function of changes in market work time. Then I show that
there is a significant relationship between the residual from the Backus-Smith condition in the

3

data and its analog in the model with home production for a number of country pairs.
Finally, using time use data for various countries and years from the MTUS, I explore the
relationship between changes in the Backus-Smith residual and cross country differences in
changes in time use. The evidence shows again a strong relationship between increasing real
exchange rates adjusted for relative market consumption scaled by the coefficient of relative
risk aversion and increasing time spent on home production in the cross section of countries.
Similarly to the case of labor wedges, I find weaker evidence for a significant relationship
between real exchange rates, relative market consumption, and leisure changes.
Relation to the Literature. Collectively, the paper shows how a frictionless model with
home production generates both a low degree of international risk sharing and countercyclical
and volatile labor wedges. These results may appear surprising because typically the low degree
of international risk sharing has been related to international asset market frictions. Similarly,
previous research has hypothesized that the labor wedge is related to labor market frictions.
The interpretation of the labor wedge as a time-varying distortion may arise from taxes,
markup shocks, shocks in union bargaining power and various other labor market frictions.2
The alternative hypothesis here is that the labor wedge simply reflects unaccounted for substitution of time between the market and the home sector. Omitting home production affects the
measured rate at which households are willing to substitute leisure for market consumption,
implying that the measured labor wedge increases whenever the percent increase in home production time exceeds the percent increase in leisure.3 This condition has been shown to hold
by Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011) during the U.S. Great Recession, which implies
that the labor wedge is countercyclical to GDP. Importantly, as long as home production time
is more elastic than leisure time, the countercyclical behavior of the labor wedge in the home
production model does not rest on the underlying source of fluctuations.
Hall (2009) is the closest predecessor of this idea. Hall develops an approach to explaining
cyclical movements of the labor wedge which, similarly to this paper, does not assume private
inefficiencies in the allocation of time. The difference is that here home production provides
an alternative time use to market work, whereas in Hall’s model unemployed are spending
time at home waiting for job opportunities to come along and are not increasing their home
production materially. The evidence I present favors non-separabilities in the utility function
due to home production as opposed to leisure in explaining movements in the labor wedge and
2

Shimer (2009) offers a comprehensive summary of the literature and extends it by discussing how search
costs and wage rigidities may affect the behavior of the labor wedge. For other explanations of the labor wedge
see Rotemberg and Woodford (1999); Cole and Ohanian (2002, 2004); Chang and Kim (2007); Galı́, Gertler,
and López-Salido (2007); Cheremukhin and Restrepo-Echavarria (2009).
3
A theory of the labor wedge focused on explaining household’s MRS is justified relative to a theory focused
on explaining firm’s MPL because the measured MRS is more volatile than the measured MPL.

4

the real exchange rate.
With respect to the interaction of labor wedges and international risk sharing, I focus
on how home production induces labor wedges that rationalize the relationship between real
exchange rates and relative market consumption. However, my results also hold in the reverse
direction when domestic and international asset markets are complete. That is, alternative
sources of the labor wedge cannot explain the Backus-Smith puzzle, no matter how well they
perform in explaining the labor wedge. With complete asset markets, the real exchange rate
is proportional to the ratio of marginal utilities of market consumption, irrespective of other
features of the economy such as sticky prices, sticky wages, search costs, heterogeneity, and
money. This implies that any joint explanation of labor wedges, real exchange rates, and
relative market consumption within the complete markets model must necessarily operate
through non-separabilities in the utility function.
Stockman and Dellas (1989) and Stockman and Tesar (1995) have introduced non-traded
market goods into the international business cycle model. Home production, a non-traded nonmarket good, differs crucially from non-traded market goods. First, as Backus and Smith (1993)
have shown, with complete asset markets the correlation between the real exchange rate and
relative market consumption (a basked of traded market consumption and non-traded market
consumption) is positive and high in models with non-traded market goods. By contrast, the
correlation between the real exchange rate and relative market consumption here in the model
with home production is negative. This difference arises because the distinctive feature of
home production is not that it cannot be traded internationally but that it is not traded in the
market and hence that its (implicit) price does not enter into the consumer price index. Second,
Stockman and Tesar (1995) find that the wedge between the marginal rate of substitution of
traded with non-traded goods and their relative price is negligible. In contrast, the labor
wedge is volatile and countercyclical. Finally, the mechanism induced by home production
differs from the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson (HBS) effect in models with a non-traded market
goods sector, as in Benigno and Thoenissen (2008). In the HBS effect, higher productivity in
the traded goods sector appreciates the real exchange rate as the relative price of non-traded
goods increases, while here the real exchange rate is determined exclusively as a function of
the terms of trade.
Other related papers include, first, Boileau (1996) who shows how a model with a single
traded good, international externalities in production, and a home sector leads to positive
comovements in output and employment. Canova and Ubide (1998) show how home production
lowers the correlation of consumption in a model with two traded goods. The impulse responses
in Canova and Ubide (1998) show that terms of trade appreciate after a positive productivity

5

shock in the home sector and depreciate after a positive productivity shock in the market
sector. In both cases, the correlation between terms of trade and domestic over foreign market
consumption is positive. In the present model, terms of trade depreciate in the first case and
depreciate weakly in the second case. Overall, terms of trade are negatively correlated with
relative market consumption which allows me to explain the Backus-Smith puzzle.
Raffo (2010) shows how investment-specific shocks explain the Backus-Smith puzzle in a
model with complete asset markets, non-separable preferences between market consumption
and market work (GHH preferences), and variable capacity utilization. Apart from the different source of fluctuations, the main difference relative to Raffo’s work is my emphasis on
disciplining the source of the non-separability in preferences using the labor wedge and on
corroborating the macro calibration with evidence from time use surveys at business cycle frequencies and in the cross section of countries. While Raffo is the first to use GHH preferences
in the two-goods class of models, non-separable preferences between consumption and labor
are also prominent in one-good models as they help increase the volatility of consumption and
the countercyclicality of the trade balance. The result in this paper that it is important to
distinguish between leisure and home production in testing for non-separabilities is, therefore,
informative for a broad class of models.

2

The Model

There are two ex-ante symmetric countries, the domestic and the foreign country i = H, F .
The market and the home sector are denoted by j = m, n. Time is discrete and the horizon
is infinite, t = 0, 1, 2, .... In each period, the economy experiences one of finitely many states
st . Denote by st = (st , ..., s0 ) the history of events up through period t. Let π (st |sr ) be the
conditional probability measure. As a shortcut, I will often use the notation Xt to denote any
variable X (st |st−1 ).
Market Production. Each country specializes in the production of an intermediate traded
m
m
good, Yii,t . Household i = H, F provides labor services, Ni,t
, and capital services, Ki,t−1
, to

a competitive domestic intermediate goods producer and receives nominal factor returns Wi,t
and ri,t . Intermediate traded goods are produced with a Cobb-Douglas technology:
m
m
m 1−αm
Yii,t = exp(zi,t
)(Ki,t−1
)αm (Ni,t
)
,

(1)

m
where zi,t
is productivity in the market sector and αm is the income share of capital in market

production.
Final goods producers are competitive. The law of one price holds for intermediate traded
goods, so final good producers purchase domestic and foreign intermediate traded goods at
6

same prices P1,t and P2,t respectively. Let the foreign intermediate good be the numéraire
good and fix P2 (st |st−1 ) = 1 in every state. In the domestic country, the (non-traded) final
good is produced with a CES technology:
ρC
ρC
C
YH,t = a1−ρ
CHH,t
+ (1 − aC )1−ρC CHF,t
C

 ρ1

C

,

(2)

where CHH,t denotes purchases of domestic traded goods and CHF,t denotes purchases of foreign
traded goods by the domestic final good producer. The parameter ǫC = 1/(1 − ρC ) > 0 is
the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign traded goods. The parameter aC
is the steady state share of the domestic traded good in income. Following the literature,
preferences are home biased, i.e. aC > 1/2. Symmetrically, in the foreign country the final
good is produced with a CES technology:
C
YF,t = a1−ρ
CFρCF,t + (1 − aC )1−ρC CFρCH,t
C

 ρ1

C

,

(3)

where CF F,t denotes purchases of foreign traded goods and CF H,t denotes purchases of domestic
traded goods by the foreign final good producer.
In each country, the final good is sold to domestic households at price Pi,t and is used for
m
market consumption (Ci,t
) or investment (Ii,t ):
m
Yi,t = Ci,t
+ Ii,t .

(4)

The market clearing condition in the intermediate goods sector i = H, F is:4
Yii,t = CHi,t + CF i,t .

(5)

Prices. The price of the domestic final good, PH,t is a weighted average of the price of the
two traded goods (and symmetrically for the price of the foreign final good PF,t ):
1−ǫC
1−ǫC
PH,t = aC P1,t
+ (1 − aC )P2,t

 ǫ1

C

.

(6)

Define the real exchange rate as the relative price of foreign market consumption, RERt =
PF,t /PH,t . Define the (home) terms of trade as the relative price of foreign exports, Tt =
P2,t /P1,t . Because preferences are home biased (aC > 1/2), a deterioration of the terms of
trade (an increase in Tt ) causes a real depreciation (an increase in RERt ). Therefore, this is a
terms of trade model of real exchange rate determination.
The strength of this approach is that the relationship between relative market consumption
and real exchange rates (the Backus-Smith puzzle) reflects fluctuations in the relative price
4

A previous version of the paper also considered government spending without a meaningful difference in
the results. Below, I explain how to account for taxes when measuring the labor wedge.

7

of traded goods. The perfect correlation of the terms of trade with the real exchange rate
in the model need not hold in the data because price indices also include non-traded market
goods prices. However, there are good reasons to abstract from non-traded market goods.
Somewhat similar to the finding of Engel (1999), in my sample the mean correlation between
relative market consumption and the real exchange rate is −0.16, while with the terms of trade
it is −0.12. This implies that the negative correlation between relative market consumption
and real exchange rates in the data reflects the negative correlation between relative market
consumption and the terms of trade, rather than movements in non-traded goods prices. The
weakness of this approach is that it implies that the terms of trade is more volatile than the
real exchange rate. More in general, a notable limitation of the model is that it does not
explain the volatility of the real exchange rate. See Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002) and
Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2008) for work that addresses the volatility of the real exchange
rate.
Home Production. Home production is introduced as in Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright
n
) is produced according to a Cobb(1991).5 In the home sector, the household good (Ci,t
n
Douglas technology that combines time in household activities (Ni,t
) with household capital
n
goods (Ki,t−1
):
n
n
n
Ci,t
= exp(zi,t
) Ki,t−1

 αn

n
Ni,t

1−αn

,

(7)

n
where zi,t
is productivity in the home sector and αn is the share of capital in home production.

Capital Accumulation. Equation (4) shows that capital goods are produced exclusively in
the market sector. Households allocate their capital across the market and the home sector
without cost:
j
j
j
Ii,t
= Ki,t
− (1 − δ)Ki,t−1
,

(8)

for sector j = m, n and country i = H, F . In equation (8), the parameter δ is the (common
across sectors) rate of capital depreciation. Total investment in every country equals the sum
m
n
of investments in the two sectors: Ii,t = Ii,t
+ Ii,t
.

Households. Household i = H, F chooses sequences of market consumption, leisure, market
work, non-market work, market capital, non-market capital, and a complete set of securities
to maximize the conditional expectation of discounted sum of utilities:
∞ X
X
 1
t−r
t r
max
β
π
s
|s
U (Ci (st |sr ), Li (st |sr ))1−σ , (9)
m ,L ,N m ,N n ,K m ,K n ,{B (s
t )}}∞
{Ci,t
|s
1
−
σ
t+1
i,t
i
t=r
i,t
i,t
i,t
i,t
t=r t r
s |s

where 0 < β < 1 is the discount factor and σ > 0 is the risk aversion parameter. In equation (9),

U denotes a Cobb-Douglas period utility function which is defined over bundles of aggregate
5

Other contributions include Greenwood and Hercowitz (1991), McGrattan, Rogerson, and Wright (1997)
and Chang and Schorfheide (2003).

8

consumption (Ci,t ) and leisure (Li,t ):
1−aL aL
U (Ci,t , Li,t ) = Ci,t
Li,t ,

(10)

where the parameter aL affects the share of time allocated to leisure. Aggregate consumption
(C) is a CES basket of market goods (C m ) and home goods (C n ):

1
m ρh
n ρh ρh
,
Ci,t = (1 − ah )(Ci,t
) + ah (Ci,t
)

(11)

where ah ∈ [0, 1] parameterizes the preference for the household good and ǫH = 1/(1 − ρh )
is the elasticity of substitution between market and home consumption goods. Leisure (L),
market work (N m ), and home work (N n ) exhaust the total endowment of time:
m
n
Li,t + Ni,t
+ Ni,t
= 1.

(12)

Asset markets are complete. Let Bi (st+1 |st ) denote holdings of a security purchased in state
st that pays off one unit of the numéraire good contingent on the realization of some future
state st+1 . Domestic holdings and foreign holdings of these securities are in zero net supply.
Let Q (st+1 |st ) be the price of this security. Since all firms earn zero profits, the household’s
flow budget constraint is:
m
Pi,t Ci,t
+ Pi,t Ii,t +

X
st+1



m
m
Q st+1 |st Bi st+1 |st = Wi,t Ni,t
+ ri,t Ki,t−1
+ Bi (st |st−1 ).

(13)

m
m
n
n
Exogenous Shocks. The vector of exogenous productivities, Zt = {zH,t
, zF,t
, zH,t
, zF,t
}, fol-

lows a VAR process:
Zt = RZt−1 + ǫt ,

(14)

where ǫt ∼ N(0, Σ) is a multivariate normal i.i.d shock and R is the matrix of spillovers.
Competitive Equilibrium and Solution of the Model. The state of the economy at
m
n
m
n
any point of time is summarized by the vector st−1 = (Zt−1 , KH,t−1
, KH,t−1
, KF,t−1
, KF,t−1
).

For a given state vector, the competitive equilibrium of the model is a set of decision rules
(i.e. quantities and prices) such that: (i) in every country households maximize utility subject
to the production function in the home sector (7), the capital accumulation equation (8),
the time constraint (12), the budget constraint (13), and appropriate intertemporal solvency
constraints; (ii) in every country intermediate and final goods producers maximize their profits
subject to the feasible technology; (iii) all intermediate goods, final goods, labor, capital, and
asset markets clear. I take a first-order log-linear approximation of equilibrium conditions
around the non-stochastic, symmetric steady state of the model and solve numerically the
linearized system of stochastic difference equations.
9

3

The Labor Wedge

I first define the labor wedge and relate it to home production and leisure using the model
developed in the previous section. Next, I test the relationship between home production,
leisure, and labor wedges, at business cycle frequencies and in the cross section of countries.
Definition 1. Measured Labor Wedge: The (domestic) measured labor wedge τ e is the log
of the ratio of the value of the marginal product of labor to the value of the marginal rate of
substitution of leisure for market consumption in a model without home production (ah = 0):
e
exp(τH,t
)

m
(1 − αm )YHH,t /NH,t
VMPLH,t
P1,t MPLH,t
P1,t
:=
=
=
,
m
m
VMRSH,t (ah = 0)
PH,t MRSH,t
PH,t [aL CH,t
]/[(1 − aL )(1 − NH,t
)]

where the ratio of prices equals: P1,t /PH,t = 1/ aC + (1 − aC )Tt 1−ǫC

 1−ǫ1

C

(15)

.

In the denominator of equation (15) leisure equals time not spent working in the market
m
(LH,t = 1 − NH,t
), as the measured labor wedge omits the home sector (ah = 0). The terms of

trade enters equation (15) because in the open economy (aC < 1) the price, PH , of the market
m
consumption good (CH
) may differ from the price, P1 , of the domestic traded good (YHH ).

Since for most countries in the sample the terms of trade is not very cyclical and the share of
imports is small, the ratio of prices does not contribute significantly to the cyclical behavior of
the measured labor wedge. Up to the terms of trade term which is quantitatively unimportant,
the expression for the labor wedge in equation (15) is identical to that in Chari, Kehoe, and
McGrattan (2007).
To construct the theoretical analog of the measured labor wedge, consider the labor market
in the model presented in Section 2. The labor market clears when, first, the value of the
marginal product of labor equals the wage:
VMPLH,t = P1,t MPLH,t = P1,t (1 − αm )

YHH,t
= WH,t .
m
NH,t

(16)

Second, the value of the marginal rate of substitution (MRS = UL /UC m ) must equal the wage:

m 1−ρh
aL (CH,t )ρh CH,t
VMRSH,t (ah 6= 0) = PH,t MRSLH ,CHm = PH,t
= WH,t . (17)
m
n
(1 − ah )(1 − aL )(1 − NH,t
− NH,t
)
Combining equation (16) with equation (17), I express the model-generated analog of the
measured labor wedge in terms of sectoral employments and sectoral consumptions. (This
condition is similar for both countries and the subscript i = H, F is omitted.)
Proposition 1. Model-Generated Labor Wedge: The model-generated labor wedge τ is:
"

  n  ǫHǫ −1 #

H
Ntn
ah
Ct
exp(τt ) = 1 +
1+
.
(18)
Lt
1 − ah
Ctm
10

In a model without home production (ah = 0) we take Ctm = Ct , Ntn = Ctn = 0 and
Lt = 1 − Ntm . In this case, the theoretical marginal rate of substitution converges to the
measured marginal rate of substitution, which implies that the model-generated labor wedge
is always equal to zero (τt = 0). Equation (18) shows how the omission of the home sector
(ah > 0) generates a positive wedge between the measured value of the marginal product
and the measured value of the marginal rate of substitution. As the size of the home sector
increases, the model implies a higher labor wedge.
The first term in the right-hand side of equation (18) captures the omission in the measurement of the marginal utility of leisure. This term arises because the measured labor wedge
attributes any non-market time to leisure time (1 − Ntm = Lt ), while in the home production
model non-market time may be spent alternatively in home production (1 − Ntm = Lt + Ntn ).
The second term in the right-hand side of equation (18) captures the omission in the measurement of the marginal utility of market consumption. This term arises because the measured
labor wedge does not account for the output of the home sector Ctn .
To be able to measure the model-generated labor wedge in the data and compare it to the
measured labor wedge, I express the right-hand side of equation (18) solely as a function of
the ratio of time spent on home production relative to leisure Rt = Ntn /Lt . The first step is to
substitute out from equation (18) the output of the home sector Ctn which is unobservable in
the data. Using the first-order condition with respect to time spent on home production, the
ratio of consumptions Ctn /Ctm can be written as a function of Rt :


Ctn
Ctm

 ǫHǫ −1
H

=



1 − ah
ah



aL R t
(1 − aL )(1 − αn ) − aL Rt



.

(19)

The second step is to substitute Ctn /Ctm from equation (19) into equation (18). After loglinearizing the resulting expression around some approximation point (denoted by asterisks),
the model-generated labor wedge can be written as:





∗
(1 + χ)R∗
(1
+
χ)R
n
b
c
b
Rt =
N t − Lt ,
τbt =
(1 + R∗ )(χ − R∗ )
(1 + R∗ )(χ − R∗ )

(20)

b =
where for the labor wedge define τbt = τt − τ ∗ and for any other variable X define X

log(Xt ) − log(X ∗ ). In equation (20), for all countries I calibrate χ = (1 − aL )(1 − αn )/aL = 1.32
and R∗ = 0.72 from the quantitative model of Section 4.

The key insight from equation (20) is that the labor wedge increases whenever the percent
change in home production time exceeds the percent change in leisure. Therefore, if in recessions households substitute sufficiently towards home production time, then the labor wedge is
countercyclical. The result that (the omission of) home production explains the countercyclical behavior of the labor wedge does not rest explicitly on the assumed source of fluctuations.
11

The home production theory of the labor wedge holds in a large class of models, irrespective
of whether these models are driven by productivity shocks, demand shocks, financial shocks or
government shocks, as long as time spent on home production increases more than time spent
on leisure during recessions.
The literature has long suffered from lack of formal tests that home production increases in
recessions. This is because consistent and long time time series on time use are not available for
any country, which makes impossible to use standard methods to separate cyclical components
from trends. To overcome this difficulty, Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011) use cross
state variation with respect to the severity of recessions to estimate the allocation of time over
the business cycle in the American Time Use Survey (ATUS). Controlling for aggregate trends
in time use, they find that time spent in home production is countercyclical. In addition,
these authors estimate that the elasticity of increases in time spent on home production with
respect to declines in market work time exceeds substantially the elasticity of increases in time
spent on leisure with respect to declines in market work time. Therefore, while both home
production time and leisure time increase in recessions, home production time increases by
more in percent terms. Below, I use these estimates to test the home production theory of the
labor wedge at business cycle frequencies.
I collect quarterly and annual data for 18 countries between 1960 and 2010. Depending on
data availability, most of the analysis below is confined to a subset of countries and years. The
main source of data is the OECD Quarterly and Annual National Accounts. Real exchange
rates are obtained from the Bank of International Settlements. I use population, employment, and hours of market work from Ohanian and Raffo (2012). Tax data are obtained from
McDaniel (2007).
Time use data are obtained from the Multinational Time Use Survey (MTUS), which
standardizes time use surveys across countries. The MTUS classifications are close to the
ATUS classifications, so I follow Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011) in defining various
time use categories. To enlarge the sample, for some countries I collect directly time use
data from their national surveys. My benchmark definition of home production excludes child
care and my benchmark definition of leisure excludes sleeping time. I discuss robustness with
respect to these choices below.
To measure the labor wedge, I adjust equation (15) to account for income and consumption
taxes.6 This adjustment produces negligible changes in the cyclical properties of the labor
wedge for the majority of countries. This implies that time-varying taxes cannot explain
cyclical properties of the labor wedge. However, this adjustment is necessary because the
6

Specifically, I divide equation (15) by (1 + qc )/(1 − ql ) where qc denotes effective tax rates on consumption
and ql denotes the sum of effective income tax rates and effective social security tax rates.

12

level of the labor wedge is substantially affected by the presence of taxes. Henceforth, the
model-generated labor wedge is compared to the tax-adjusted labor wedge in the data, i.e. the
residual of the labor wedge after accounting for income and consumption taxes.
Other than taxes, I use data on market consumption, total market hours of work, output,
and the terms of trade to measure the labor wedge. The parameters aL , αm and ǫC do not
affect the cyclical properties of the measured labor wedge (up to a first-order approximation).
The value of αm and aL , however, matters for the level of the labor wedge.7 For all countries
I set αm = 0.36 and aL = 0.41 in equation (15) and also fix αm = 0.36 and aL = 0.41 in the
model. The value aL = 0.41 allows the model to match the observed average share of time
spent on leisure.
Figure 1 presents the measured labor wedge for the U.S., Japan, U.K., Germany, France,
and Canada (with and without the terms of trade correction). Figure 2 presents the cyclical
component of the measured labor wedge together with the cyclical component of output. A
number of stylized facts emerge from these figures. First, the U.S. has the lowest labor wedge.
Second, in the U.S. and in Canada the labor wedge trends downward, whereas in France and
Germany the labor wedge trends upward over time. Third, in most countries the labor wedge
is countercyclical to output. Fourth, the labor wedge is volatile and positively autocorrelated
at business cycle frequencies.
I provide two tests of the home production theory of the labor wedge. Both tests aim to
measure in the data changes in the model-generated labor wedge in equation (20) and then
compare them to changes in the measured labor wedge constructed according to equation (15).
The first test is at business cycle frequencies and the second is in the cross section of countries.
ctn − Lbt ,
To measure equation (20) at business cycle frequencies, I substitute out the term N

for which long time series do not exist, with a function of the cyclical component of market
m
d
work hours N
t , which is easy to measure in the data. To perform this substitution, I use

the sensitivity of changes in home production time and changes in leisure time with respect to

changes in market work time as estimated in Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011). These
m 8
ctn − L
bt in equation (20) as −0.56 ∗ N
d
estimates imply that one can write the difference N
t .
Figure 3 compares the cyclical component of the measured labor wedge to the cyclical

component of the labor wedge implied by the home production model for various countries.
7

In equation (15), the parameter aC is estimated separately for every country. The value of ǫC does not
affect either the cyclical properties or the level of the labor wedge.
8
Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011) estimates are dN n /dN m = −0.30 and dL/dN m = −0.29. I
adjust these two estimates proportionally to absorb all changes in market work hours since the model does not
n /N
m =
d
d
include other time uses. The elasticity of home production with respect to market work hours is N
m
n ∗
m =
b N
d
−0.51 ∗ (N /N ) = −0.88 and the elasticity of leisure with respect to market work hours is L/
−0.49 ∗ (N m /L)∗ = −0.32. Including child care would slightly weaken my results since the home production
elasticity would increase to -0.75 and the leisure elasticity to -0.30.

13

The figure shows that the model-generated labor wedge tracks very closely the measured labor
wedge in the data for most countries. The mean correlation of the two series across 10 countries
is 0.66. The labor wedge induced by home production is somewhat less volatile than the labor
wedge in the data. Across 10 countries, the mean standard deviation of the model-generated
labor wedge is 65 percent that of the measured labor wedge. The mean R-squared from a
regression of the measured labor wedge on the model-generated labor wedge is 41 percent.
Collectively, these estimates support the hypothesis that increases in the labor wedge are
related to increases in home production time at business cycle frequencies.
Figure 4 presents the second test which is based on long-term relationships in the cross
section of countries. This exercise is informative because it uses directly time use data on home
production and leisure for various countries and years from the MTUS, instead of using only
U.S. estimates based on the 2003-2010 ATUS sample. I follow a difference-in-difference strategy
and examine how cross-country differences in changes in measured labor wedges correlate with
cross-country differences in changes in model-generated labor wedges. Each observation in
Figure 4 plots the difference between two countries in the change in their measured labor
e
e
wedge ∆τH,t
−∆τF,t
against the difference between the same two countries in the change in their

model-generated labor wedge ∆τH,t − ∆τF,t .9 The figure pools across all available observations,
so some pairs of countries appear more than once but for different years (corresponding to
their multiple time use surveys).10 The figure considers various definitions of labor and home
production. As the figure shows, there is a strong cross sectional relationship between the
measured and the model-generated labor wedge. The correlation between the two variables
ranges between 0.37 and 0.46 across the four panels and is statistically significant at any
conventional level.
The home production theory of the labor wedge looks similar to a theory of mis-specified
preferences between consumption and leisure. This is because the marginal rate of substitution
between consumption and leisure for utility functions not of Cobb-Douglas form differs from the
marginal rate of substitution in the Cobb-Douglas utility function used to measure the labor
wedge in the data. Similarly to what I will do in Section 4, one could then choose parameters
that affect the behavior of the marginal rate of substitution in order to fit cyclical and longrun moments of the measured labor wedge. Without using data on time use, the labor wedge,
while disciplining parameters that govern the non-separability in preferences, does not identify
9

Differencing over time controls for country-specific fixed effects, such as permanently different home production technologies or tastes for leisure. Differencing across countries controls for common shocks, such as a
world-wide improvement in home production technologies, global shifts in tastes, or oil shocks.
10
Because time use surveys have taken place in more than a year and to increase the sample size, I treat time
use surveys within two years as belonging to the same cross section. For example, the U.S.-Canada difference in
the measured labor wedge against the U.S.-Canada difference in the model-generated labor wedge is included
in the figure, for Canadian surveys 1986 and 1992 and U.S. surveys 1985 and 1993.

14

whether home production or leisure is the relevant source of non-separability. This equivalence
is also related to the well-known fact that models with home production nest models without
home production but with non-separable preferences between consumption and leisure.
Given this identification issue, how does home production differ from leisure in explaining
movements in the labor wedge? The implicit assumption of models with home production
is that time spent on home production is more substitutable to market work time than time
spent on leisure. Therefore, modeling home production explicitly matters for testing and
interpreting non-separabilities using time use data. For instance, at business cycle frequencies,
Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011) have shown that home production time is roughly
three times more elastic than leisure time. As I showed, this feature of home production makes
it successful in explaining cyclical movements of the labor wedge. By contrast, an explanation
of the labor wedge based on non-separable preferences between consumption and leisure would
require much larger cyclical movements of leisure time than found in the U.S. between 2003
and 2010.
I propose a test that differentiates between a theory of the labor wedge based on leisure and
a theory based on home production. First, to see the implications of leisure-based explanations
for the labor wedge, consider two popular classes of utility functions:
ǫL

ǫL −1  ǫ −1
ǫL −1
L
m ǫL
+ L ǫL
,
U1 = (C )

U2 = (C m )1−κ − (1 − L)

1+ ǫ1

F

,

(21)

(22)

where ǫL denotes the constant elasticity of substitution (CES) between consumption and leisure
in equation (21) and ǫF denotes the Frisch elasticity of labor supply in equation (22). The
utility function U2 nests the GHH utility function (when κ = 0) and the log-separable utility
function that satisfies conditions for balanced growth (when κ → 1). In all utility functions, I
have fixed to unity all parameters that are not essential for my argument. Under these utility
functions, the model-generated labor wedge becomes:




ǫL − 1 cm
ǫL − 1 b
Lt −
Ct ,
τc
1,t ∝
ǫL
ǫL
τc
2,t ∝



ǫF (1 − L∗ ) − L∗
ǫF (1 − L∗ )



m
Lbt − (1 − κ) Cc
t .

(23)

(24)

The test compares the model-generated labor wedge under the home production explanation in equation (20) to the model-generated labor wedge under leisure-based explanations
in equations (23) and (24). In the home production explanation, the labor wedge decreases
in leisure, conditional on home production time. In the leisure explanation, the labor wedge
15

must increase in leisure, conditional on market consumption. While I have considered two
specific utility functions for illustrative reasons, the condition that leisure is positively related
to the labor wedge is intuitive and should restrict any utility function. If leisure were not
positively related to the labor wedge, then any leisure-based explanation would fail to generate
countercyclical labor wedges. So here I assume ǫL > 1, i.e. that leisure and consumption are
substitutes as in Hall (2009).
The upper panels of Figure 5 show a positive, unconditional, relationship between home
production time (with and without child care) and the measured labor wedge in the data.
The lower panels show a negative, unconditional, relationship between leisure time (with and
without sleeping) and the measured labor wedge in the data. To test conditional relationships,
I estimate:
e
∆∆τi,t

=

(−0.386) ∆∆ log Li,t
[−0.662, −0.110]

+

m,
(−0.158) ∆∆ log Ci,t
[−0.357, 0.042]

e
∆∆τi,t

=

(−0.299) ∆∆ log Li,t
[−0.586, −0.011]

+

n,
(+0.242) ∆∆ log Ni,t
[0.002, 0.481]

where the double difference operator denotes differencing across time and across countries with
time use surveys belonging to the same cross section and the brackets denote 90 percent confidence intervals for estimated coefficients. These results strongly favor the home production
theory of the labor wedge, as opposed to explanations based on leisure. This is an important
finding because various models use non-separable preferences between consumption and leisure
to increase the volatility of macroeconomic aggregates at business cycle frequencies. In practice, differentiating between home production and leisure makes a difference for testing and
interpreting such non-separabilities.

4

Labor Wedges and International Real Business Cycles

Having established the relationship between the labor wedge and home production theoretically
and empirically, I now explore implications of non-separable preferences with home production
for international business cycles. The strategy is to estimate the parameters of the home sector
to match moments of the labor wedge and then test whether the two-country model generates
business cycles with properties consistent with international data.

4.1

Stylized Facts and Estimation

Table 1 presents summary statistics for the sample period between 1971(1) and 2007(4).11
The upper panel presents moments of the labor wedge which are used to estimate the struc11

The sample period is chosen to balance the trade-off between longer time series and larger number of
countries represented in statistics. 18 countries are included in at least one statistic: Australia, Austria,

16

tural model. The lower panels present various other closed economy and open economy moments which are not used to estimate the model. Variables are logged and HP filtered with a
smoothing parameter of 1600. The columns present the mean estimate of each statistic across
countries, the median estimate, the minimum and the maximum value, and the U.S. estimate.
As the table shows, the labor wedge is more volatile than output, which implies a high
elasticity of substitution between the market and the home sector. The labor wedge is positively and significantly autocorrelated. The mean contemporaneous correlation of the labor
wedge with output across countries is -0.25. The U.S. is a clear outlier here, having the most
countercyclical and the most autocorrelated labor wedge. The fact that the labor wedge is not
very countercyclical to output implies an important role for productivity shocks in the home
sector. This is because productivity shocks in the home sector induce workers to spend more
time on the home sector relative to other time use activities, leading to an increase in the labor
wedge. However, these type of shocks do not affect much measured GDP, as not only reduced
market work but also reduced leisure absorb increases in home production. Thus, productivity
shocks in the home sector, while generating volatile labor wedges, lower in absolute value the
correlation of the labor wedge with output.
The labor wedge is on average positively correlated with market productivity. This may
initially appear surprising because higher market productivity induces workers to increase
market time and decrease time spent on home production, leading to a decrease in the labor
wedge. In the context of the model, this conditional relationship can be overturned on average,
if productivity disturbances in the market and the home sector are positively correlated.
To summarize important features of international data, output and employment are more
correlated across countries than consumption and investment and all correlations are positive.12
The difficulty of the standard international business cycle model to match these regularities
constitutes the “quantity anomaly.” Note also that the labor wedge is positively correlated
across countries, but less so than output. Other well-documented features of the data are
that both current-price and constant-price (real) net exports are countercyclical.13 The import
ratio, CHF /CHH , is more volatile than the terms of trade, which implies that the elasticity of
substitution between traded goods ǫC must exceed one.
The negative relationship between real exchange rates and relative market consumption
Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway,
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States. At least 10 countries are included in every statistic.
12
To compute these correlations, for each country I first estimate the mean correlation across all its bilateral
correlations. Columns 1 and 2 show the mean and the median across countries of the mean correlation.
13
Current-price and constant-price net exports relative to GDP are defined as N Xt
=
(P1,t CF H,t − P2,t CHF,t ) / (P1,t YHH,t ) and N XQT Yt = (CF H,t − CHF,t ) / (YHH,t ) in the model. Consistent
with Raffo (2008), the terms of trade in the model is weakly procyclical and, therefore, the countercyclicality
of current-price net exports is mostly due to changes in quantities rather than due to changes in prices.

17

observed in the data is the “Backus-Smith puzzle.” My measure of market consumption
m
Ci,t
in the data is private final consumption for households and my measure of investment
m
n
Ii,t = Ii,t
+ Ii,t
is gross fixed capital formation. This is consistent with Backus and Smith

(1993), in that market consumption in the data should include both traded and non-traded
market goods, even though the model does not consider the latter. On the other hand, while
one could potentially differentiate between private consumption of non-durables and services
(which clearly belong to market consumption) and private consumption of durables (which
could be included either in market consumption or in non-market investment), quarterly data
on durables exist for few countries only.14
I estimate the structural parameters of the home sector:
n ),
θ = (ǫH , ah , ρzin ,zin , σǫni ,ǫni , σǫm
i ,ǫi

(25)

where ǫH is the elasticity of substitution between market and home goods, ah is the preference
parameter for household goods in the consumption aggregator (11), ρzin ,zin denotes the persistence of productivity in the home sector, σǫni ,ǫni denotes the variance of the productivity shock
n denotes the covariance of productivity innovations in the home
in the home sector, and σǫm
i ,ǫi

and the market sector.
The two countries i = H, F are symmetric in all parameters. I fix parameters other than
the ones estimated to values shown in Panel A of Table 3 (these are called “fixed parameters”).
To isolate the contribution of home production to explaining international business cycles, the
values of the fixed parameters are taken from Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994).
To estimate the model, I minimize the distance between simulated moments of the model
and their analogs in the data:
θS = arg min [MT − MT S (θ; ǫ)]′ W [MT − MT S (θ; ǫ)] ,
θ∈Θ

(26)

where W is a five-by-five positive definite weighting matrix, MT denotes empirical moments,
MT S denotes model-generated moments under some parameter θ and shocks ǫ, T = 148 denotes
the sample size, and S = 300 denotes the length of the simulation. In the objective function
(26), MT includes the volatility of the labor wedge, its contemporaneous correlation with output
and market productivity, its autocorrelation, and its mean sample value. The weighting matrix
W is arbitrarily set to the identity matrix since the model generates moments that always match
perfectly their empirical analogs.
14

Classifying durables as investment instead of consumption should not change the cross-country correlation
of consumption and investment much because estimates for these correlations with my imperfect consumption
and investment definitions are close to each other. On the other hand, excluding durables from consumption
will decrease the volatility of consumption, which makes more difficult for the model to match the volatility of
the labor wedge.

18

I follow a Monte Carlo simulated method of moments procedure to estimate the model.15
First, I estimate the distribution of empirical moments MT . For each country I draw 200
samples with replacement from its observed sample. Each sample has length 148 quarters.
The estimated empirical means differ slightly from the means presented in column 1 of Table
1 because, to avoid compositional changes, I now drop any country with missing observations
between 1971(1) and 2007(4).16 Second, I vary MT to estimate the model 200 times, with
each estimation minimizing equation (26) for empirical moments corresponding to a particular
draw from their estimated distribution. This Monte Carlo procedure yields estimates of the
joint distribution of estimated parameters θS and of estimated moments MT S (θS ). Finally,
to solve the minimization problem in equation (26), I fix the shock ǫ to make the objective
function continuous in the parameters. Given an initial guess for the parameter vector, I solve
and simulate the model. Then, I use simulated annealing to update the parameter vector until
convergence to the global minimum is achieved.

4.2

Model Results

Figure 6 shows the distribution of estimated parameters. Table 2 (Panel B) presents statistics
from the distribution of estimated parameters (means, standard deviations, and 5th and 95th
percentile values over 200 Monte Carlo estimations). Table 3 presents various moments. Column 1 of Table 3 presents the mean value of each moment in the data, column 2 presents the
mean value of each moment in the model (across 200 estimations), and column 3 presents 5th
and 95th percentile values of each moment. Column 4 of the table presents moments in the
model without home production, as in Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994). Finally, columns
5 to 8 present moments when I change the values of estimated parameters.
The contribution of home production to explaining international business cycle facts can
be seen by comparing column 2 to column 4 of Table 3 (panel C). When the parameters that
govern the behavior of the home sector are estimated to generate a labor wedge with moments
similar to those observed in the data (panel A), the model performs significantly better than the
workhorse international business cycle model. As in Benhabib, Rogerson, and Wright (1991),
the home production model also performs better than the workhorse real business cycle model
15

This simulated estimation is very similar to the GMM estimation. The difference is that in the former case
statistics of the model are computed from simulated data, while in the latter case statistics of the model are
computed theoretically. I use simulated estimation because computing theoretical statistics is much more costly.
Computed at the optimal parameter vector, simulated statistics are very close to their theoretical counterparts.
I also note that to generate unbiased Monte Carlo standard errors one would have to vary simultaneously both
the underlying moment vector and the seed of the shock. To reduce simulation time, I instead fix the seed.
Theoretically, the parameter covariance matrix is biased by a factor of 1 + 1/S which for S = 300 implies a
less than 0.2% bias in standard errors.
16
The 10 countries with complete data used to estimate the model are Australia, Austria, Canada, Finland,
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, and United States.

19

with respect to various closed economy statistics. This is shown in Panel B of Table 3.
Focusing on panel C of Table 3 which shows open economy moments not targeted during
the estimation, there are a number of interesting differences between the model with home production and the model without home production. First, as in the data, output correlates more
than market consumption across countries in the model with home production. By contrast,
in the model without home production, market consumption correlates significantly more than
output across countries. Market work is positively and highly correlated across countries in the
model with home production, whereas it is negatively correlated across countries in the model
without home production. Total investment is uncorrelated across countries in the model with
home production, but it is negatively correlated in the model without home production. In
addition, the model with home production generates a realistic comovement of the labor wedge
across countries.
To understand these differences, Figure 7 plots responses of each country’s market consumption, market work, leisure, and non-market work when market productivity in the home
m
country zH
increases by one percent. In the model without home production, risk sharing

ensures that consumption increases are highly correlated across countries. In the home country, labor increases reflecting the increase in the wage induced by higher market productivity.
Labor in the foreign country, however, decreases which induces a negative comovement of labor
inputs across countries. As it is well-known, when a positive market productivity shock hits the
home country, the foreign country experiences a positive wealth effect which tends to depress
the labor input (see e.g. Baxter and Crucini, 1995). In the model without home production,
this wealth effect on foreign labor dominates any substitution effects from wage, interest rate,
and relative price of traded goods movements. In turn, the negative correlation of labor inputs
lowers the correlation of output across countries. Output is positively but weakly correlated
across countries due to productivity spillovers and correlated market productivity innovations.
By contrast, substitution effects become more important in the model with home production under a high elasticity of substitution between market and home goods ǫH = 3.93. In
response to a positive market productivity shock in the home country, home market consumption and labor increase by more than in the model without home production as households
substitute time and expenditure from the non-market to the market sector. The fact that
market consumption becomes more responsive in the home country implies a lower correlation
of market consumption across countries. In addition, foreign labor also increases as the substitution from non-market to market time induced by higher wage, interest rate, and relative
prices now dominates the tendency of households to work less because of their increased wealth.
Therefore, labor and output become highly correlated across countries.

20

Further, as Figure 7 shows, in both countries time spent on home production decreases
more in percent terms than time spent on leisure. Since the cyclical component of the labor
wedge is proportional to the difference between the cyclical components of home production
and leisure, both countries experience a decrease in their labor wedge. Therefore, conditional
on market productivity shocks, labor wedges are positively correlated across countries.17
While investment is positively correlated across countries in the data, the model without
home production generates a negative investment correlation. Instead, the model with home
production implies nearly uncorrelated investment across countries. This difference can be
understood by recalling the difference in the response of market labor in the two models. In the
model without home production, foreign households work less in response to a positive market
productivity shock in the home country. The lower foreign labor decreases the foreign marginal
product of capital and diminishes the incentive to invest capital in the foreign country. By
contrast, in the model with home production, foreign labor increases in response to a positive
market productivity shock in the home country. Even though the increase in foreign labor
is not strong enough to induce a positive comovement of total investment, home production
improves the performance of the model along this dimension. As discussed below, increasing
the persistence of market productivity generates a positive comovement of investment across
countries in the model with home production, but not in the model without home production.
Second, in the model with home production, the correlation between real exchange rates
and relative market consumption is negative which explains the Backus and Smith (1993)
puzzle. This correlation is, however, close to one in the model without home production. To
understand this difference, consider the key efficiency condition under complete asset markets
that sets the ratio of the marginal utilities of market consumption proportional to the real
exchange rate:

m
n
UCFm (CF,t
, CF,t
, LF,t )
PF,t
∝ RERt :=
.
m
n
UCHm (CH,t , CH,t , LH,t )
PH,t

(27)

m
Consider a decrease in domestic market consumption CH,t
, for instance due to a negative

market productivity shock in the home country. In the model without home production, the
marginal utility of market consumption depends mostly on market consumption. Therefore, the
domestic marginal utility increases and the real exchange rate appreciates. As a result, relative
(domestic over foreign) market consumption is positively correlated with the real exchange
rate. While leisure breaks the perfect correlation between relative market consumption and
real exchange rates, the non-separability induced by leisure is not strong and the Backus-Smith
17

In the data, the correlation of the labor wedge across countries is positive but low. The model succeeds
n
in matching this fact because a productivity shock zH
in the home sector of the domestic country increases
significantly the domestic labor wedge but does not affect much the foreign labor wedge. Therefore, the
unconditional correlation of the labor wedge across countries is positive but relatively low.

21

correlation remains higher than 0.9.
In the model with home production, when domestic market consumption is low, households
n
direct an increasing fraction of their non-market time to home production (increase in CH,t
).

Because the two goods are substitutes, the marginal utility of market consumption does not
increase as much as in the model without home production. In other words, the endogenous
increase in home production acts as a taste shock which keeps the domestic marginal utility of
market consumption relatively low. In this case, equation (27) implies that the real exchange
rate need not appreciate much when domestic market consumption is relatively low.
The sign and magnitude of the correlation between the real exchange rate and relative
market consumption depends on a host of factors, such as the elasticity of substitution between
market and home consumption, the size of the home sector, the source of the shock, and its
correlation with other sectoral or country shocks. Under the parameters estimated to match
moments of the labor wedge, the mean correlation between relative market consumption and
the real exchange rate is -0.44. Below I examine the sensitivity of this result to alternative
parameterizations. In Section 5, I take the efficiency condition (27) to the data and show that
home production helps explain the relationship between relative market consumption and real
exchange rates, at business cycle frequencies and in the cross section of countries.
The model with home production generates countercyclical real net exports. In that respect,
the results here differ from the results in the one-good model with endogenous incomplete
markets of Kehoe and Perri (2002) and the results in the two-good model with financial autarky
of Heathcote and Perri (2002). Both papers show that restrictions in international lending and
borrowing help increase the cross country correlation of employment, investment, and output
relative to the cross country correlation of consumption. However, in the first case the trade
balance is procyclical and in the second case trade is always balanced. The model with home
production matches cross country correlations in quantities closer than the benchmark model
of Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994, 1995), while generating countercyclical trade balances
in the complete markets environment. This is because the improvement in cross country
correlations reflects stronger substitution effects induced by home production, rather than
frictions in international asset markets.
The calibrated value of the elasticity of substitution between traded goods ǫC = 1.5 implies
that the volatility of the import ratio relative to the volatility of the terms of trade matches
closely its mean value in the data. In that respect, my results differ from Corsetti, Dedola
and Leduc (2008), who explain the low degree of international risk sharing in economies with
incomplete asset markets and either very low or very high values of this elasticity.18
18

In Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc (2008), the low elasticity of substitution between traded goods implies a
downward sloping world demand for domestic traded goods with respect to the terms of trade. The incom-

22

To understand what features of the labor wedge help improve the open economy dimensions
of the model, columns 5 to 8 of Table 3 present moments for alternative values of estimated
parameters. In column 5 of Table 3, I set the variance of the shock in the home sector
m.
σǫni ,ǫni equal to the variance of the shock in the market sector σǫm
Under less volatile
i ,ǫi

home production shocks, the model-generated labor wedge is slightly less than two-thirds as
volatile as the labor wedge in the data. This change also generates a labor wedge that is more
negatively correlated with output and market productivity in the model. Thus, volatile shocks
in the home sector reflect, in part, the low in magnitude correlation between the labor wedge
and output and the positive unconditional correlation between the labor wedge and market
m , the model still generates a negative correlation between
productivity. Under σǫni ,ǫni = σǫm
i ,ǫi

real exchange rates and relative market consumption, a relatively low correlation of market
consumption across countries, and a high correlation of labor inputs across countries.
In column 6 of Table 3, I set the elasticity of substitution between market and home goods
ǫH to 2.5. This is lower than the mean estimated value of 3.93 in column 2. While Benhabib,
Rogerson, and Wright (1991) set this elasticity equal to 5 in their most preferred specification,
Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011) estimate that a value of roughly ǫH = 2.5 is consistent
with reallocations of market work hours to home production time and leisure time in the U.S.
between 2003 and 2010.19 Under ǫH = 2.5, the model-generated labor wedge is two-thirds as
volatile as the labor wedge in the data. This result is consistent with the business cycle results
of Section 3. This is because, when feeding estimates of Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis
(2011) into the model, the model-generated labor wedge was found to be 65 percent as volatile
as the labor wedge in the data. Further, under ǫH = 2.5, the model still generates a negative
correlation between real exchange rates and relative market consumption, a relatively low
correlation of market consumption across countries, and a high correlation of labor inputs
across countries.
In column 7 of Table 3, I decrease the correlation between market and home productivity
shocks from roughly 0.66 to 0. When shocks in the two sectors are uncorrelated, the labor wedge
becomes more volatile but, similar to lowering the volatility of home production shocks, the
labor wedge becomes more countercyclical and negatively correlated with market productivity.
n = 0, the model still generates a negative correlation between real exchange rates
Under σǫm
i ,ǫi

pleteness of the asset market in their model guarantees that the model behaves more like a financial autarky
model than like a complete markets model upon impact of productivity shocks. In a model with financial autarky and a downward sloping world demand, any shock that contracts world demand less than supply (i.e. a
“supply disturbance”) depreciates the terms of trade. Therefore, the Backus-Smith correlation turns negative.
In contrast, in the model here world demand is upward sloping and asset markets are complete.
19
McGrattan, Rogerson, and Wright (1997) estimate this elasticity to be slightly less than 2. Chang and
Schorfheide (2003) estimate an elasticity of roughly 2.3. Rupert, Rogerson, and Wright (1995) estimate an
elasticity of roughly 1.8.

23

and relative market consumption, a relatively low correlation of market consumption across
countries, and a high correlation of labor inputs across countries.
In column 8 of Table 3, I set the persistence of home productivity shocks ρzin ,zin to 0.995.
This change produces, again, more countercyclical labor wedges in the model. Under this
higher value, the model-generated labor wedge becomes more volatile than in the data. Now
the model with home production differs even more from the standard model in its open economy
predictions. The correlation between real exchange rates and relative market consumption is
close to negative one and market consumption is negatively correlated across countries. At
the same time, the model still generates a positive comovement of labor and output across
countries. However, labor wedges become negatively correlated across countries.
Table 4 presents two additional results of interest. The first result, presented in columns 3
and 4, is that the properties of the home production model are robust to reasonable variations
of the elasticity of substitution between traded goods (ǫC = 0.5 and ǫC = 2.5). With the
exception of the volatility of the terms of trade and the volatility of the import ratio, all other
domestic and open economy moments are not sensitive to such variations.
Columns 5 to 8 of Table 4 contrast the home production model to the workhorse model
of Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1994), as I vary the persistence and the spillover parameter
of market productivity z m . First, I set the market productivity spillover ρzim ,zjm = 0 both
in the model without home production (column 5) and in the model with home production
(column 6). In columns 7 and 8, I set the market productivity spillovers to zero and increase
the persistence of market productivity to ρzim ,zim = 0.995.
Two results worth highlighting. First, shutting down market productivity spillovers across
countries increases the cross country correlation of labor and investment both in the model
without home production and in the model with home production. The reason is that, in
the absence of productivity spillovers, the wealth effect which tends to induce a negative
comovement becomes weaker. However, the model without home production still generates a
higher correlation of market consumption than output across countries and a nearly perfect
correlation of real exchange rates with relative market consumption. By contrast, the model
with home production generates positive comovement in quantities with output and labor
being more correlated across countries relative to market consumption and investment, and a
negative correlation of real exchange rates with relative market consumption.
Second, increasing the persistence of market productivity shocks clearly deteriorates the
performance of the model without home production. As in the benchmark calibration of
column 4 of Table 3, output is less correlated than market consumption across countries, the
cross country correlation of labor and investment is negative, and the real exchange rate is

24

almost perfectly correlated with relative market consumption. In addition, real net exports
become procyclical. By contrast, the model with home production and persistent shocks to
market productivity comes very close to matching stylized facts, along all these dimensions.

5

Real Exchanges Rates and Time Use

This section presents evidence on the relationship between real exchange rates, relative market
consumption, and the allocation of time at business cycle frequencies and in the cross section
of countries. I start by log-linearizing the Backus-Smith condition in a model without leisure
and home production in the utility function:


m
m
d
d
[t = U
[
[
m
m
RER
−
U
=
σ
C
−
C
CF,t
CH,t
H,t
F,t .

(28)

Under separable preferences, real exchange depreciations are proportional to relative market
consumption changes. This condition has been tested extensively in open economy macroeconomics, with the typical finding being that real exchange rates do not correlate (or correlate
negatively) with relative market consumption. To quantify the Backus-Smith puzzle, I define
a residual from the efficiency condition that, under separable preferences, real exchange rates
should be proportional to relative market consumption.
Definition 2. Measured Backus-Smith Residual: The change in the measured Backusd et is defined as the deviation between changes in real exchange rates and
Smith residual BSR
changes in relative market consumption scaled by the coefficient of relative risk aversion:


e
m
m
d
d
d
[
BSRt := RERt − σ CH,t − CF,t .

(29)

In the model with home production, the Backus-Smith residual will in general not be equal
to zero. I now derive the theoretical analog of the measured Backus-Smith residual in the
model with home production. First, write the marginal utility of market consumption for the
home country as:
m =
UCH,t

1−σ
(1 − aL )(1 − ah )UH,t
m
CH,t

!

m
CH,t
CH,t

 ǫHǫ −1
H

.

(30)

Using the functional form for the consumption aggregator CH,t and the utility function UH,t , the
log-linearized version of the marginal utility of market consumption in equation (30) becomes:
m
d
d
d
[
m = −χ1 C
U
CH,t
H,t − χ2 LH,t − χ3 RH,t ,

χ1 = 1 + (1 − aL )(σ − 1),
χ2 = aL (σ − 1),
25

(31)



R∗
ǫH (1 − aL )(1 − σ)
,
χ3 = 1 −
ǫH − 1
χ − R∗
n
where RH,t = NH,t
/LH,t denotes the home production to leisure time ratio and asterisks denote
[t = U
[
[
approximation points. Using the model’s condition RER
C m − UC m , the following propo

F,t

H,t

sition yields an expression for the Backus-Smith residual in the model with home production.
Proposition 2. Model-Generated Backus-Smith Residual: The change in the modeld t is:
generated Backus-Smith residual BSR






m
m
d t = (χ1 − σ) C
d
d
d
d
d
d
BSR
−
C
+
χ
L
−
L
+
χ
R
−
R
2
H,t
F,t
3
H,t
F,t .
H,t
F,t

(32)

A limiting case of the model-generated Backus-Smith residual is when aL = 0, that is
when leisure does not enter into the utility function (or enters in a separable way from market
consumption), and when ah = R∗ = 0, that is when there is no home production in the model.
In that case, the change in the model-generated Backus-Smith residual is equal to zero, simply
because the Backus-Smith condition under separable preferences holds exactly in the model.
The goal is to compare the Backus-Smith residual as measured by the standard condition
(29) with the model-generated Backus-Smith residual when preferences are non-separable as
measured by equation (32). If non-separable preferences explain failures of the Backus-Smith
condition, then we should see a positive relationship between the model-generated BackusSmith residual and the residual as measured in the data.
Before taking equation (32) to the data, I deal with two issues. First, as with the labor
wedge, a challenge to testing implications of non-separabilities for real exchange rates is that
consistent and long time series on home production time and leisure time are not available for
any country. Once again, for business cycle analysis, I will therefore use the results of Aguiar,
m
m
d
d
d
Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011) and set R
and Lc
to construct
i,t = −0.56∗ N
i,t = −0.32∗ N
i,t

i,t

the model-generated Backus-Smith residual.

Second, movements in the real exchange rate in the model are solely because of terms

of trade movements and the model abstracts from any nominal factors. Therefore, in addition to the residual as measured by equation (29), I consider two adjustments. The first
adjustment is to test directly whether the model predicts terms of trade movements. Since
[ t = (2aC − 1) Tbt , I define the measured Backus-Smith residual as
in the model we have RER


e
m
m
d
b
d
d
BSRt := (2aC − 1) Tt − σ CH,t − CF,t . The second adjustment takes out the influence of

nominal exchange rates (which are very volatile) and defines the Backus-Smith residual in the


m
m
d et := RER
d
d
[ t − NER
[t −σ C
[
data as BSR
−
C
H,t
F,t , where NERt denotes the change in the bilat-

eral nominal exchange rate. These two adjustments are especially important at business cycle
frequencies, since the model abstracts from nominal exchange rate volatility and non-traded
market goods.
26

Table 5 compares the measured Backus-Smith residual to the model-generated BackusSmith residual at business cycle frequencies along three dimensions, their correlation, their
relative standard deviation, and the R-squared from a regression of the former on a constant
and the latter. All statistics are means across 45 bilateral exchange rates (10 countries). The
first panel of the table presents these statistics when no adjustment to the real exchange rate
series is made, the second panel presents these statistics when the terms of trade is used to
measure the residual in the data, and the third panel presents these statistics when subtracting
the nominal exchange rate from the real exchange rate. Figure 8 shows bilateral U.S. BackusSmith residuals in the data (reflecting terms of trade movements) and U.S. model-generated
Backus-Smith residuals.
Under the parameters estimated in Section 4, the model generates a Backus-Smith residual
which is highly positively correlated with the residual as measured in the data (correlations
between 0.30 and 0.47), is 34 to 59 percent as volatile as the residual in the data, and which
captures 14 to 24 percent of the variation in the residual in the data. As Table 5 shows,
increasing σ to 5 as proposed by Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002) significantly improves
the performance of the home production model in explaining the residual from the BackusSmith condition. Under σ = 5, the model generates a Backus-Smith residual which displays a
correlation between 0.54 and 0.64 with the residual in the data, which is 62 to 80 percent as
volatile as the residual in the data, and which captures 31 to 43 percent of the variation in the
residual in the data. To summarize, home production clearly generates a close comovement
between the residual in the data and the residual in the model, but generates less volatile
residuals than observed in the data.
Figure 9 presents the second test which is based on long-term relationships in the cross
section of countries. In parallel to the labor wedge tests, I examine the correlation between
changes in the measured bilateral Backus-Smith residual and changes in the model-generated
bilateral Backus-Smith residual. Each observation in Figure 4 plots the change in the measured residual ∆ log BSReHF,t for countries H and F against the change in the model-generated
residual ∆ log BSRHF,t . The model-generated residual assumes parameters as estimated in the
model of Section 4. In the two upper panels the measured Backus-Smith residual is constructed
using the real exchange rate and in the two lower panels the measured Backus-Smith residual is
constructed using the terms of trade. In the two left panels the definition of home production
excludes child care, whereas in the two right panels it includes child care. The correlation between the two variables ranges between 0.20 and 0.38 across the four panels and is statistically
significant at conventional levels.
Finally, as with the labor wedge, I differentiate between home production versus leisure

27

explanations of the residual from the Backus-Smith condition. To explain the Backus-Smith
residual, leisure-based non-separabilities must have leisure and consumption enter as substitutes in the utility function. This implies that for various class of preferences, including the
CES utility function in (21) with ǫL > 1 and the isoelastic/GHH preferences in (22), the
Backus-Smith residual is positively related to time spent on leisure conditional on market consumption. For the home production model, equation (32) shows that time spent on home
production enters positively conditional on market consumption. For leisure the result is theoretically ambiguous but, for parameter values used in the model, leisure enters with a negative
coefficient.
The upper panels of Figure 10 show the unconditional relationship between home production time (with and without child care) and the measured Backus-Smith residual in the
data. There is a positive relationship, as predicted by the home production explanation of the
Backus-Smith residual. The lower panels show the unconditional relationship between leisure
time (with and without sleeping) and the measured Backus-Smith residual in the data. There
is essentially a flat relationship. To test conditional relationships, I estimate:
∆ log BSRei,t

∆ log BSRei,t

=

=

(+0.291) ∆∆ log Li,t
[−0.229, 0.812]

(+0.542) ∆∆ log Li,t
[0.014, 1.070]

+

+

m,
(−2.599) ∆∆ log Ci,t
[−2.975, −2.222]

m
(−2.391) ∆∆ log Ci,t
[−2.780, −2.003]

+

n,
(+0.680) ∆∆ log Ni,t
[0.209, 1.151]

where the double difference operator denotes differencing across time and across countries
with time use surveys belonging to the same cross section and the brackets denote 90 percent confidence intervals for estimated coefficients. To summarize, the first regression rejects
leisure-based explanations of the Backus-Smith residual as leisure enters with an insignificant
coefficient. The second regression shows that home production time enters with a positive
coefficient as predicted by the model with home production. However, leisure also enters with
a positive coefficient whereas, for the parameters used in Section 4, this coefficient should have
been negative.

6

Conclusions

This paper explores the role of non-separable preferences with home production for international business cycles. Non-separabilities in preferences have the potential to account for several
discrepancies between the data and predictions of the workhorse international business cycle
model, as they introduce a wedge between market consumption and its marginal utility and
they induce stronger substitution patterns over time and across states. The contribution of the
paper is to propose two strategies that help discipline and interpret these non-separabilities.
28

The first main finding is that when the parameters of the home sector are estimated to
generate a labor wedge in the model that mimics its empirical analog in several moments,
the standard international business cycle model with complete asset markets comes closer to
matching key stylized facts of international data. Specifically, the model accounts for the
high correlation of output and employment across countries, the low but positive correlation
of market consumption across countries, the low but positive comovement of the labor wedge
across countries, and the negative relationship between relative market consumption and real
exchange rates observed in the data. The model with home production comes closer than the
workhorse international business cycle model to explaining the correlation of investment across
countries, and matches this correlation when shocks to market productivity are persistent.
Previous literature has related the low degree of international risk sharing and deviations
from the efficiency condition that the marginal product of labor be equal to the marginal rate
of substitution to imperfections in asset and labor markets. My results suggest that such imperfections are not necessary elements to explaining these features of the data. Unaccounted
for substitution of time between the market and the home sector goes a long way towards
explaining these features. In fact, within the complete asset markets model, any joint explanation of labor wedges, real exchange rates, and relative market consumption must necessarily
attribute an important role to non-separable preferences.
Using international time use data, the second main finding is that the non-separability
induced by home production helps explain a significant fraction of variations in the labor
wedge and the real exchange rate. The tests show a significant relationship between time
spent on home production, the labor wedge, and real exchange rates adjusted for relative
market consumption scaled by the coefficient of relative risk aversion, both at business cycle
frequencies and in the cross section of countries. Leisure time, as opposed to home production
time, does not help explain these patterns.
In theory, a model in which home production provides a substitute to market consumption
is equivalent to a model without home production but in which consumption and leisure are
substitutable. For some purposes, the shortcut of using a model with non-separable preferences
between consumption and leisure may be warranted. However, my results show that such
non-separabilities can be difficult to detect in the data and interpret unless one differentiates
between home production time and leisure time.

29

References
Aguiar, Mark, Erik Hurst, and Loukas Karabarbounis. 2011. “Time Use During
Recessions.” NBER Working Paper No. 17259.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland. 1994. “Dynamics of
the Trade Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-Curve?” American Economic Review,
84(1): 84–103.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland. 1995. “International Business Cycles: Theory and Evidence.” in Thomas F. Cooley (eds.), Frontiers of Business
Cycle Research, Chapter 11, 331–356.
Backus, David K., and Gregor Smith. 1993. “Consumption and Real Exchange Rates
in Dynamic Economies with Non-Traded Goods.” Journal of International Economics,
35(3–4): 297–316.
Baxter, Marianne, and Mario J. Crucini. 1995. “Business Cycles and the Structure of
Asset Trade.” International Economic Review, 36(4): 821–854.
Benhabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. 1991. “Homework in Macroeconomics: Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Journal of Political Economy, 99(6): 1166–1187.
Benigno, Gianluca, and Christoph Thoenissen. 2008. “Consumption and Real Exchange Rates with Incomplete Financial Markets and Non-Traded Goods.” Journal of
International Money and Finance, 27(6): 926–948.
Boileau, Martin. 1996. “Growth and the International Transmission of Business Cycles.”
International Economic Review, 37(4): 737–756.
Canova, Fabio, and Angel J. Ubide. 1998. “International Business Cycles, Financial
Markets and Household Production.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 22(4):
545–572.
Chang, Yongsung, and Sun-Bin Kim. 2007. “Heterogeneity and Aggregation: Implications for Labor Market Fluctuations.” American Economic Review, 97(5): 1939–1956.
Chang, Yongsung, and Frank Schorfheide. 2003. “Labor-Supply Shifts and Economic
Fluctuations.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(8): 1751–1768.
Chari, Varadarajan V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2002. “Can
Sticky Price Models Generate Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?” Review of
Economic Studies, 69(3): 533–563.
Chari, Varadarajan V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2007. “Business
Cycle Accounting.” Econometrica, 75(3): 781–836.
Cheremukhin, Anton, and Paulina Restrepo-Echavarria. 2009. “The Labor Wedge as
a Matching Friction.” Working Paper, UCLA.
Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. 2002. “The U.S. and U.K. Great Depressions
through the Lens of Neoclassical Growth Theory.” American Economics Review Papers
and Proceedings, 92(2): 28–92.
30

Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. 2004. “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of
the Great Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy,
112(4): 779–816.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc. 2008. “International Risk Sharing and the Transmission of Productivity Shocks.” Review of Economic Studies, 75(2):
443–473.
Devereux, Michael B., Allan W. Gregory, and Gregor W. Smith. 1992. “Realistic
Cross-Country Consumption Correlations in Two-Country, Equilibrium, Business Cycle
Model.” Journal of International Money and Finance, 11(1): 3–16.
Engel, Charles. 1999. “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes.” Journal of
Political Economy, 107(3): 507-538.
Fitzgerald, Doireann. “Trade Costs, Asset Market Frictions and Risk Sharing.” American
Economic Review, Forthcoming.
Galı́, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David López-Salido. 2007. “Markups, Gaps, and
the Welfare Costs of Business Fluctuations.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1):
44–59.
Ghironi, Fabio, and Marc J. Melitz. 2005. “International Trade Dynamics and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3):
865–915.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Zvi Hercowitz. 1991. “The Allocation of Capital and Time
over the Business Cycle.” Journal of Political Economy, 99(6): 1188–1214.
Hall, Robert E. 1997. “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time.” Journal
of Labor Economics, 15(1): 223–250.
Hall, Robert E. 2009. “Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and
the Marginal Product of Labor.” Journal of Political Economy, 117(2): 281–323.
Heathcote, Jonathan, and Fabrizio Perri. 2002. “Financial Autarky and International
Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(3): 601–627.
Heathcote, Jonathan, and Fabrizio Perri. 2008. “The International Diversification Puzzle is Not As Bad As You Think.” CEPR Discussion Paper 6982.
Kehoe, Patrick J., and Fabrizio Perri. 2002. “International Business Cycles with Endogenous Incomplete Markets.” Econometrica, 70(3): 907–928.
Kollmann, Robert. 1996. “Incomplete Asset Markets and the Cross-Country Consumption
Correlation Puzzle.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 20(5): 945–961.
Lewis, Karen K. 1996. “What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of International Risk Sharing?” Journal of Political Economy, 104(2): 267–297.
McDaniel, Cara. 2007. “Average tax rates on consumption, investment, labor and capital
in the OECD 1950-2003.” Working Paper, Arizona State University.

31

McGrattan, Ellen R., Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. 1997. “An Equilibrium
Model of the Business Cycle with Household Production and Fiscal Policy.” International
Economic Review, 38(2): 267–290.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International
Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?” in Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff
(eds). NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 15: 339–390.
Ohanian, Lee, and Andrea Raffo. 2012. “Aggregate Hours Worked in OECD Countries: New Measurement and Implications for Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 59(1): 40–56.
Raffo, Andrea. 2008. “Net Exports, Consumption Volatility and International Business
Cycle Models.” Journal of International Economics, 75(1): 14–29.
Raffo, Andrea. 2010. “Technology Shocks: Novel Implications for International Business
Cycles.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper Number 992.
Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1999. “The Cyclical Behavior of Prices and
Costs.” in John B. Taylor, and Michael Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Macroeconomics.
Rupert, Peter, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. 1995. “Estimating Substitution Elasticities in Household Production Models.” Economic Theory, 6(1): 179–193.
Shimer, Robert. 2009. “Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge.” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 267–297.
Stockman, Alan C., and Harris Dellas. 1989. “International Portfolio Nondiversification
and Exchange Rate Variability.” Journal of International Economics, 26: 271–289.
Stockman, Alan C., and Linda L. Tesar. 1995. “Tastes and Technology in a TwoCountry Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements.” American
Economic Review, 85(1): 168–185.

32

Figure 1: Measured Labor Wedges: Levels

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.4

U.S.
1.2
1
1960

1.2
1
1960

2000

1.2

1980

1
1960

2000

1.6

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.4

1.2
1
1960

1980

2000

Canada

1.6

France

33
Germany

1980

U.K.

1.6

Japan

1.6

1.2
1
1960

1980

2000

1980

2000

1980

2000

1.2
1
1960

Notes: The solid line is the measured labor wedge constructed according to equation (15), after adjusting for consumption and income taxes, using data
on consumption, output, total market work hours, and the terms of trade. The dashed line sets the first term of equation (15) equal to one (when the
terms of trade is one), and so this series for the measured labor wedge does not adjust for terms of trade fluctuations. The terms of trade equals one on
average during 2005, and therefore the two series roughly coincide in 2005.

Figure 2: Measured Labor Wedges: Cycles

0

−0.05

0.05

0

−0.05
1980

1990

2000

1990

2000

France

−0.05

0

−0.05
1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

0.05

Canada

34

0.05

0

0

−0.05
1980

0.05
Germany

Labor Wedge
Output

U.K.

0.05

Japan

U.S.

0.05

0

−0.05
1980

1990

2000

Notes: The dashed line is the cyclical component of the measured labor wedge constructed according to equation (15), after adjusting for consumption
and income taxes, using data on consumption, output, total market work hours, and the terms of trade. The solid line is the cyclical component of
output. Both series are HP filtered with smoothing parameter equal to 1600.

Figure 3: Labor Wedges: Data vs. Model (Business Cycles)

0.05

U.K.

0

−0.05

0

−0.05
1980

1990

2000

1990

2000

France

−0.05

0

−0.05
1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

0.05

Canada

35

0.05

0

0

−0.05
1980

0.05
Germany

Data
Model

0.05

Japan

U.S.

0.05

0

−0.05
1980

1990

2000

Notes: The dashed line is the cyclical component of the measured labor wedge constructed according to equation (15), after adjusting for consumption
and income taxes, using data on consumption, output, total market work hours, and the terms of trade. The solid line shows the cyclical component of
the model-generated labor wedge, constructed according to equation (20) and using estimates in Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2011). All series
are HP filtered with smoothing parameter equal to 1600.

0

(R2)
∆τ

H,t

−∆τ

F,t

0.5

0.3

−0.5
−0.2

−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
e
e
∆ τ − ∆ τ (Labor 1)
H,t
F,t

0.3

−∆τ

F,t

0.5
0

H,t

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6

−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
e
e
∆ τ − ∆ τ (Labor 1)
H,t
F,t

(R2)

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.2

∆τ

F,t

−∆τ

H,t

∆τ

36

(R1)

∆τ

H,t

−∆τ

F,t

(R1)

Figure 4: Labor Wedges: Data vs. Model (Cross Section)

−0.2

−0.1
0
0.1
e
e
∆ τH,t − ∆ τF,t (Labor 2)

0.2

−0.5
−0.2

−0.1
0
0.1
e
e
∆ τH,t − ∆ τF,t (Labor 2)

0.2

e − ∆τ e ) against the difference between
Notes: Each panel plots the difference between two countries in the change in their measured labor wedge (∆τH,t
F,t
the same two countries in the change in their model-generated labor wedge (∆τH,t − ∆τF,t ). The measured labor wedge is constructed according to
equation (15), after adjusting for consumption and income taxes, using data on consumption, output, market work hours, and the terms of trade. The
model-generated labor wedge is constructed according to equation (20). In the two upper panels the measured labor wedge is constructed using total
market hours of work (“Labor 1”) and in the two lower panels the measured labor wedge is constructed using only the total number of employed (“Labor
2”). In the two left panels the model-generated labor wedge is constructed using a definition of home production that excludes child care (“R1”), while
in the two right panels the model-generated labor wedge is constructed using a definition of home production that includes child care (“R2”).

F,t
H,t

0
−0.2
−0.2

−0.1
0
0.1
n,1
∆ log N − ∆ log Nn,1
H,t

0.2

0
−0.2
−0.2

F,t

0
−0.2
−0.05
0
1
∆ log L − ∆ log L1

F,t

−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
n,2
n,2
∆ log N − ∆ log N
H,t

0.2

H,t

0.2

F,t

H,t

F,t
H,t

37

∆ τe − ∆ τe (Labor 1)

∆ τe − ∆ τe (Labor 1)

0.2

∆ τe − ∆ τe (Labor 1)

H,t

F,t

∆ τe − ∆ τe (Labor 1)

Figure 5: Labor Wedges, Home Production, and Leisure

0.05

F,t

0.2
0
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
2
∆ log L − ∆ log L2
H,t

0.2

F,t

e − ∆τ e ) against the difference between
Notes: Each panel plots the difference between two countries in the change in their measured labor wedge (∆τH,t
F,t
the same two countries in the change in their time use. The measured labor wedge is constructed according to equation (15), after adjusting for
consumption and income taxes, using data on consumption, output, market work hours, and the terms of trade. In the two left panels the measured
labor wedge is constructed using total market hours of work (“Labor 1”) and in the two right panels the measured labor wedge is constructed using
only the total number of employed (“Labor 2”). In the upper left panel home production excludes child care (superscript 1), whereas in the upper right
panel home production includes child care (superscript 2). In the lower left panel leisure includes sleeping (superscript 1), whereas in the lower right
panel leisure excludes sleeping (superscript 2).

Figure 6: Distribution of Estimated Parameters

10
0.4
5

0.2
0
2

3

4
εH

5

6

0

0.75

0.8
ρzn,zn
i

38

2

4

1

2

0
1

0.7

1.5
1/2
100*σεn,εn
i

0
0.4

2

i

0.5

0.85

0.9

i

0.6
0.7
m n
corr(εi ,εi )

0.8

0.9

Notes: The panels show the distribution of estimated parameters. The distributions are based on kernel estimates of the probability density function
of 200 Monte Carlo parameter estimates as discussed in the text. ǫH is the elasticity of substitution between market and home goods; ρzin ,zin is the
1/2

persistence parameter for productivity in the home sector; 100 ∗ σǫn ,ǫn is the percent standard deviation of the productivity shock in the home sector;
i i
n
corr(ǫm
i , ǫi ) is the cross-sector correlation of innovations in productivity. The subscript i = H, F denotes the country and the superscript j = m, n
denotes the sector.

m
Figure 7: Impulse Responses to One Percent Increase in zH

Home Production: H country

Home Production: F Country

1

1

0

0

−1
0

5

10

15

20

−1
m 0
C
Nm
L

39

No Home Production: H country

Nn 1

0

0

5

10

15

20

10

15

20

No Home Production: F Country

1

−1
0

5

−1
0

5

10

15

20

m . The vertical axis measures percent changes
Notes: The figure plots impulse responses to a one percent increase in domestic market productivity zH
relative to steady state values. The upper panels show impulses in the home production model, under the parameters shown in Table 2. The lower
panels show impulses in the model without home production, i.e. when the preference parameter for home goods is ah = 0.

Figure 8: US vs. Foreign Backus-Smith Residual: Data vs. Model (Business Cycles)

0
−0.1

1990

2000

Canada

0.05
0
−0.05

1990

2000

0.1
0

1980

1990

2000

1980

Finland

0.1
0

1990

0.1

1980

1990

2000

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

0
−0.1

0.1

0
−0.1

−0.1

1980

0.1

2000

Italy

40

−0.1

−0.1

0
−0.1

1980

Australia

1980

France

0.1
Germany

0
−0.1

Austria

Data
Model

0.1
U.K.

Japan

0.1

0
−0.1

1980

1990

2000

Notes: The dashed line is the cyclical component of the measured Backus-Smith residual of the U.S. against foreign countries, constructed according
to equation (29), and adjusted to reflect terms of trade movements as explained in the text. The solid line shows the cyclical component of the modelgenerated Backus-Smith residual of the U.S. against foreign countries, constructed according to equation (32). All series are HP filtered with smoothing
parameter equal to 1600.

(R2)
HF,t

0.5

∆ log BSR

∆ log BSR

HF,t

(R1)

Figure 9: Backus-Smith Residual: Data vs. Model (Cross Section)

0
−0.5
−0.5
0
e
∆ log BSR
(RER)

1
0.5
0
−0.5

0.5

−0.5
0
e
∆ log BSR
(RER)

HF,t

0.5

∆ log BSR

HF,t

∆ log BSR

41

(R2)

HF,t

(R1)

HF,t

0
−0.5
−0.6 −0.4 −0.2
0
0.2
e
∆ log BSR
(TT)
HF,t

0.5

0.4

1
0.5
0
−0.5
−0.6 −0.4 −0.2
0
0.2
e
∆ log BSR
(TT)

0.4

HF,t

Notes: Each panel plots the change in the measured bilateral Backus-Smith residual (∆ log BSReHF,t ) against the change in the model-generated bilateral
Backus-Smith residual (∆ log BSRHF,t ). The measured Backus-Smith residual is constructed according to equation (29). The model-generated BackusSmith residual is constructed according to equation (32). In the two upper panels the measured Backus-Smith residual wedge is constructed using the
real exchange rate (“RER”), while in the two lower panels the measured Backus-Smith residual is constructed using the terms of trade (“TT”). In the
two left panels, the model-generated Backus-Smith residual is constructed using a definition of home production that excludes child care (“R1”), while
in the two right panels the model-generated Backus-Smith residual is constructed using a definition of home production that includes child care (“R2”).

(RER)

0
−0.5
−0.2

−0.1
0
0.1
n,1
∆ log N − ∆ log Nn,1

0
−0.5
−0.2

(RER)

0
−0.5
−0.05
0
1
∆ log L − ∆ log L1

F,t

−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
n,2
n,2
∆ log N − ∆ log N
H,t

0.5

H,t

0.5

F,t

HF,t

HF,t

∆ log BSRe

42

(RER)

H,t

0.2

∆ log BSRe

HF,t

0.5

0.05

∆ log BSRe

∆ log BSRe

HF,t

(RER)

Figure 10: Backus-Smith Residual, Home Production, and Leisure

F,t

0.5
0
−0.5
−0.1
0
0.1
2
∆ log L − ∆ log L2
H,t

0.2

F,t

Notes: Each panel plots the change in the measured bilateral Backus-Smith residual (∆ log BSReHF,t ) against the difference between the same two
countries in the change in their time use. The measured Backus-Smith residual is constructed according to equation (29). In the upper left panel home
production excludes child care (superscript 1), while in the upper right panel home production includes child care (superscript 2). In the lower left panel
leisure includes sleeping (superscript 1), while in the lower right panel leisure excludes sleeping (superscript 2).

Table 1: Stylized Facts, 1971(1)–2007(4)
Mean
(1)

Median
(2)

Minimum
(3)

Maximum
(4)

U.S.
(5)

τH∗

1.26
-0.22
0.17
0.69
1.36

1.24
-0.24
0.21
0.69
1.34

0.92
-0.68
-0.27
0.56
1.28

1.52
0.22
0.49
0.87
1.55

1.15
-0.68
-0.27
0.87
1.28

B. Closed Economy Moments
sd(cH )/sd(yH )
sd(iH )/sd(yH )
sd(empH )/sd(yH )
corr(cH , yH )
corr(iH , yH )
corr(empH , yH )

1.03
3.18
0.94
0.67
0.72
0.58

1.03
3.15
0.92
0.67
0.77
0.61

0.78
2.26
0.69
0.34
-0.05
0.18

1.27
4.28
1.70
0.91
0.95
0.87

0.83
2.84
0.93
0.86
0.95
0.87

C. Open Economy Moments
sd(ttH )/sd(yH )
sd(iqrtyH )/sd(ttH )
corr(ttH , yH )
corr(nxqtyH , yH )
corr(yH , yF )
corr(cH , cF )
corr(iH , iF )
corr(empH , empF )
corr(zH , zF )
corr(τH , τF )
corr(tt, cH /cF )
corr(rer, cH /cF )

2.29
1.72
-0.06
-0.27
0.30
0.18
0.23
0.24
0.15
0.12
-0.12
-0.16

1.73
1.54
-0.02
-0.30
0.33
0.22
0.25
0.28
0.16
0.15
-0.10
-0.12

0.99
0.85
-0.52
-0.76
0.10
0.03
0.00
0.03
-0.06
-0.10
-0.42
-0.62

4.57
3.68
0.40
0.21
0.44
0.29
0.37
0.36
0.33
0.22
0.07
0.06

1.71
1.48
-0.17
-0.45
0.37
0.24
0.25
0.32
0.33
0.14
-0.21
-0.19

A. Labor Wedge Moments
sd(τH )/sd(yH )
corr(τH , yH )
m
corr(τH , zH
)
corr(τH , τH,−1 )

43

Notes: y, c, i emp, iqrty, nxqty, z, τ , tt, and rer denote market output, market consumption, total investment, total market work hours, import ratio
in constant prices, net exports in constant prices divided by GDP, market productivity, labor wedge, terms of trade, and real exchange rate. An asterisk
denotes mean values in the sample. All variables (except for means) denote deviations from their trends. Trends are computed with the HP filter, using
a smoothing parameter of 1600. The variables nxqty, z, and τ are in levels, and all other variables are in logs. The statistics are computed for 18
countries. Countries missing data for some statistic are not dropped from the sample when computing other statistics. The subscript i = H, F denotes
the country.

Table 2: Parameter Values
Panel A: Fixed Parameters

Parameter

ǫC
aL
αn
σ
ρzim ,zim
1/2
100 ∗ σǫm
m
i ,ǫi
Panel B: Estimated Parameters

Parameter

ǫH
ah
44

ρzin ,zin
1/2
100 ∗ σǫni ,ǫni
n
corr(ǫm
i , ǫi )

Value
1.500
0.410
0.080
2.000
0.906

Parameter

aC
αm
β
δ

Value
0.850
0.360
0.990
0.025
0.088

0.852

ρzim ,zjm
m
corr(ǫm
i , ǫj )

Mean
3.931
0.658
0.795

Standard Error
0.670
0.006
0.034

[5th, 95th]
[2.947,5.141]
[0.647,0.667]
[0.742,0.851]

1.374
0.661

0.162
0.075

[1.163,1.648]
[0.524,0.780]

0.258

Notes: ǫC is the elasticity of substitution between traded goods; aC is the preference parameter in the traded goods aggregator; aL is the Cobb-Douglas
exponent on leisure; αm is the share of capital in the production of market output; αn is the share of capital in the production of home output; β
is the discount factor; σ is the relative risk aversion parameter in the utility function; δ is the depreciation parameter in the capital accumulation
equation; ρzim ,zim is the persistence parameter for productivity in the market sector; ρzim ,zjm is the spillover parameter for productivity in the home sector;
1/2

m
100 ∗ σǫm ,ǫm is the percent standard deviation of market productivity; corr(ǫm
i , ǫj ) is the cross-country correlation of innovations in market productivity;
i
i
ǫH is the elasticity of substitution between market and home goods; ah is the preference parameter is the consumption aggregator; ρzin ,zin is the persistence
1/2

n
parameter for productivity in the home sector; 100 ∗ σǫn ,ǫn is the percent standard deviation of the productivity shock in the home sector; corr(ǫm
i , ǫi )
i i
is the cross-sector correlation of innovations in productivity. All other parameters in matrices R and Σ in the VAR process (14) are equal to zero. The
subscript i = H, F denotes the country and the superscript j = m, n denotes the sector.

Table 3: Model Results
Data Mean
(1)

Model Mean
(2)

Model [5,95]
(3)

ah = 0 (BKK)
(4)

τH∗

1.26
-0.22
0.17
0.69
1.36

1.26
-0.22
0.17
0.69
1.36

[1.21,1.31]
[-0.26,-0.17]
[0.13,0.21]
[0.69,0.69]
[1.36,1.37]

0.00
—
—
—
0.00

0.80
-0.40
-0.14
0.74
1.35

0.82
-0.02
0.16
0.67
1.36

1.35
-0.70
-0.40
0.71
1.35

1.39
-0.43
0.19
0.80
1.35

B. Closed Economy
sd(cH )/sd(yH )
sd(iH )/sd(yH )
sd(empH )/sd(yH )
corr(cH , yH )
corr(iH , yH )
corr(empH , yH )

0.91
2.74
0.88
0.70
0.78
0.64

1.00
3.32
0.70
0.38
0.77
0.93

[0.95,1.07]
[3.24,3.39]
[0.66,0.74]
[0.35,0.41]
[0.75,0.79]
[0.92,0.94]

0.53
3.15
0.25
0.89
0.92
0.92

0.70
2.94
0.68
0.58
0.87
0.98

0.75
3.38
0.57
0.33
0.86
0.97

1.11
2.33
0.84
0.77
0.75
0.97

0.94
2.40
0.89
0.65
0.92
0.82

C. Open Economy
sd(ttH )/sd(yH )
sd(iqrtyH )/sd(ttH )
corr(ttH , yH )
corr(nxqtyH , yH )
corr(yH , yF )
corr(cH , cF )
corr(iH , iF )
corr(empH , empF )
corr(zH , zF )
corr(τH , τF )
corr(tt, cH /cF )
corr(rer, cH /cF )

2.21
1.56
-0.01
-0.26
0.41
0.24
0.31
0.27
0.21
0.12
-0.11
-0.08

0.32
1.50
0.32
-0.28
0.51
0.24
-0.04
0.59
0.30
0.14
-0.44
-0.44

[0.28,0.37]
[1.50,1.50]
[0.30,0.35]
[-0.32,-0.23]
[0.39,0.64]
[0.09,0.40]
[-0.13,0.05]
[0.38,0.80]
[0.30,0.30]
[0.02,0.29]
[-0.56,-0.31]
[-0.56,-0.31]

0.34
1.50
0.48
-0.48
0.16
0.87
-0.55
-0.57
0.30
—
0.91
0.91

0.27
1.50
0.37
-0.39
0.45
0.50
-0.09
0.56
0.30
0.36
-0.06
-0.06

0.35
1.50
0.43
-0.36
0.34
0.31
-0.23
0.36
0.30
0.11
-0.33
-0.33

0.21
1.50
0.21
-0.52
0.29
0.06
-0.08
0.23
0.30
0.03
-0.17
-0.17

0.67
1.50
0.09
-0.24
0.36
-0.28
-0.12
0.28
0.30
-0.22
-0.80
-0.80

A. Labor Wedge
sd(τH )/sd(yH )
corr(τH , yH )
m
corr(τH , zH
)
corr(τH , τH,−1 )

m
σǫni ,ǫni = σǫm
i ,ǫi
(5)

ǫH = 2.5
(6)

n = 0
σǫm
i ,ǫi
(7)

ρzin ,zin = 0.995
(8)

45

Notes: y, c, i emp, iqrty, nxqty, z, τ , tt, and rer denote market output, market consumption, total investment, total market work hours, import ratio
in constant prices, net exports in constant prices divided by GDP, market productivity, labor wedge, terms of trade, and real exchange rate. An asterisk
denotes mean values in the sample. All variables (except for means) denote deviations from their trends. Trends are computed with the HP filter, using
a smoothing parameter of 1600. The variables nxqty, z, and τ are in levels, and all other variables are in logs. The subscript i = H, F denotes the
country.

Table 4: Robustness of Model Results
Data Mean
(1)

Baseline
(2)

ǫC = 0.5
(3)

ǫC = 2.5
(4)

ρzim ,zjm = 0 (BKK)
(5)

ρzim ,zjm = 0
(6)

ρzim ,zim = 0.995 (BKK)
(7)

τH∗

1.26
-0.22
0.17
0.69
1.36

1.26
-0.22
0.17
0.69
1.36

1.34
-0.25
0.19
0.70
1.35

1.29
-0.21
0.18
0.69
1.35

—
—
—
—
0.00

1.27
-0.15
0.24
0.67
1.35

—
—
—
—
0.00

1.32
-0.32
0.11
0.71
1.35

B. Closed Economy
sd(cH )/sd(yH )
sd(iH )/sd(yH )
sd(empH )/sd(yH )
corr(cH , yH )
corr(iH , yH )
corr(empH , yH )

0.91
2.74
0.88
0.70
0.78
0.64

1.00
3.32
0.70
0.38
0.77
0.93

1.05
3.34
0.71
0.41
0.74
0.91

1.03
3.36
0.71
0.36
0.77
0.93

0.29
3.37
0.31
0.94
0.98
0.99

0.99
3.43
0.70
0.30
0.80
0.93

0.56
2.27
0.20
0.94
0.97
0.95

0.96
2.86
0.71
0.47
0.75
0.92

C. Open Economy
sd(ttH )/sd(yH )
sd(iqrtyH )/sd(ttH )
corr(ttH , yH )
corr(nxqtyH , yH )
corr(yH , yF )
corr(cH , cF )
corr(iH , iF )
corr(empH , empF )
corr(zH , zF )
corr(τH , τF )
corr(tt, cH /cF )
corr(rer, cH /cF )

2.21
1.56
-0.01
-0.26
0.41
0.24
0.31
0.27
0.21
0.12
-0.11
-0.08

0.32
1.50
0.32
-0.28
0.51
0.24
-0.04
0.59
0.30
0.14
-0.44
-0.44

0.49
0.50
0.29
-0.40
0.59
0.24
0.00
0.64
0.30
0.12
-0.45
-0.45

0.24
2.50
0.31
-0.21
0.48
0.21
-0.08
0.55
0.30
0.12
-0.44
-0.44

0.40
1.50
0.52
-0.35
0.23
0.52
-0.01
0.22
0.25
—
0.96
0.96

0.37
1.50
0.41
-0.27
0.42
0.08
0.08
0.52
0.25
0.03
-0.26
-0.26

0.66
1.50
0.63
0.44
0.16
0.76
-0.15
-0.36
0.25
—
0.99
0.99

0.45
1.50
0.44
-0.09
0.44
0.11
0.23
0.50
0.25
0.05
-0.15
-0.15

A. Labor Wedge
sd(τH )/sd(yH )
corr(τH , yH )
m
corr(τH , zH
)
corr(τH , τH,−1 )

ρzim ,zim = 0.995
(8)

46

Notes: y, c, i emp, iqrty, nxqty, z, τ , tt, and rer denote market output, market consumption, total investment, total market work hours, import ratio
in constant prices, net exports in constant prices divided by GDP, market productivity, labor wedge, terms of trade, and real exchange rate. An asterisk
denotes mean values in the sample. All variables (except for means) are deviations from their trends. Trends are computed with the HP filter, using a
smoothing parameter of 1600. The variables nxqty, z, and τ are in levels, and all other variables are in logs. The subscript i = H, F denotes the country.

Table 5: Backus-Smith Residuals: Data vs. Model (Business Cycles)
Panel A: Real Exchange Rates

Case

ǫH
ǫH
ǫH
ǫH
ǫH
ǫH

σ=1
= 2, σ = 2
= 2, σ = 5
= 3, σ = 2
= 3, σ = 5
= 4, σ = 2
= 4, σ = 5

ǫH
ǫH
ǫH
ǫH
ǫH
ǫH

σ=1
= 2, σ = 2
= 2, σ = 5
= 3, σ = 2
= 3, σ = 5
= 4, σ = 2
= 4, σ = 5

Panel B: Terms of Trade

Case

47
Panel C: Without Nominal Exchange Rates

Case

ǫH
ǫH
ǫH
ǫH
ǫH
ǫH

σ=1
= 2, σ = 2
= 2, σ = 5
= 3, σ = 2
= 3, σ = 5
= 4, σ = 2
= 4, σ = 5

Correlation
0.12
0.28
0.49
0.30
0.52
0.30
0.54

Relative Std. Dev.
0.17
0.40
0.77
0.36
0.66
0.34
0.62

R-squared
0.06
0.13
0.27
0.14
0.30
0.14
0.31

Correlation
0.23
0.44
0.59
0.46
0.63
0.47
0.65

Relative Std. Dev.
0.31
0.61
0.91
0.54
0.78
0.52
0.73

R-squared
0.08
0.22
0.36
0.23
0.41
0.24
0.43

Correlation
0.17
0.39
0.58
0.41
0.62
0.41
0.64

Relative Std. Dev.
0.35
0.69
0.99
0.61
0.85
0.59
0.80

R-squared
0.06
0.18
0.35
0.19
0.40
0.20
0.42

Notes: The table compares the measured Backus-Smith residual, constructed according to equation (29), to the model-generated Backus-Smith residual
constructed according to equation (32). The first column presents the correlation between the two series, the second column presents the standard
deviation of the model-generated residual relative to the standard deviation of the residual in the data, and column 3 presents the R-squared from a
regression of the residual in the data on the residual in the model. All values denote means across 45 bilateral exchange rates (10 countries). Panel A
presents statistics for the measured Backus-Smith residual, constructed to equation (29), which uses the real exchange rate. As discussed in the text,
panel B adjusts the real exchange rate to reflect only terms of trade movements and panel C removes the influence of nominal exchange rates from real
exchange rates. All series are HP filtered with smoothing parameter equal to 1600.

