                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     SOVEREIGN DEBT IN LATIN AMERICA, 1820–1913

                                         Gerardo della Paolera
                                           Alan M. Taylor

                                         Working Paper 18363
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18363


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




We thank the IDB for support and Leticia Arroyo Abad for excellent research assistance. All errors
are ours. Alan Taylor served as a Senior Advisor at Morgan Stanley in 2010–11, and has received
compensation for presenting research findings at private and public sector meetings. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18363.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Gerardo della Paolera and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Sovereign Debt in Latin America, 1820–1913
Gerardo della Paolera and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 18363
September 2012
JEL No. F34,H63,N16,N26,N46

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines sovereign lending to Latin America and the Caribbean from 1820 to 1913. We
examine four waves of capital flows where defaults were followed by a return to market access. In
spite of extended default, countries kept promising high returns that attracted international investors
again and again: financial autarky thus gave way to eras of high integration to global markets as measured
by sovereign risk pricing. We discuss imperfections of the sovereign debt institutional context in the
region and discuss a menu of options that some countries used to seek funds in the global financial
markets after defaults. The parallel with the modern Latin American and Caribbean sovereign bond
market experience is striking.


Gerardo della Paolera
Universidad de San Andrés
Vito Dumas 284
1644 Victoria
Buenos Aires
Argentina
and Central European University (CEU)
gdellapaolera@udesa.edu.ar
dellapaolerag@gmail.com

Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
Monroe Hall
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
alan.m.taylor@virginia.edu
1. The Latin American Bond Market in History

More than any other region, Latin America provides an expansive historical experience on the
contribution to economic development of foreign capital in general, and sovereign debt in
particular. Latin America is the only part of the formerly colonial periphery with two centuries of
post-independence historical experience. Once freed from Iberian rule, Latin American countries
rapidly embraced the use of global capital markets to finance their public debt (and, increasingly,
their private sectors too). Previously, they had made no use of such tools. It is not inevitable the
colonies should be denied external financing from any source but their colonizing powers—as in
the British empire debt (especially from semi-autonomous dominions) in the nineteenth century,
when it was held by a variety of creditors. Yet the combination of tight Iberian control and a
financially immature global market in the 1700s had foreclosed this option for Latin America.
       Independence opened the door to external finance starting in the 1820s. Over the next one
hundred years, foreign capital flows arrived in four great waves—punctuated by defaults, crises,
and periods of near autarky. With the outbreak of World War I, the global bond market met an
abrupt end, and it would not restart for Latin American countries until the 1990s. This chapter
reviews the historical record of Latin American sovereign debt from 1820 to 1913 and highlights
some important parallels between the course of events in the nineteenth century and today.


The First Wave
In the 1820s, the new independent governments of Latin America approached the burgeoning
international capital markets of London and Amsterdam. Funding was sought to establish
security and infrastructure, and on a smaller scale the private sector went in search of
development finance. British investment dominated the first wave.
       In 1822, government bond issues were floated by Colombia, Chile, Peru, and the
fictitious “Poyais” (see Box 1) with a face value of £3.65 million; in 1824, there were new issues
by Colombia and Peru, plus Buenos Aires, Brazil and Mexico to the tune of £10.4 million; and in
1825, Peru (yet again) plus Brazil, Mexico, Guadalajara, and Central America issued bonds for a
further £7.1 million. Sold at an average discount of almost 25 percent, these £21 million in
government bonds realized on net only £16 million for the borrowers. As investors soon


                                              2
discovered, these issues were at best risky, at worst (in the case of Poyais) a fraud. When fiscal
burdens escalated with the wars of independence and subsequent civil wars, a wave of defaults
ensued, with all bond issues in default by 1827.1
         New loans were not extended to the region until the defaults were resolved and political
and economic stability seemed more assured, a process that took years and, in some cases,
decades (Table 1). Of the various 1820s sovereign issues that quickly failed, only the Brazilian
default was quickly resolved in 1829, but most remained in default for decades, with
restructuring attempts frequently subject to failure as well. Here was a seemingly clear case
where reputation mattered: the bad debtors paid for their defaults by being excluded for a long
period from the financial markets.2


The Second Wave
Starting in the 1850s, there was a marked renewal of interest in Latin America in the London
capital markets. By 1880, these new investments had accumulated into a sizeable stock that
dwarfed the previous boom in the 1820s, and by then a total of £179 million was outstanding to
Britain, £123 million in government bonds (69 percent) and £56 million in private enterprise
debts (Table 2). The new surge was driven in part by a global trade boom from the 1850s until
the onset of the Great Depression of the 1870s. More exports and imports meant more revenues
(principally from customs duties) that governments could use to amortize loans. These new debts
constituted a major increase in public borrowing and a test of the governments’ creditworthiness
after decades of “financial hibernation.” A total of fifty major foreign loans were negotiated from
1850 to 1873, most in London, and a few in Paris and other European markets.3
         But the extension of credit to sovereigns was more selective in the second wave as
compared to the first—investors avoided the riskier locations and started to follow the signals
given by the few countries that had shown some dedication to debt service. With respect to
sovereign loans, Brazil had worked harder than other countries to honor debts and was duly
rewarded with the largest share of the new flows. Other countries took longer to re-establish their
creditworthiness. Argentina did not fully resolve internal disputes and old debts until the 1860s,
and only then did new loans appear. Paraguay borrowed in London in 1871. Uruguay and
1
  Rippy (1959, 17–24); Marichal (1989, 13–14); Stone (1977, 692).
2
  On default, punishments, and reputation, see Lindert and Morton (1989) and Tomz (2001).
3
  Marichal (1989).

                                                      3
Bolivia could do likewise in 1872 (the first Bolivian issue in 1864 had failed). Chile floated
issues in 1858, 1865, 1866, 1867, 1870 and 1873 totaling £8.5 million. Costa Rica, Guatemala,
and Honduras all issued non-refinancing debt (new net inflows) in the peak of the investment
boom from 1867 to 1872.4
        As might be expected, risk premiums paid by countries varied over a wide range. Good
risks like Brazil or Chile could float loans with 5 percent coupons at a price of 80 or 90, for a
yield of under 6 percent. Peru did about as well. Argentine coupons ran to 6 or 7 percent, and the
issues sold at around 90. Costa Rica floated 6s and 7s and sold them for about 70. But war-torn
Paraguay offered 8s, and Honduras 10s, and these bonds still could not be sold for more than 80.5
        But a global macroeconomic and financial crisis was stirring yet again, and a second
wave of defaults soon spread over the region in the 1870s. By the end of 1880 of the £123
million of British capital invested in Latin American government bonds, more than £71 million
(58 percent) were in default (see Table 2). Some of these loans had been a bad idea in the first
place, and some were again tainted by fraud. But even the genuine loans in the larger republics
ran into servicing problems as the global depression spread. Credit conditions suffered. A much
wider global debt crisis was under way of which Latin America was only a small part: by 1876
fifteen non-European nations had defaulted to the tune of £300 million. Global capital flows
again ground to a halt and irate bondholders chased down the insolvent republics long into the
1880s. Settlements were again drawn out and defaulting governments were shut out of new
borrowing during negotiations and often for many years beyond.


Third Wave, Crash, and Fourth Wave
An even bigger borrowing boom began in the 1880s as global economic activity, and especially
trade, recovered. Defaulting governments gradually straightened out their fiscal problems and
sought access to credit again. The overall flows were massive, and by the end of 1890 total
British investments in the region were £426 million, more than double the 1880 total. Of this,
£194 million sat in government bonds, now for the first time surpassed by a slightly higher
amount, £231 million, in securities issued by private enterprises.6
        The regional distribution of the new wave of investment favored those countries that
4
  Rippy (1959), Marichal (1989).
5
  Marichal (1989).
6
  Rippy (1959)

                                              4
prospered the most in the new trade boom. In the 1880s, capital inflows were concentrated in just
5 countries: 37 percent in Argentina, 17 percent in Mexico, 14 percent in Brazil, 7 percent in
Chile and 5 percent in Uruguay. Government loans were more skewed, with 60 percent of new
loans going to Argentina and Uruguay. Economic divergence was starting to be seen: Foreign
capital—which sought out the most profitable investment, the most dynamic economies, and the
most creditworthy countries—played a part in furthering the economic divergence in the region.7
           As financial development and monetization in Latin American economies grew in the late
nineteenth century, the consequences of government-induced macroeconomic crises became
deeper and more far-reaching. With any increase in the probability of default, sovereign spreads
widened and the capital market tightened. Domestic banks found themselves in distress, and a
credit crunch followed that squeezed local borrowers. Whereas government defaults in the 1820s
and 1870s could bypass pre-modern economic modes of production that relied more on retained
profits and less on financial intermediation, by the 1890s the region’s more modern economies
risked more resounding economic crises after a default. The major crises in the 1890s for two
large capital recipients, Argentina and Brazil, illustrated these new financial risks.
           The first crisis was in Argentina—arguably the world’s first example of a modern
“emerging market” crisis, combining debt crisis, bank collapses, maturity and currency
mismatches, and contagion. Argentina’s bold development strategy of the 1880s rested on a
highly leveraged parastatal banking sector, which borrowed in gold, and lent in pesos. When the
economy faltered and the fiscal gap widened, it was covered by money printing, which broke the
exchange rate peg and unleashed inflation. A generalized financial and banking crisis ensued.
Stabilization and debt restructuring took the better part of a decade. Foreign capital flows dried
up, and a global recession contributed to a delayed recovery.8
           The other major crisis then hit, in Brazil. Political and economic instability was high in
the 1890s following the proclamation of the Republic: the country was adjusting to the abolition
of slavery, the gold standard had been abandoned, and inconsistent monetary and fiscal policies
had the printing presses running at full speed. The currency steadily devalued by a factor of 3.5
from 1890 to 1898, adding to the domestic costs of debt service. Default was put off for a time,
but was unavoidable in 1898–1900, and again in 1902–09. By then, the real economy was by in

7
    Marichal (1989).
8
    della Paolera and Taylor (2001).

                                                 5
deep recession, having never really recovered from the financial instability of the early 1890s.9
           The global capital market quickly recovered from the crisis of the 1890s, although
countries badly affected, most notably Argentina, took longer to recover. However, compared to
the 1870s boom and bust, this one was not associated with widespread default in the region, but
rather a more general and global increase in country risk that slowed foreign capital flows for the
better part of a decade. Inflows to Argentina and Uruguay were sluggish in the 1890s, but in
other countries in the region the tap was still open as shown in Table 3.


Summary
Latin America’s experience was characterized by successive booms and busts, as four great
waves of foreign capital flowed into the region, separated by periods of near autarky. Each wave
generally ended with a crisis in one or more countries. Very often it was a twin or triple crisis
that damaged the value of the currency, the solvency of public debt, and (especially in later
times) the health of the financial sector. The inflows also became rather more geographically
concentrated over time. Markets tended to pick out “winners” among these emerging markets,
and fund them well, even after crises; other countries gained access once or twice, but spent most
of their time excluded from large-scale external capital flows.
           The process reached its peak from 1900 to 1914. Still, the reach of the global capital
market should not be overstated—the country risk perceived by foreign investors remained high
and only a handful of countries had reputation enough regularly to issue external debt. Even as
late as 1913, the point of deepest maturation of the global capital market before the 1980s and
1990s, the five countries of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Uruguay accounted for 90% of
outstanding Latin American issues in London. Countries like Peru and Venezuela made
occasional issues, often merely rollovers of earlier defaults. Others were out of the game entirely.
In the first era of globalization, just as today, capital flows were highly volatile. To better show
their stop-and-go nature Figure 1 presents annual data on capital flows to the region. If we
compare trends in capital flows with the country risk data in Figure 2, for then a more complete
picture of the global crises emerges. Booms were typically associated with a convergence in




9
    Cardoso and Dornbusch (1989); Fishlow (1989); Triner (2001).

                                                    6
bond spreads; defaults were associated with a sudden stop of capital flows and dramatically
increased country risk.



2. Theory and Evidence
We have already seen in the previous section that Latin America’s sovereign borrowers
experienced very heterogeneous global credit market conditions in the long nineteenth century.
Some countries borrowed little, some a lot. Some paid high rates of interest, some low. Some
defaulted many times, others did not. The formal study of sovereign debt, using theory and
empirics, seeks to explain such heterogeneity in outcomes.
       The heterogeneity clearly reflected, in part, sovereign behavior in respect of past debts. It
also reflected political and economic conditions in the borrowing country. Qualitative evidence
suggests that past behavior mattered for future access. After the first wave of borrowing in the
1820s, resumption of borrowing was slow and irregular. In each subsequent wave, countries had
further opportunities to improve their credit record, and those that did enjoyed access on better
terms. Conversely, some countries handled their early debts so badly that they were unable to
issue much debt at all later in the century. But one should also ask why did the ability to handle
debt service vary so widely? What were the deep fundamentals driving this outcome? Here we
might turn to the economic and political conditions in each country to try to understand what
affected a country’s ability and/or willingness to pay.
       A case study is provided by one of the more successful borrowers in the nineteenth
century, Brazil. As we saw in Table 1, in terms of recovery from the 1820s debt crisis, Brazil
was the most successful country in the region. A prompt restructuring clearing the way for
renewed lending after a few years, whereas other countries had to wait decades. But why was
Brazil so better able to resolve its debt crisis. One obvious proximate explanation is economic.
At least compared to some other countries in the region, Brazil enjoyed good export and growth
performance over the longer run. Not only did this make debt service less painful by lowering
the country’s perceived riskiness, it was a powerful “pull” effect drawing in more foreign capital
ceteris paribus.
       Yet, one might also look deeper for a political explanation. Rippy notes that “during the
sixty years following 1824 Englishmen preferred Brazil as a field of investment to any other


                                             7
Latin American country, largely for the reason that Brazil was politically more stable.”
According to this view, political fundamentals mattered. But how? Was it that Brazil faced less
violent conflict, which in other countries consumed vast fiscal resources and repressed output in
other countries? Or was it that Brazil had less political conflict between different groups or
regions, allowing policymakers to lengthen their horizons and/or act more cooperatively and less
opportunistically? Or are there other explanations?


The Mystery of Sovereign Debt and Default
To disentangle competing explanations we turn to a combination of theory and empirics. Theory
has often viewed the existence of sovereign debt as quite fragile, even mysterious. After all, if
repayment cannot be enforced, why would any sovereign debtor repay? One obvious answer
would be to secure reputational benefits in a repeated game where the punishment for default is
exclusion from future borrowing (Eaton and Gersovitz 1981). Such an argument clearly depends
on coordinated creditor action. One escape from that assumption is to instead assume that
punishments take another form, whereby default spills over into other economic activity and
cause others costs, for example, to trade (Cole and Kehoe 1996; Rose and Spiegel 2002).
       However, an extraordinary result shows that this explanation may not sufficient when
borrowing countries can save and build up buffer stocks of external assets. Suppose that creditors
cannot seize these assets, and suppose these assets can contain contingencies similar to those of
the debt contract. At some point (e.g., during a bad state of nature) a country’s debt will be high
enough that its future expected surpluses would be better saved and consumed rather than
dissipated on debt service (Bulow and Rogoff 1989). The intuition is clear, even if the robustness
of this result depends on deeper assumptions about the structure of financial markets (Kletzer
and B. Wright 2000; M. Wright 2002).
       A recent contribution (Amador 2004) extends this analysis and highlights another
mechanism that might be important as a sustaining mechanism for sovereign debt, one with
particular resonance in the case of nineteenth century Latin America. In the case of political
competition, turnover among parties ensures that current incumbents may be out of power for a
time, only to return in the future. In this case, they will be aware that the opposition might gain
power and—being short-sighted like everyone in this game—they would over-spend and
dissipate any buffer stock of assets. (Formally, this is analogous to a problem of hyperbolic

                                              8
discounting.) This threat of dissipation of any savings by the incumbent effectively blunts the
incentive to employ a default-plus-saving strategy à la Bulow-Rogoff, since the assets will be
spent inefficiently, and it can be shown that servicing the debt then becomes optimal. The
interesting wrinkle here is that this argument only works for what Amador calls “democracy”—
meaning there is some kind of turnover and current incumbents can come back after losing
power (which might not mean truly democratic at all, but only that there is some political
competition). In contrast, the argument breaks down under “autocracy”—meaning incumbents
exit when they lose power and there is no political resurrection of parties or groups that lose
power. The latter scenario could be an apt description of the violent world of mid-nineteenth
century Latin America.
       However, in the nineteenth century, an explanation of historical outcomes requires not
just an explanation for debt’s existence but also for why it worked so differently in one country
versus another. Why did some countries borrow more than others? Why did some default more
than others?


Variations in Investment Needs
Overall investment financed from abroad is not necessarily a good predictor of overall
government spending financed from abroad. That is, the economywide stock or flow of foreign
investment need not correlate with the subsets of flows and stocks involving the government
sector. However, in the nineteenth century there were powerful reasons to expect a correlation
between the two and this logic underpins a discussion of the links between the two. The basic
reason for the high correlation of the two measures was the strong complementarity between
private and public sector investments in this period.
       The case of transport and infrastructure is the obvious example. As we have noted,
foreign finance of railways was a dominant category of foreign capital flows in this period
(Twomey 2000). When the railroads were publicly operated, the lending was directed via
government borrowing. But even when the railroads were privately owned, the construction of
the railroads was often accompanied by significant public expenditure: related infrastructure,
guarantees and subsidies, and so on. The same was true of ports, canals, and other large projects.
At a more general level, a fast growing economy generally needed broad investments in a whole



                                             9
range of public goods as part of a “balanced growth” strategy, so that utilities, education, and so
on, would all be higher in a high investment path.
       Can simple one-sector macroeconomic models help us here? These models do not make a
distinction at a fine level between types of capital, but we need to keep such complementarities
in mind when understanding the motives of governments to borrow. We do know that the
countries in the region had very different investment needs in the nineteenth century and this
certainly affected their overall need to draw on foreign capital inflows, and hence their need to
engage in infrastructure-led public borrowing.
       In the simplest macroeconomic sense, we could speak of some countries being much
more capital scarce than others, and therefore having a much higher marginal product of capital
(MPK). In a standard neoclassical model, capital would tend to flow to the countries with the
highest MPK. However, in what is known as the so-called “Lucas paradox,” the highest MPK
need not be found in the poorest country (Lucas 1990).
       Consider a standard production function where output per worker y depends on
productivity A and capital per worker k. If all countries have the same productivity level A, then
log MPK is perfectly inversely correlated with log k, and classic diminishing returns means that
capital will flow to the poorest country. In general, this is not true: countries do not have the
same A and this offers the simplest resolution of the Lucas paradox. Much of the great
divergence in incomes between rich and poor countries today is explained by A and not k
(Easterly and Levine 2001; Hall and Jones 1999). Explaining A (its level and/or its growth rate)
has led to debate concerning the importance of deeper determinants such as colonial history,
human capital, legal origins, institutions, policies, or geography (Sachs and Warner 1995;
Acemoglu et al. 2001; Glaeser et al. 2004; Sachs et al. 1998).
       How well do the insight from this contemporary debate translate to the nineteenth
century? And how well do any lessons apply to Latin America and the heterogeneous
experiences within the region?
       At the most general level, recent historical research suggests that the Lucas paradox was
less apparent in the first era of globalization than it is today. Figure 3 shows Obstfeld and
Taylor’s (2004) simple tabulation of the distribution of foreign investments by country in 1913
and in 1997. In this “then” versus “now” comparison it is evident that the global capital markets
of a century ago were much more successful at directing financial flows to very poor countries as

                                              10
compared to the capital markets of today. Moreover, these flows included significant investments
in Latin America, for example by 1913 cumulative gross capital flows from Britain to Latin
America accounted for a lower bound of 23 % of total British overseas investments. This begs
the question as to what fundamental forces led to such an outcome. To do this one may analyze
the flows themselves, the quantities, or the prices at which the flows moved, which in the case of
government debt means looking at the risk premia charged to sovereign borrowers, a challenge
we take up below.


Variations in Saving Scarcity
Since capital inflows are, by definition, the difference between domestic investment and savings,
it does not suffice to look only at investment-based (demand side) determinants of capital flows,
but also at the saving-based (supply side) determinants. This applies as much to aggregate flows
of saving, investment and foreign capital as it does to public (government) debt. Two important
aspects of the Latin American economies on the supply side should be noted, factors which have
persisted to some extent up to today: financial underdevelopment and demography.
       According to financial historians like Davis (1965), the function of capital markets in the
aggregate can be broken down into two functions: the mobilization of savings supply resources
and the allocation of these resources to competing investment demands. If the system is efficient,
then the maximal resources are mobilized, and they are allocated efficiently across sectors and
firms. This ideal is never reached, and reality falls particularly short in developing countries.
       In a closed-economy view of the world, these failures of financial development could
place a serious brake on economic growth. (Schumpeter 1911; Gurley and Shaw 1955; King and
Levine 1993). Some evidence has been adduced to this effect, although controversy still swirls
around the finance-development nexus given the possible reverse causality running from growth
to finance.
       In an open economy world, however, the inefficiency of financial markets may place a
tax on long-run national wealth, but it need not slow economic growth. In a hypothetical
frictionless world, small open economies lacking the means to mobilize or allocate their own
savings could still draw on the pool of global savings available at the real world interest rate.
Foreign banks and financial firms might then enter the domestic market to allocate and monitor
the capital so raised. In line with this logic, in the nineteenth century, differences in domestic

                                              11
financial development did not necessarily hinder countries’ ability to accumulate capital, even if
they did affect subsequent development paths once the global capital market collapses.10
           For government finance, the effect was to supply at low transaction costs a large group of
counterparties in London, and elsewhere, who were willing to subscribe to government debt
issues, for whom the investments in any one periphery country were a small part of their
portfolio. In contrast, working through the domestic financial market meant high transaction
costs using inefficient banks to reach a small pool of domestic investors for whom a debt issue
would be a large share of their portfolio. It is easy to understand why the former route would be
preferable. Indeed, the latter route was often ignored, unless there were telling reasons to use it—
for example, a loss of access to external credit after a default, or a desire to engage in financial
repression or “forced savings” and thus tax the domestic bond holders (whether institutions or
individuals) either through below market nominal interest rates or via the inflation tax on paper
debt, tactics that could not be exploited too often without totally destroying what little financial
development there was.
           In essence then, open capital markets created the possibility of “trade diversion” in asset
trade. We can recast this in the language of gravity models, which have been successfully
applied to financial flows also. In a country with poorly developed capital markets the intra-
national transaction costs were high. If the country were closed, however, “multilateral
resistance” against all foreign countries would be high, sustaining the domestic market. But if
inter-national transaction costs suddenly fell—globalization—the country would be expected to
divert financial flows from domestic to foreign markets.
           These forces were a double-edged sword in countries that plugged into the global capital
market before 1914. On the plus side they made the supply of capital much more elastic, and this
could help explain the very positive association between foreign investment and growth,
notwithstanding any claim about causality (Schularick and Steger 2006). On the minus side these

10
     For example, Davis and Gallman (2001) find that in the “settler economies” the British Dominions generally had
more advanced financial systems than Argentina, a finding consistent with the account of della Paolera and Taylor
(2001). In the Argentine case, penetration by foreign banks, many of them branches of London banks, brought the
country to the doorstep of the deep and liquid British financial markets. In this type of setting, foreign financial
development can substitute for—and thus crowd out—domestic financial development. This effect was probably at
work in many less developed economies, within and beyond the British Empire, before 1914.


                                                      12
pressures possibly deterred domestic financial development. The latter proved to be a major
weakness once global capital supply dried up after 1914. Countries had to turn to the domestic
supply of capital, and domestic intermediaries. As argued, the intermediaries were often few and
inefficient. In addition, supply of capital was low too. Why?
       The dominant explanation argues not only that savers were cutoff from investors by high
transaction costs, but that savers were themselves rather scarce for demographic reasons. Taylor
(1992) made the argument for Argentina, and it would apply to some other countries too. In
many developing countries then, as now, fertility and population growth rates were very high.
The standard life cycle argument would predict that such countries would tend to save less, as
compared to countries with a more mature population with greater numbers in high-saving mid-
life cohorts. Taylor and Williamson (1994) show how these effects could explain a fair portion of
the capital flows from Britain to the settler economies before 1914.
       This argument offers another explanation for the need for governments to borrow from
abroad—at home, there were few savers in the population. This may well have been efficient for
other reasons. Much domestic saving in Latin America was within the firm or the household, and
this was probably important for the financing of many small firms and businesses. We know, for
example, that domestic stock markets were often quite thin and banks were often financing only
large firms with some type of “connection” (Hanley 2005; Triner 2001; Haber 1991). Thus,
small enterprises, if they relied on domestic saving were liable to feel crowding out if
government borrowing went direct bond issues to the domestic market, simply because such
small firms were likely to have severe asymmetric information problems that would preclude
them issuing debt or equity abroad. On the other hand, the government was rather better placed
to issue debt overseas as compared to such small firms, so it did them a favor by doing so,
leaving most of the market and nonmarket domestic capital flows untouched.


Variations in Frictions
So far we have examined government (and aggregate) borrowing as driven by the forces of
demand and supply. However, a third and final set of factors must be considered—frictions or
wedges, in the form of transaction costs. These costs raise the expected return of the marginal
dollar invested above the expected returns of the marginal dollar saved, and thus serve to inhibit
transactions between borrowers and lenders.

                                             13
   For 19th century Latin American governments borrowing in the world capital market, these
frictions took two principal forms: exclusion from the market, leading to quantity rationing; or
market access subject to a risk premium, a sovereign spread over the market’s benchmark bond
yield (in those days the British consol). Market exclusion, as we have seen, was typically a result
of unresolved past defaults. What drove risk premia? A considerable research body of research in
recent years has explored this topic, and several pertinent findings can be summarized. 11


Gold Standard
In a seminal paper, Bordo and Rockoff (1996) offered evidence that sovereign borrowers
received a lower risk premium when they adhered to the gold standard—the authors referred to
this as a “seal of approval” whereby the sound policies necessary to achieve successful (i.e.,
credible) commitment to the gold standard also operated to lower the macroeconomic risks that
were of concern to holders of sovereign debt, namely the risks of default due to economic
underperformance or fiscal crisis. This hypothesis was lent further support by Obstfeld and
Taylor (2004) who studied much larger sample of countries in the 1870–1913 period. The risk
premium appeared to be 40 or more basis points lower for a country after it went on gold, and
this effect remained after many other controls were added.
   Of course, being on the gold standard was an endogenous outcome and was also correlated
with many other macroeconomic variables, so this effect needs to be carefully interpreted. More
generally, attempts to extend the Bordo-Rockoff analysis by adding right-hand side variables to
produce a “kitchen sink” regression have to be interpreted with care, and if the right hand side
variables are collinear with the gold standard then the results may be meaningless.
   To illustrate the correlation problem, we can examine results in Flandreau and Zumer (2004)
where exchange rate volatility is added to most regressions and the authors find that the inclusion
of this variable reduces or negates the impact of gold standard adherence. This isn’t surprising
since going on gold was the way in which countries lowered their exchange rate volatility in this
period: hence these results, which ignore the fact that exchange rate volatility depends on the
exchange rate regime, offer no evidence for or against the “seal of approval” hypothesis. A more
robust attack on the gold standard effect has been offered by Ferguson and Schularick (2006):
they have a larger sample that includes many African and Asian poor countries. In poorer



                                            14
countries (where the cutoff was in the 1000 to 2000 US$ per capita in 1900, roughly 20 to 40%
of the British level), the impact of the gold standard on spreads appears weak: perhaps their
politico-economic institutions were too weak to make gold standard commitments credible.
However, in samples that focus more on the rich Atlantic economies, and include the main Latin
American borrowers the gold standard effect remains. We might infer that, as a region of
middling incomes and middling institutional quality, Latin America was poised on the periphery
of an Atlantic club where gold standard adherence could, if credible, offer some benefits.
   Even if that is accepted, however, the endogeneity of the gold standard is a more difficult nut
to crack. Econometrically, Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) used GMM techniques to address this
issue, but other approaches still need to be explored, for example the use of a first-stage model of
gold standard adoption along the lines proposed in an innovative paper by Meissner (2005).
These results matter for the Latin American countries in the 19th century because they were
generally among the weakest of countries at maintaining gold standard adherence. However,
returning to the endogeneity issue, this really begs the question: why? What was it about the
region’s economies that made it so difficult for them to stick to a hard monetary regime?


War
Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) also included controls for the occurrence of military conflict
involving the sovereign borrower, both civil war and inter-state war. Perhaps surprisingly, both
of these variables turned out to be statistically insignificant as determinants of country risk.
Ferguson and Schularick (2006) found mixed results. However, the arguments of Bordo and
Kydland (1995) that the gold standard was a “contingent rule” caution against a simple
interpretation of these weak findings. Wars tended to mean going off gold, so indirectly, via the
gold standard effect, we may still be capturing an effect of conflict on sovereign risk. Returning
to the last point, we can see here one endogenous source of weak gold standard adherence. In
this sense, we do find support for the notion that the prevalence of conflict in the region may
have had something to do with Latin America’s high sovereign risk. Again, this cautions against
using the kitchen sink regression as a means to refute the gold standard as a seal of approval.


Institutions and Empire



                                              15
Looking at institutional determinants, it is not clear that most parts of Latin America could have
been expected to attract large-scale capital flows. Stressing extractive institutions arising from
colonial origins, Acemoglu et al. (2001) reach a conclusion that builds on the insights of North
and Thomas (1973) concerning the legacy of Iberian rule in Latin America. Spain and Portugal
did not establish colonies that were characterized by good political and economic institutions.
Power was concentrated in privileged elites, democracy never flourished, property rights and rule
of law were weak (except where needed to protect the elite). In the AJR account these flaws
persisted after independence, and slowed economic growth, keeping the region poor. Here,
institutions are the fundamental driver of A, which in a Solovian model determines a country’s
level of productivity and hence income per capita in the long run as k converges to a steady state
level that depends itself on A.
       The Acemoglu et al. view is often—wrongly—seen as purely deterministic, but of course
there is still an error term in their model, and residual variation is significant. Between the
colonial past and present outcomes, history reveals even bigger residual variance. In a challenge
to the persistence story Prados de la Escosura (2005) notes that the “great divergence” between
Latin America and the core economies was even more a 20th century than a 19th century
phenomenon. If Prados de la Escosura is correct, then, perhaps despite political and institutional
weaknesses, the region did manage to sustain growth in the 19th century, and hence became
attractive to foreign capital, except where the worst political and institutional failures could not
be contained. This prompts a call for future research to assess the more detailed mechanisms
needed for an “institutional explanation”—that is, why some institutions matter more than others,
and at some times more than others. Some countries obviously surmounted their colonial
legacies, if only for a time, and were able to get onto a reasonably fast growth track. The most
dramatic example would be Argentina, which by 1900–13 was one of the 5 richest countries in
the world and a prime destination for foreign capital. Argentina’s subsequent growth failures put
the country back in the ranks of the less developed a century later, so perhaps its colonial legacy
finally caught up with it. Brazil, and several other countries have also witnessed ups and down in
growth performance, yet without sustained convergence. These perturbations along the
development path deserve greater scrutiny, as we need to better understand the extent to which
countries are “prisoners of history” and how many degrees of freedom they have that allow them
to escape from their past.

                                              16
           In this respect Latin America again stands as a crucial test case. In other areas of the
periphery still under colonial rule, it would be simple to attribute the large flows of capital in the
1870–1913 period to institutions, such as rule of law and property rights that were enforced by
the colonial powers themselves. As Lucas himself noted:
           Until around 1945, much of the Third World was subject to European-imposed legal and
           economic arrangements, and had been so for decades or even centuries. A European
           lending to a borrower in India or the Dutch East Indies could expect his contract to be
           enforced with exactly the same effectiveness and by exactly the same means as a contract
           with domestic borrowers. (Lucas 1990, 94–95)
The same idea supports the theory of “anglobalization” that underpins Ferguson’s (2003)
qualified rehabilitation of the benefits of the British Empire. Of course, empires have since
collapsed and it can be argued that this crucial difference explains the absence of a Lucas
paradox then, but its presence today (Schularick and Steger 2006).
           By the mid-twentieth century, however, observers had their doubts about the benefits of
this process for the developing countries:
           It was in the newly settled regions, which received two-thirds of the capital exports and
           practically all the emigrants, that nineteenth-century international investment scored its
           greatest triumphs. The remaining third of British capital exported (or more accurately a
           quarter, since some went to Continental Europe) was employed in a different type of area,
           where its achievements were much more dubious: tropical or subtropical regions
           inhabited, often densely, by native populations endowed in some cases with ancient
           civilizations of their own. The areas that formed a minor field for overseas investment
           before 1914 are the major problem today: the truly backward economies, containing now
           about two-thirds of the world’s population. The empty and newly settled regions, from
           which international investment derived its brilliant record and reputation, are today, in
           per capita income, among the most prosperous countries in the world. (Nurkse 1954,
           745).12

12
     Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) note that: “The dual classification of economies stressed by Acemoglu et al. (2001)
matches neatly the dichotomy at the heart of Nurkse’s (1954) description of pre-1914 international investment.
Moreover, the phenomena the two papers explain are mutually consistent. Poor protection of property rights can
explain both poverty and a failure to attract private investment from abroad. As Nurkse (1954, 746) expressed the


                                                      17
Whether one views the financial and institutional exports of the European imperial epoch as a
plus or a minus, it is fair to say that Latin America’s post-independence experience remains
relatively neglected in this explanatory framework, and fits none to well either with the pro- or
anti-colonial view. The region was politically independent then, as now; and some countries
enjoyed respectable economic growth and capital market access; we still have to answer how
they pulled it off. On the one hand, defaults were undoubtedly higher “on average” than in the
Empire group. On the other hand, the region still managed to attract significant capital flows
despite those risks. The benefits (returns) must have outweighed the costs (risks), which would
be consistent with the Prados de la Escosura (2005) story that, despite its flaws, some parts of the
region had good growth potential. Colonial origins did not doom the region to failure, at least up
to 1914.
    The empire thesis was examined by Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) and Ferguson and Schularick
(2006). Both found little evidence for an “average” discount based on British empire
membership using the industry-standard Bordo-Rockoff (1996) CAPM framework, but the latter
found stronger support for a lower “beta” among Empire borrowers when an Empire-beta
interaction was added. Ferguson and Schularick (2006) have the advantage of an even bigger
sample than Obstfeld and Taylor (2004), including many more British colonies in Asia and
Africa, although such a sample obviously weights Latin American observations a lot less. Both
also found evidence of noticeable convergence of risk premia over the 1870–1914 period. In the
FS framework, this trend is mopped up either by time dummies or by the CAPM Empire-beta
interaction, and in both cases it negates the gold standard effect: in the former case “something
else” explains convergence and in the latter case it is the gradual diminishing amplitude of the
global weighted risk premium. Of course, either or both of these effects are correlated with the
global spread of the gold standard, so inference is till unclear. We need to remember that the
gold standard was never viewed as a fundamental by Bordo et al.: merely as a “seal of approval”
which, if credible, was indicative of other fundamentals. Such fundamentals could, of course,


point, modern poor-country borrowers “have not grown up in a capital-minded milieu, and may not be culturally
prepared for the use of western equipment, methods, and techniques.” In addition, the superior institutional
framework of the settler economies certainly enhanced the environment for foreign investment there,
complementing the more conventional economic determinants of capital flows stressed by Nurkse and by Clemens
and Williamson (2002).”


                                                    18
include the Empire—where the gold standard was virtually a sine qua non of macroeconomic
regime design.
   Could such an alternative explanation exist for interest rate convergence after 1870? Perhaps
“institutional convergence” was afoot in the global economy in this period? Schularick and
Steger (2006) argue that smaller property rights differentials could explain the absence of a
Lucas paradox before 1914. However, with no data on property rights before 1914, this
hypothesis awaits further testing, for example, in the manner of Alfaro et al. (2005). But why
would such a convergence have occurred? And when? One might appeal to the notion of
“informal empire” or “soft power” to argue that, in effect, British (or at the least, European)
capitalistic norms were being spread around the globe under the influence of the colonial police
powers—that “anglobalization” had spillovers beyond the formal empire itself by setting global
“rules of the game” in the shape of norms for good behavior, that is, global public goods
(Ferguson and Schularick 2006). Such an argument would say that, for all its notional
independence, Latin America could not have chosen to abrogate property rights before 1914
without facing deep shame and (more importantly) stiff penalties. There is some evidence that
the flexing of U.S. power in the Latin American region may have been instrumental in this
regard (Mitchener and Weidenmier 2005). However, with no way to measure informal empire or
its influence, these conjectures remain largely untestable. Indeed, if the entire globe is under the
sway of an informal empire, the hypothesized effect cannot be identified at all.


Default history
Another place to look for an explanation of high sovereign risk is in the default record. Obstfeld
and Taylor (2004) found a high penalty for contemporaneous default: maybe 100 basis points for
full default and 50 basis points for partial default. But what about the longer term record?
Ferguson and Schularick (2006) also find a strong impact of past default on current spreads.
   The role of past default in determining current spreads is central to the “reputation” model of
the sovereign debt market. The 1820s and 1870s crises started to cement in investors’ minds the
untrustworthiness of Latin American sovereign borrowers, a reputation that was to expand in the
years ahead and which persists even to this day. According to Tomz (2001), of the 77
government defaults from 1820 to 1914, 58 involved Latin American countries (75%).
Compared to other periphery countries, the economic potential and sovereign independence of

                                             19
the region obviously encouraged this outcome: the potential for high returns encouraged more
borrowing ex ante and the independence from Empire gave more freedom to default ex post.
    Clearly the borrowers in the region could not manage their fiscal affairs with anything
approaching the prudence of most borrowers in the core countries. Figure 4 shows the incidence
of sovereign default in the region from 1820 to 1940 and the fraction of years that debtors spent
in default status is impressive, 38% on average. The better-behaved borrowers like Uruguay
(12%) or Brazil (17%) managed to maintain a pretty clean sheet, but the odds of getting
repayment from others like Honduras (79%) or Mexico (57%) were no more favorable than a
coin toss.
    We can assess the importance of reputation for capital market access in the first era of
globalization by following Reinhart, Rogoff, and Savastano (2003, RRS) and Reinhart and
Rogoff (2004, RR). We look at the relationship between default history and country risk. The
country’s default history is captured by the number of defaults or the fraction of years spent in
default over a specified prior period, in this case 1801–1900. Country risk is measured by the
spread of the country’s long-term gold bond yield over the benchmark yield of the British consol,
using data collected by Obstfeld and Taylor (2003), in this case for 1900–13.
    We might expect that a country with a record of “serial default” ought to be penalized with
higher country risk, and RRS show that this is the case in the present era. RR show that this
behavior matters for capital market access today. Was it true in the past also? Figure 5 shows that
more defaults and longer defaults in the 19th century were associated with higher spreads in
1900–13. In other words, the problem of serial default is an old one, and there appears to be
evidence that even in the 19th century, global capital markets were quick to identify and punish a
serial defaulter.


Fiscal burdens: levels and volatility
Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) found that debt/GDP ratios had very little impact of sovereign risk in
the 1870–1914 period, suggesting that so long as the debt path was consistent with gold standard
adherence, creditors were willing to take the latter signal as credible and allow quite wide
movements in public debt to GDP ratios, a pattern that was to change dramatically in the
interwar period. Nonetheless, alternative models of risk premia in the 1870–1914 period have
given different results: Flandreau and Zumer (2004) and Ferguson and Schularick (2006) found

                                             20
evidence that debt/revenue ratios did matter for sovereign risk, and that in some specifications
these debt burden measures could sometimes lessen the impact gold standard adherence.
Empirically, the question is likely to remain unresolved until we can better model the
endogeneity of debt levels, which were surely correlated with the ability to make a credible gold
standard commitment. But in theory the result is clear: unsustainable debt paths will usually
break any commitment to gold, since they are almost surely indicative of fiscal weaknesses that
will, at least in some states of nature, cause explosive budget dynamics. It is quite possible that
the gold standard seal would not be apparent once such a control was added.
   However, debt levels are not the only matter of concern for creditors. The volatility of the
fiscal situation is also important. The unusual volatility of public debt in the region is shown in
Table 4. More than the core or the periphery as a whole, the Latin American economies seem to
have been more susceptible than any other group of countries to extreme fluctuations in public
debt to GDP ratios. The region’s governments experienced big runs ups in debt levels during
periods of easy credit, followed by big crashes during tighter times or after a default/repudiation
episode. This led to higher means and standard deviations of public debt to GDP ratios as
compared to other countries, especially core countries and even other periphery countries. In an
institutionally sound and financially mature environment, such data might reflect the decisions of
a strong optimizing government taking maximal advantage of the flexibility provided by a debt-
financed buffer. But in a financially and fiscally backward periphery environment these data tell
a different story—a tale of fiscal “snakes and ladders” where governments were poorly equipped
to cope with tax and spending shocks, forced to use debt (when not using the printing press), and
eventually crashing into debt ceilings, followed by default, and austerity.
   One might view these higher moments of the fiscal deficit as exogenous “fundamentals”
linked to political and institutional weakness. In this view, Latin American countries were
burdened with fiscal volatility either because their tax revenues were volatile (e.g., due to trade
volatility and terms of trade shocks affecting customs revenue) or because spending was volatile
(e.g., due to wars and military spending caused by internal/external political instability).
Alternatively, shocks may have been no different but the governments’ propensity to use external
borrowing may have simply been higher. The latter might reflect institutional weakness of a
different sort—the suboptimally short time horizons of sovereigns. Whatever the origin, it is



                                             21
clear that Latin America governments lived in a more fiscally volatile world and witnessed more
dramatic fluctuations in their debt positions than other countries in the core or periphery.


3. Sovereign Public Debt and the Macroeconomic History of Latin America
Access to foreign savings to finance either public or/and private enterprises was a permanent
characteristic that has conditioned the economic development of the region. The external or
sovereign public debt played a “multipurpose” function in the region’s development and sheds
an important light on the dynamic linkages between public finances and developmental and
infrastructural needs of these newly independent nations.
         We argue that key aspects of the sovereign debt—its size, availability and, most
importantly its strategic management—cannot be understood solely in terms of a simple closed
economy macroeconomic model which might be suited to study the nature and evolution of debt
in countries such as Britain, France, Germany and even the idiosyncratic case of the newly-
settled United States. In these countries that successfully developed internal capital markets, tax
smoothing and the presence of “abnormal” spikes in the level of the internal public debt (relative
to GDP) are basically a by-product of recessions in the former case and the finance of war efforts
in the latter case (Barro 1989).13 But, in general, these countries, during the modern era, could
finance their public budget imbalances by resorting to the issuance of internal public debt
denominated in their domestic currency or by engineering changes in tax policies. The
effectiveness of such tax policies depended on a diversified tax base, something lacking in the
fiscally fragile nations of Latin America. In Latin America, the conduct and management of
public finances crucially determined how these independent countries coped with turbulence and
illiquidity in international capital markets, particularly when a net transfer of resources to the
capital markets in the central countries had to be effected.
         Public debt, and especially sovereign public debt, was also linked to: (a) the finance of
the immense economic opportunities present in Latin America in which the new nation states
were stakeholders; (b) the building of new infrastructure to channel the production of goods or


13
  Although as Ferguson (2001, 142) points out correctly: “Although the American Federal Government never
defaulted on its debt, the same cannot be said of the American States themselves. In the recession of 1837-43, there
were defaults on around half of the outstanding state debt; 10 per cent of the total amount owed by the states was
repudiated altogether. There were further rashes of default in 1857 and again in the 1870s. Latin American States
were the perennial defaulters of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.”

                                                    22
extraction of natural resources to the developed world; (c) the support of sound monetary and
banking regimes in light of accepted international standards; and (d) the guarantee of a minimum
rate of return to certain private equity ventures, to hedge some of the risk of inward foreign direct
investment. Obviously, the private inflow of capital for direct investment and for trade financing
is a topic of utmost importance for developmental issues in Latin America and it has been very
well documented by Feis (1931) and Davis and Huttenback (1988) for the British Empire. In this
study we examine the experience and strategic issues concerning the issuance of sovereign
public debt in Latin America countries. In our discussion, we do not explicitly include the
financing of the independence wars of Latin America, because the experience is very
heterogeneous in the different nations of the region, as many have noted.
       As is evident today, where we witness similar levels of integration in international bonds
markets, turbulence is to be expected. According to Harold Peters, a respected scholar of the
Argentine debt:
       The Latin-American republics have always been burdened with debt, perhaps as a
       necessary condition of independence…. The flow of capital from Great Britain, and later
       from the continent and the United States to debtor countries, has been an intermittent one.
       Waves of intense optimism, during which almost any properly engraved certificate, could
       be sold at a high price, have alternated with troughs of profound pessimism, in which the
       export of capital stopped completely. There is one thing for which a subscriber to an issue
       of foreign bonds by an undeveloped country must be prepared—an interval of default
       (Peters 1934, 1).
The statement resonates with many of the most modern theoretical developments about the
sustainability of the dynamics of the public debt for an underdeveloped country: the dependence
on the world economic cycle in terms of the evolution of international interest rates and the
evolution of the terms of trade for a particular indebted country and the phenomenon of “sudden
stops” (and also “sudden gos”) to use the terminology of Calvo (1998). The extent of booms and
busts of export of capital to Latin America shown in Section 1 is totally in accord with the
sudden stops lately analyzed by Calvo and others; and the varied experiences reveal how Latin
America countries managed sovereign debts and resolved critical situations in their relations with
the creditor advanced nations, as the following vignettes illustrate.



                                             23
3.1 Vignettes: Sovereign Borrowing Episodes in Latin American Economic History.

3.1.1 The Characteristics of Sovereign Bonds during the 1820-1930 period.
In the 19th century, sovereign bonds typically had a very long maturity. They averaged more than
20 years while in the current globalization of the 1990s and 2000s the issue of Eurobonds by
emerging market sovereigns was at maximum maturities of 7 to 10 years. Some of the
contemporary bonds may have had clauses of semi-automatic renewal, but we have still not
observed anything like the 25-year bonds which were typically seen in the 1820s–1930s epoch.
Also, in particular, the 1870–1913 period witnessed a situation in which early redemption
clauses were the norm in the structuring of the public debt issues (the so-called “lottery clause”,
allowing partial repayment and conversion). This tells us that the international capital markets of
the 19th century (notably, the London Market) took a “friendly” approach towards debtor
countries, allowing the to refinance and swap long term debt instruments for comparable
instruments at lower interest or coupon rates to exploit favorable liquidity conditions (Mauro et
al. 2006).
       As Bordo and Meissner (2005) have shown, most of the sovereign bonds floated by Latin
American countries in the period were denominated in foreign currency or in terms of gold (or
else had “gold clauses”). The limitation for an emerging country to issue a bond only in a hard or
key currency was referred by Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) as “original sin” and they
viewed this as a symptom of extreme fragility that might explain the recurrence of interruptions
in the original contractual debt obligations of the emerging market countries. Here, the linkages
between monetary regimes, public finances, the level of economic activity, and the sovereign
debt issued in foreign currency provides important insights that help explain recurrent problems
in the management of the sovereign debt in Latin America countries (see, for example, the
Baring crash of 1891, discussed in della Paolera and Taylor 2001).
       Due to the acute credibility problems posed by the conduct of volatile monetary and
fiscal policies, the Latin America countries also issued domestic debt with gold clauses. This is
shown in Figure 6 taken from Bordo and Meissner (2005), we can see that two very big Latin
American countries, Brazil and Argentina, consistently issued public debt by resorting to gold
clauses or hard currency denominations.




                                             24
       Finally a notable difference with today’s international markets was that in many debt
issues export revenues and tax revenues were earmarked as collateral to guarantee the servicing
of the debt. In other words, it seems that some public bonds had explicit “seniority” over the
same type of bonds issued by the same national political entity. Clauses linking different
bonds—to prevent selective default—were not a central feature as they are in the present day
international bond market.


3.1.2 The Cost of Capital for a small independent Nation: moral hazard and collusion among
lenders and borrowers or the price to pay for the reputation of a newcomer?
It is well known—notwithstanding the frictions and productivity differences underlying the
Lucas paradox—that when the yield of available investments in the core countries drops, the
international capital market has a strong tendency to funnel liquidity to more risky prospects in
the periphery. This is evident today, but was just as true in the 1820s, 1870s, and 1880s. Hence,
the possibility of “overborrowing” arises when extremely high liquidity in international capital
markets becomes an equilibrium possibility. An instance of “irrational exuberance” in the case of
some of the riskier speculations in the wave of the 1820s cannot be totally ruled out, as the
following example illustrates.
       A basic guiding principle can be set forth: potential lemons behave always like
“seasoned” public bonds in good times—they just become junk bonds in bad times. The example
of the 1824 £1 million so-called “Baring loan” to the Province of Buenos Aires is a very
interesting case that illuminates the behavior of the various actors involved in a sovereign debt
placement. As Peters (1934) explains, the loan was placed with Baring Brothers at 70 percent.
Barings then deducted 13 percent of the par amount (£130,000) so the loan yielded the Province
of Buenos Aires a mere £570,000. Then the bonds were placed in the London market at 85
percent of par, yielding to Baring Brothers a spread of 15 percent, and a further £150,000 profit.
With total profits of £280,000 on a loan of £570,000, the merchant house achieved a return of 49
percent! While it is true that as market makers and subscribers, the merchant house had their
reputation at stake, the initial phases of outburst of financial liquidity in the London market were




                                             25
exploited to the full by the merchant houses as well as by the policymakers in the recipient
countries.14
        While the net proceeds to the recipient were very low in this first experiment of the
Province of Buenos Aires, and indeed very profitable for the merchant houses, the gross yield to
maturity of the bond approached 7 percent, equivalent to a 4.5 percent spread over the British
consol. The “risk premium” or spread is traditionally viewed as the “price of access” to capital
markets for emerging market borrowers and is in accord with Tomz (2007) who argues that it is
not the particularities of the international capital market that characterize the interactive behavior
of investors and borrowers but rather the formation of reputation.15 And reputations form in
Bayesian way: creditors update the debtor’s creditworthiness based on performance. Tomz
considers two periods: the first wave (1820s) and the second wave (1870s). Then he identifies
the differential premium between seasoned borrowers and new entries; in the second wave he
also distinguishes between, the good, the bad, and the worse: that is, the payers, the resettlers,
and the defaulters.
        As we can see from Figure 7, in the first wave, as in the example of Argentina given
above, the Latin American economies were new borrowers par excellence and spreads were
around 350 basis points. In the second wave of the 1870s, the market attached “reasonable”
prices to the seasoned players, the new borrowers and the proven lemons or junk bonds (the
latter having an average yield of 27 per cent).
        The fall in yields from the 1820s to the 1870s marked an important development in the
region’s access to global markets. The high cost of capital in the first wave might have been
associated with the building-up of reputation for the early borrowers, but, in addition, genuine
asymmetric information problems were surely quite acute during the 1820–70 period (see
Poyais, above) which would also drive the required yield to hold a sovereign bond up.


3.1.3 Availability of Information and the Importance of News
Paucity of information was a major issue, especially until the second wave in the 1870s. In the
1820s there were in London several very important newspapers which compiled quite


14
  As stated by Tim Duncan (1989).
15
  Basically his argument is even if outrageous, those investment banking lump-sum fees are infra-marginal and can
not characterize the dynamics of the sovereign debt market.

                                                  26
sophisticated data: on bond pricing and volumes traded, and also quotes on the political economy
events of different countries. The Colonist, Common Sense, The Times and Course of Exchange
followed closely the Latin American debt during the first phase on a daily basis until the
generalized defaults of the 1826–7. From the information we could gather from the six years
1822–28 were data on a good portion of the sovereign bonds outstanding, allowing us to
construct a Latin American bond composite index that is quite comparable to the current EMBI
index, as seen in Figure 8.
       During the second wave, however, the availability of news was much more fluid.
Information on macro variables such as outstanding debt per nation, trade flows, fiscal positions,
population, railway construction as a proxy for investment, prices and quotations of sovereign
bonds were readily available from additional sources such as Investor’s Monthly Manual, The
Economist, the Palmer’s Index and from the Annual Reports of the Corporation of Foreign
Bondholders which was created in the mid 1860s as an association of British investors holding
bonds issued by the emerging economies.
       Whether the availability of this information, plus the Consular Reports being drafted by
the different Creditor Nations, meant a better understanding of the political economy realities of
the Latin American countries is, we think, debatable. In the case of Argentina, Peters (1934)
noted that:
       A federal union was again formed in 1861, without definitely solving many of the
       controversial issues between Buenos Aires and the other provinces….the lack of
       knowledge of and confidence in the Argentine Republic, as distinct from Buenos Aires,
       led to the failure of the attempt [to float a national bond in 1866]…The Buenos Aires
       bonds remained about ten points above a national issue, indicating that the investors
       feared a possible dissolution of the union, and the possible repudiation of the debt by the
       province. (Peters 1934, 24)
He then shows clearly that the messy arrangements of fiscal federalism gave rise to asymmetric
information for foreign investors, coordination problems at the national level, moral hazard and
free riding. These problems have always been present and have made it very difficult to achieve
a full understanding of the presence of different political subunits as major actors in the sphere of




                                             27
fiscal policy and debt management. These problems played a huge role in the Baring crash of
1891 and, again, in the Argentine crash of 2001.16


3.1.4 Public Debt and The Degree of Openness and the Direction of International Trade
In a seminal paper Tomz (2001) analyzes whether it is the threat of punishment or rather the
desire to preserve reputation that prompts debtor countries to repay. Tomz states that
traditionally, it has been argued that potential trade threats have compelled countries to honour
their debts. Creditors could use a variety of threats to persuade debtors to pay, such as seizure of
foreign assets, denial of short-term credit, or trade embargoes.
           One by one, the author rejects the arguments based on punishment. In this work, he
builds a case study based on the Argentine experience during the 1930s when the country was
almost the sole Latin American country still honoring its debt service payments. He notes that
there was no correlation between commercial dependence and debt repayment. Given that the
UK was then Argentina’s main trade partner, the traditional debt-trade argument implies that the
country should prioritize payment to the UK. However, in the 1930s debt issued in the United
States represented about 60 percent of the total Argentine sovereign debt, and the debt in British
pounds a mere 37 percent. Yet Argentina respected full service payments on both accounts even
when the US-based debt was more expensive than the UK one.
           At another level, in terms of political economy, the argument goes that should the trade-
debt link hold, this would imply a consistent lobby by exporters against default. Yet Tomz finds
that this is not exactly what happened in Argentine public debate. Rather, key legislators from
cattle raising districts in the most important export-oriented provinces of Buenos Aires and Santa
Fe, actually endorsed default. Finally, he concludes that even politicians claimed that reputation
was the main reason to maintain debt service payments, apparently displaying some kind of far-
sighted vision of the country’s future.17


4. Summary: A Snapshot of Sovereign Debt Market Disruptions in Latin America
The above vignettes illustrate the many “imperfections” of the sovereign debt institutional context.
Consequently, an important question arises about the manifestation and resolution of sovereign debt

16
     See della Paolera and Grandes(2005) and della Paolera and Taylor (2003)
17
     Tomz (2003, 19–20)

                                                     28
crises. Absent a strong international legal and contractual context which could enforce the promises
of the young nations to honor their debts, what was the Latin American experience regarding the
strategic behavior of borrowers and lenders? We identify four major lessons in the historical record:
   1. Outright Repudiation or Refinancing? In the wave of the 1820s, the main nations of Brazil,
       Chile, Mexico, Peru, Gran Colombia, Federation of Central America and the Province of
       Buenos Aires (which seceded in the 1820s from the Argentine Confederation) all defaulted
       between 1826 and 1828. They had issued their sovereign bonds in the early 1820s, but all of
       these borrowers renegotiated and settled their debt situation starting by the mid 1830s. Their
       situation was completely regularized no later than the 1870s, with arrangements that
       capitalized interest and amortization arrears. Although repayment was often very delayed, in
       this first wave there were no cases of outright repudiation.
               In between the two waves, for the period 1850-73, the approximate total of outstanding
       foreign loans to Latin America was £140 million—but 45 percent of this stock was simply
       devoted to refinancing the defaults of the 1820s, as shown in Table 5. Later, after the crisis of
       1873, which saw a massive fall in the price of commodities, eight Latin American countries
       defaulted as shown in Table 6, but most of them restructured in the decade of the 1880s with
       the exception of Honduras, which was in a perennial situation of default and was one of the
       few cases where the gunboat policy was applied in 1905–7. Hence, most countries were in
       some sense willing to restructure their debts and resume service when they could take
       advantage of renewed liquidity in global capital markets.
   2. A case of Early Default, Resumption and Restructuring The Baring loan of 1822 to the
       Province of Buenos Aires is an interesting example of a situation where a default is a direct
       consequence of political economy events—in this case, the ongoing war with Brazil from
       1825 until 1828, which had a drastic consequences on internal monetary and fiscal institutions.
       Buenos Aires tried to maintain service on the London loan until 1827, in spite of a
       depreciation of the domestic paper currency of 220 per cent in the 1825-27 period (Bordo and
       Végh 2002). In early January 1828, the Times stated: “ the dividends… will not be paid. That
       government (Buenos Aires) is unable to ship specie due to a blockade, and exchange was so
       unfavorable, that had the alternative of remitting bills been resorted to the government would
       have had to raise four dollars for everyone paid to the English creditor. But the war is wasting
       the resources of the country… They rely on another British loan, which they will never get”

                                            29
   (Peters 1934, 18). What was then the behavior of Juan Manual de Rosas, the Governor who
   ruled the Province from 1830 to 1852? Did he resume soon payments or did the Province
   entertained a strategy of partial repayments?
          Whilst Rosas took a unilateral position of default, he always maintained a position to
   resume payments. In 1842, interestingly enough, he offered a debt for land swap by offering
   the Malvinas Islands to the Barings as a partial settlement, on offer that was rejected. In 1844,
   he started to pay a partial monthly installment until a definitive settlement could take place.
   The government that succeeded Rosas—and which reunited the province of Buenos Aires
   with the Argentine Confederation—proposed a consensual restructuring to Barings and
   initially doubled the monthly installment accepted by Rosas. In 1857 Argentina assumed and
   consolidated the full principal and the capitalization of interest arrears along the lines of a
   previous Chilean restructuring in 1842.
          Interestingly enough both in the cases of Chile (a span of 18 years of outright default)
   and Argentina (a period of 16 years of outright default and 13 years of a unilateral partial
   repayment scheme) the debt restructuring did not include any debt relief or principal reduction
   schemes. In the case of Brazil, the most significant principal owed, about 21 million pounds
   went into default by the mid 1820s but default was short-lived and already as early as in 1829,
   arrears on interest were paid and service resumed normally (again, see Table 1).
3. Early Bail-outs in Sovereign Debt Episodes after the boom of the 1880s In the period 1880s-
   1890s Argentina alone was the recipient of 30 percent of the total Latin American Foreign
   loans followed distantly by Brazil with 14 percent of total foreign loans inflows to Latin
   America, as shown in Table 7. It is no surprise, then, that when Argentina started to reveal by
   the end of 1890 that it would have problems servicing its foreign debt, a panic arose in
   London and means were sought to avoid a contagion in the event of an Argentine default. This
   event became famously known as the Baring Crash of 1890–91. To avoid an all across the
   board default by Argentina, the Bank of England coordinated a rescue operation in January
   1891 that involved a syndicate of merchant banks providing a “stand-by” loan of £15 million,
   a “6 percent funding loan,” to cover the full service of the external debt over three years for
   the Argentine Republic Bonds. Also, this arrangement known as the “de la Plaza–Bank of
   England” agreement included very harsh and contractionary conditionality measures. Yet, in
   spite of the stabilization reform efforts, the package failed in 1892 to bring in a sustainable

                                         30
        intertemporal path of the debt service and principal payments for Argentina. The real yield at
        which the Funding loan was floated was 16 percent at a time of recession when the Debt-
        Output ratio rose from 72 percent to 91 percent. (Curiously enough, the conditions closely
        match the Argentina MegaSwap of May/June 2001 which was also effected at a yield rate of
        16 percent while the rate of growth of the economy was minus 2 percent.) A debt forgiveness
        package was proposed by J. J. Romero in 1893 to a Committee of Creditors headed by the
        House of Rothschild, leading to a successful resolution (della Paolera and Taylor 2001, 106–
        117).
    4. Quasi-Market Approaches of Resolution of Crises with Debt-Relief Argentina’s so-called
        Romero agreement of 1893 stated that, between 1893 and 1898 the national government
        would pay half the level of original debt service recognized in the de la Plaza-Bank of
        England agreement, then from 1898 onwards it would pay the full level of debt service, and
        finally from 1901 the government would begin to amortize principal on the National
        Sovereign Bonds. Therefore, the Argentine Republic Bonds were never technically in default,
        but they avoided default only by two sequential restructuring attempts. It is important to notice
        here that the Provincial and Municipal bonds were in default since 1891 and that the federal
        government was eventually to nationalize those obligations as late as 1898. Argentina could
        float new money bonds again in 1901 so the country was virtually in financial autarky for
        almost a decade.



References

Acemoglu, Daron & Simon Johnson & James A. Robinson, 2001. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
         Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, vol. 91(5), pages 1369-1401.
Alfaro, Laura & Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan & Vadym Volosovych, 2005. “Capital Flows in a Globalized World: The
         Role of Policies and Institutions,” NBER Working Papers 11696.
Amador, Manuel. 2004. A Political Model of Sovereign Debt Repayment. Meeting Papers 762, Society for
         Economic Dynamics.
Barro, Robert J. The Ricardian Approach to Budget Deficits. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1989.
Bordo Michael D. & Finn E. Kydland, 1995. “The Gold Standard As a Rule: An Essay in Exploration,”
         Explorations in Economic History, vol. 32(4), pages 423-464, October.
Bordo, Michael D., and Christopher M. Meissner. 2005. “The Role of Foreign Currency Debt in Financial Crises:
         1880-1913 vs. 1972-1997,” NBER Working Papers 11897.
Bordo, Michael D., and Hugh Rockoff. 1996. “The Gold Standard as a “Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval”.”
         Journal of Economic History 56 (2): 389–428.




                                                31
Bordo, Michael D., and Végh, Carlos A., 2002. “What if Alexander Hamilton had been Argentinean? A comparison
         of the early monetary experiences of Argentina and the United States,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
         vol. 49(3), pages 459-494, April.
Bulmer-Thomas, Victor. The Economic History of Latin America Since Independence. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press, 1994.
Bulow, Jeremy, and Rogoff, Kenneth, 1989. “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?,” American Economic
         Review, vol. 79(1), pages 43-50.
Calvo, Guillermo. “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops,” Journal of
         Applied Economics, November 1998.
Cardoso, Eliana A., and Rudiger Dornbusch. “Brazilian Debt Crises: Past and Present.” In The International Debt
         Crisis in Historical Perspective, edited by Barry J. Eichengreen and Peter H. Lindert. Cambridge, Mass.:
         MIT Press, 1989.
Cole, Harold L. & Patrick J. Kehoe, 1996. “Reputation spillover across relationships: reviving reputation models of
         debt,” Staff Report 209, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Davis, Lance E. 1965. The Investment Market, 1870-1914: The Evolution of a National Market. Journal of
         Economic History 25 (Sept.): 355-99.
Davis, Lance E., and Robert E. Gallman. 2001. Evolving Financial Markets and International Capital Flows:
         Britain, The Americas, and Australia, 1865–1914. Japan–U.S. Center Sanwa Monographs on International
         Financial Markets Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davis, Lance E. and Robert A. Huttenback. 1988. Mammon and the Pursuit of Empire: The Economics of British
         Imperialism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
della Paolera, Gerardo, and Alan M. Taylor. “Gaucho Banking Redux.” Economía 3 (Spring 2003): 1–42.
della Paolera, Gerardo, and Alan M. Taylor. Straining at the Anchor: The Argentine Currency Board and the Search
         for Macroeconomic Stability, 1880–1935. NBER Series on Long-Term Factors in Economic Growth.
         Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Duncan, Tim. 1983. La política fiscal durante el gobierno de Juárez Celman, 1886-1890: una audaz estrategia
         financiera internacional. Desarrollo Económico 23: 11–34.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 2001. What have we learned from a decade of empirical research on growth?
         It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth Models. World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 15,
         No. 2, 177-219
Eaton, Jonathan & Gersovitz, Mark, 1981. “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical Analysis,”
         Review of Economic Studies, vol. 48(2), pages 289-309.
Eichengreen, Barry and Ricardo Hausmann (1999), “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility” in New Challenges for
         Monetary Policy, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp.329-368.
Feis, Herbert. 1931. Europe: The World’s Banker: 1870-1914 (Yale University Press, New Haven).
Ferguson, Niall. 2001. The Cash Nexus: Money and Power in the Modern World, 1700–2000. New York: Basic
         Books.
Ferguson, Niall. 2003. Empire: How Britain Made the Modern World. London: Allen Lane.
Ferguson, Niall, and Moritz Schularick. 2006. “The Empire Effect: The Determinants of Country Risk in the First
         Age of Globalization, 1880–1913.” Journal of Economic 66(2), 283–312.
Fishlow, Albert. “Conditionality and Willingness to Pay: Some Parallels from the 1890s.” In The International Debt
         Crisis in Historical Perspective, edited by Barry J. Eichengreen and Peter H. Lindert. Cambridge, Mass.:
         MIT Press, 1989.
Flandreau, Marc, and Frederic Zumer, The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913. Paris: OECD, 2004.
Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2004. “Do Institutions Cause
         Growth?,” Journal of Economic Growth 9(3), 271–303.
Gurley, John G. and Shaw, Edward S. (1955), Financial Aspects of Economic Development, American
        Economic Review 45, September, 515-538.
Haber, Stephen. 1991. “Industrial Concentration and the Capital Markets: A Comparative Study of Brazil, Mexico,
        and the United States, 1830-1930.” Journal of Economic History, 51(3): 559-80.
Hall, Robert E. & Charles I. Jones, 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per Worker
        Than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114(1), pages 83-116.
Hanley, Anne G. Native Capital: Financial Institutions and Economic Development in São Paulo, Brazil, 1850-
        1920. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2005.



                                                   32
King, Robert G & Levine, Ross, 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,” Quarterly Journal of
         Economics, vol. 108(3), pages 717-37.
Kletzer, Kenneth M. & Brian D. Wright, 2000. “Sovereign Debt as Intertemporal Barter,” American Economic
         Review, vol. 90(3), pages 621-639.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” American Economic Review 80, no.
         2 (1990): 92–96.
Marichal, Carlos. A Century of Debt Crises in Latin America: From Independence to the Great Depression, 1820–
         1930. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989.
Mauro, Paolo, Nathan Sussman, and Yishay Yafeh. 2006. Emerging Markets and Financial Globalization:
         Sovereign Bond Spreads in 1870–1913 and Today. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Meissner, Christopher M. 2005. “A new world order: explaining the international diffusion of the gold standard,
         1870–1913” Journal of International Economics, 66 (2): 385-406.
Mitchener, Kris J., and Marc Weidenmier. 2005. Empire, Public Goods, and the Roosevelt Corollary. Journal of
         Economic History 65: 658-692.
North, Douglass C. and Robert Paul Thomas, The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History. New York:
         Cambridge University Press, 1973.
Nurkse, Ragnar (with W. A. Brown, Jr.) 1944. International Currency Experience: Lessons of the Inter-war Period.
         Geneva: League of Nations.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. “Sovereign Risk, Credibility, and the Gold Standard: 1870–1913 versus
         1925–31.” Economic Journal 113 (2003): 1–35.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth. Japan-U.S.
         Center Sanwa Monographs on International Financial Markets Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
         2004.
Peters, Harold E., The Foreign Debt of the Argentine Republic, Baltimore, 1934.
Prados de la Escosura, Leandro, 2005. “Growth, Inequality, And Poverty In Latin America: Historical Evidence,
         Controlled Conjectures,” Economics History and Institutions Working Papers wh054104, Universidad
         Carlos III, Departamento de Historia Económica e Instituciones.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2004. “Serial Default and the “Paradox” of Rich-to-Poor Capital
         Flows,” American Economic Review, vol. 94(2), pages 53-58.
Reinhart, Carmen M., Kenneth S. Rogoff and Miguel A. Savastano. 2003. “Debt Intolerance,” Brookings Papers on
         Economic Activity (1), 1-74.
Rippy, J. Fred. British Investments in Latin America, 1822–1949: A Case Study in the Operations of Private
         Enterprise in Retarded Regions. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1959.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian & Francesco Trebbi, 2004. “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions Over
         Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 9(2), pages 131-
         165.
Rose, Andrew K. & Mark M. Spiegel, 2002. “A Gravity Model of Sovereign Lending: Trade, Default and Credit,”
         NBER Working Papers 9285.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., John Luke Gallup, and Andrew Mellinger. 1998. “Geography and Economic Development,” in
         Pleskovic, Boris and Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds.), Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics
         (April), The World Bank: Washington, DC.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration,”
         Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1, pp. 1-118.
Schularick, Moritz & Niall Ferguson, 2005. ““The Thin Film Of Gold”: The Limits Of Monetary Commitments,”
         Macroeconomics 0509009, Economics Working Paper Archive EconWPA.
Schularick, Moritz & Thomas M. Steger, 2006. “Does Financial Integration Spur Economic Growth? New Evidence
         from the First Era of Financial Globalization,” Economics working paper series 06/46, Institute of
         Economic Research (WIF), Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETH).
Schumpeter, Joseph. [1911] 1934. The Theory of Economic Development. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
         Press.
Stone, Irving. “British Direct and Portfolio Investment in Latin America Before 1914.” Journal of Economic History
         37 (1977): 690–722.
Taylor, Alan M. “External Dependence, Demographic Burdens, and Argentine Economic Decline After the Belle
         Époque,” Journal of Economic History (December 1992): 907-36.



                                                   33
Taylor, Alan M., 2003. “Foreign Capital in Latin America in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries,” NBER
         Working Papers 9580.
Taylor, Alan M., and Williamson, Jeffrey G., 1994. “Capital Flows to the New World as an Intergenerational
         Transfer,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 102(2), pages 348-71.
Tomz, Michael. “How Do Reputations Form? New and Seasoned Borrowers in International Capital Markets.”
         Paper presented at the 2001 Annual Meetings of the American Political Science Association, San
         Francisco.
Tomz, Michael. 2007. Sovereign Debt and International Cooperation. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Triner, Gail D. Banking and Economic Development: Brazil, 1889-1930 (Palgrave/St. Martin’s Press, December
         2000).
Twomey, Michael J. A Century of Foreign Investment in the Third World. London: Routledge, 2000.
Wright, Mark L. J. 2002. Reputations and Sovereign Debt. Photocopy, Stanford University.




                                                       Figure 1
                                             Boom and Bust Cycles, 1850–1914
                  300                                                                                                           14
                           Total number of Latin American countries in default (right scale)
                           UK gross capital exports to Latin America, US $ million at par, 3-year moving average (left scale)
                                                                                                                                12
                  250


                                                                                                                                10
                  200

                                                                                                                                8

                  150

                                                                                                                                6

                  100
                                                                                                                                4


                   50
                                                                                                                                2



                    0                                                                                                           0
                    1850          1860             1870             1880             1890             1900             1910

                                                       Source: Taylor (2003).




                                                               34
                        Figure 2
                 Country Risk, 1870–1914

          External Bond Spread over British Consol:
        Latin America versus 11 Core & Empire Bonds


40


                                                     Core & Empire
                                        -10
                                                     Brazil
35
                                                     Uruguay
                                                     Mexico
                                                     Chile
                                                     Argentina
30



25



20



15



10



 5



 0



-5
 1870     1880            1890                1900            1910
                   Source: Taylor (2003).




                        35
                                                     Chart 2. Foreign Capital Inflows to Rich and Poor
                                                               Countries: Figure 3
                                                                          Then Versus   Now
                                                      Foreign Capital in Rich and Poor Countries: Then vs. Now


Average foreign capital to GDP ratio    50%
                                                             1913, gross stocks
                                        40%                  1997, gross stocks


                                        30%


                                        20%


                                        10%


                                         0%
                                                         <20                      20–40                                      40–60                                          60–80                                       >80
                                                               Per capita income range of receiving countries (U.S.=100)

                                                                            Source: Obstfeld and Taylor (2004).




                                                                                                      Figure 4
                                                                                                 Default, 1825–1940
                                                                   1825
                                                                          1830
                                                                                 1835
                                                                                        1840
                                                                                               1845
                                                                                                      1850
                                                                                                             1855
                                                                                                                    1860
                                                                                                                           1865
                                                                                                                                  1870
                                                                                                                                         1875
                                                                                                                                                1880
                                                                                                                                                       1885
                                                                                                                                                              1890
                                                                                                                                                                     1895
                                                                                                                                                                            1900
                                                                                                                                                                                   1905
                                                                                                                                                                                          1910
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1915
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1920
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1925
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1930
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1935
                                            Argentina (28%)
                                                                     no issues
                                            Bolivia (18%)
                                            Brazil (17%)
                                            Chile (24%)
                                            Colombia (49%)
                                            Costa Rica (30%)
                                            Ecuador (62%)
                                            Guatemala (48%)
                                            Honduras (79%)
                                            Mexico (57%)
                                            Nicaragua (45%)
                                            Paraguay (26%)           no issues

                                            Peru (39%)
                                            Salvador (29%)
                                            Santo Domingo (41%)      no issues

                                            Uruguay (12%)            no issues

                                            Venezuela (45%)




                                              Notes: Fraction of years in default shown in parentheses. Poyais is omitted.
                                       Source: Taylor (2003). Default data from Tomz (2001), issue dates from Marichal (1989).




                                                                                                             36
                                                         Figure 5
                                             Serial Default and Country Risk

                                                                (a) Histogram
                               Average Spread of Long Term Gold Bond over the British Consol Yield 1900-13
    basis points
    300


    250


    200


    150


    100


        50


         0
                           0                                1                         2                      more than 3
                                                            Number of Defaults 1801-1900



                                                                (b) Scatterplot
6
             [Average Spread 1900-1913] = 3.1754[fraction of years in default 1801-1899] + 0.7833
                                                   R2 = 0.4683
                                                                                                                  Greece
5




4




3

                 Uruguay
                  Brazil
2                                          Chile
                                                                               Argentina                       Mexico

                                                   Portugal                                               Spain
1




0
    0               0.1              0.2              0.3             0.4           0.5             0.6           0.7      0.8


                      Source: Obstfeld and Taylor (2004); Reinhart and Rogoff (2004).




                                                                 37
                                                Figure 6. Original Sin




                                          Source: Bordo and Meissner (2005).




                              Figure 7. Reputation: First and Second Wave Spreads

                                (a) First Wave                              (b) Second Wave

        Yield Differential Seasoned & New Borrowers
                London Capital Market, 1824-1825
                                                                                 Average Yield (%) by Type of Borrower
4.0                                                                                     London Market, 1872
3.5                                                             30

3.0                                                             25

2.5
                                                                20
2.0
                                                                15
1.5
                                                                10
1.0

0.5                                                              5


0.0                                                              0
           7/1824                1/1825          7/1825              Seasoned payers        Settled &   New Borrowers   Proven Lemons
                                                                                           Reborrowed
 Source: Based on Tomz (2001), Table 3                         Source: Based on Tomz (2001),




                                                 Source: Tomz (2003).




                                                          38
                       Figure 8. London Latin American Bond Index for the First Wave

                                                     Latin American Bond Market in the 1820s
                                                                 Composite Index*
                        100


                          90


                          80


                          70


                          60
                                                             Default Peru
                                                                                            Default Argentina
                                                              Apr 1826
                          50                                                                   July 1827


                          40
                                                                            Default Chile
                                                                            & Venezuela
                          30                                                                          Default Mexico
                                                                              Sep 1826
                                                                                                       October 1827
                          20


                          10


                           0
                             1824                    1825                     1826                     1827            1828
                        (*) See notes for details.


                                                             Sources: See text.




Table 1. Default History of Latin American Government Bonds Issued in the 1820s
Country               Principal      Resolution, if any
                          owed
Brazil            £21,129,000        Arrears on interest paid and service resumed in 1829.
Mexico               6,400.000       Refinancing in 1831 to cover principal and arrears on interest. Quickly
                                     defaulted on. New refinancing in 1837. More defaults and refunding.
                                     Resolved 1864.
Costa Rica              13,608       Inherited share of Central American confederation debt. Principal paid off in
                                     1840, but not arrears on interest.
Chile                1,000,000       Arrears on interest paid and service resumed in 1842.
Peru                 1,816,000       Arrears on interest paid and service resumed in 1849. Default in 1876.
Colombia (New        3,375,000       Inherited 50% share of Gran Colombia debt. Principal and arrears paid off
Granada)                             by new loan in 1845. Default in 1850. Principal and arrears paid off by new
                                     loan in 1861.
Venezuela            1,923,750       Inherited 28.5% share of Gran Colombia debt. Principal and arrears paid off
                                     by new loan in 1841. Default in 1847. New arrangements and further
                                     defaults then follow.
Ecuador              1,451,259       Inherited 21.5% share of Gran Colombia debt. Principal paid off by new loan
                                     in 1855. Arrears cancelled in exchange for land warrants and Peruvian
                                     bonds. Default in 1868.
Guatemala               68,741       Inherited share of Central American confederation debt. Principal and arrears
                                     paid off by new loan in 1856.
Buenos Aires         1,000,000       Resumed service in 1857.
El Salvador             27,217       Inherited share of Central American confederation debt. Paid off 90% of
                                     debt in 1860, but balance not until 1877.
Honduras                27,217       Inherited share of Central American confederation debt. Principal and arrears
                                     paid off by new loan in 1867.
Nicaragua               27,717       Inherited share of Central American confederation debt. Paid off 85% of
                                     debt face value in 1874.
Source: Rippy (1959, 26–28).Note: Poyais is omitted.




                                                                   39
Table 2. British Investments in Latin America at the End of 1880
Country                         Total         Private enterprise    Government bonds     Government bonds in
                                                                                            default (year)
Argentina                     £20,338,709               9,105,009          11,233,700                      —
Bolivia                         1,654,000                      —            1,654,000      1,654,000 (1875)
Brazil                         38,869,067              15,808,905          23,060,102                      —
Chile                           8,466,521                 701,417           7,765,104                      —
Costa Rica                      3,304,000                      —            3,304,000      3,304,000 (1874)
Cuba                            1,231,600               1,231,600                 n.a.                   n.a.
Dominican Republic                714,300                      —              714,300        714,300 (1872)
Ecuador                         1,959,380                 135,380           1,724,000      1,824,000 (1868)
Guatemala                         544,200                      —              544,200        544,200 (1876)
Honduras                        3,222,000                      —            3,222,000      3,222,000 (1872)
Mexico                         32,740,916               9,200,116          23,540,800     23,540,800 (1866)
Nicaragua                         206,570              23,540,800                  —                       —
Paraguay                        1,505,400                      —            1,505,400      1,505,400 (1874)
Peru                           36,177,070               3,488,750          32,688,320     32,688,320 (1876)
Uruguay                         7,644,105               4,124,885           3,519,220                      —
Venezuela                       7,564,390               1,161,590           6,402,800                      —
General                        10,274,660              10,274,660                 n.a.                   n.a.
Total                        £179,490,261              56,412,255         123,078,006            71,097,020
Source: Rippy (1959, 25, 32).




Table 3. Cumulative Gross Capital Flows from Britain to Latin America, 1880–1913
                                                                                             growth rates
                                                                                         1880– 1890– 1900–
Type    Country             1880 share      1890 share       1900 share     1913 share    1890 1900 1913

Private Argentina               9    3%        78 10%         102 10%        257 12%       24%    3%      7%
        Brazil                 10    3%        29    4%        40   4%        90   4%      11%    3%      6%
        Chile                   1    0%        12    2%        18   2%        32   2%      28%    4%      4%
        Cuba                    1    0%         3    0%         6   1%        20   1%       8%    7%     10%
        Mexico                  4    1%        19    2%        27   2%        64   3%      17%    4%      7%
        Peru                    2    1%         5    1%         6   1%        11   1%      10%    1%      5%
        Uruguay                 5    2%        12    2%        14   1%        20   1%       9%    2%      3%
        These 7                32 11%         157 20%         212 20%        494 24%       17%    3%      7%
        All countries         296 100%        770 100%      1,064 100%     2,065 100%      10%    3%      5%
All     Argentina              21    3%       132 10%         160   9%       332 10%       20%    2%      6%
        Brazil                 22    4%        56    4%        74   4%       166   5%      10%    3%      6%
        Chile                   8    1%        22    2%        33   2%        60   2%      11%    4%      5%
        Cuba                    1    0%         3    0%         6   0%        26   1%       8%    7%     13%
        Mexico                  5    1%        26    2%        39   2%        80   3%      18%    4%      6%
        Peru                   27    4%        30    2%        30   2%        37   1%       1%    0%      2%
        Uruguay                 7    1%        20    1%        23   1%        30   1%      11%    2%      2%
        These 7                90 15%         289 22%         365 20%        732 23%       12%    2%      6%
        All countries         599 100%      1,334 100%      1,812 100%     3,203 100%       8%    3%      4%
Notes and Source: Millions of pounds, from Stone (1999).




                                                  40
Table 4. Volatility of Public Debt to GDP Ratio, 1870–1913
Sample                                    N           Mean               Std. Dev.          Min         Max
Latin America                           149            1.31                   0.91          0.29         3.39
Periphery                               439            0.99                   0.77          0.11         3.54
Core                                    391            0.46                   0.39          0.01         1.42
Source: Obstfeld and Taylor (2004).




Table 5. Foreign Loans to Latin American governments, 1850–73

                                                                                     Purpose (%)
                         Total no.                      Nominal Value
Country                   of loans               (thousands of pounds)   Military    Public Works   Refinance
Argentina                        7                              13,488         20              68          12
Bolivia                          1                               1,700                       100            0
Brazil                           8                              23,467        30               13          57
Chile                            7                               8,502        37               51          12
Colombia                         2                               2,200                          9          91
Costa Ria                        3                               3,400                       100            0
Ecuador                          1                               1,824                                    100
Guatemala                        2                                 650                        77           23
Haiti                            1                               1,458                                    100
Honduras                         4                               5,590                        98            2
Mexcio                           2                              16,960        70                           30
Paraguay                         2                               3,000                        80           20
Peru                             7                              51,840        10              45           45
Santo Domingo                    1                                 757                       100            0
Uruguay                          1                               3,500                                    100
Venezuela                        2                               2,500                        30           70

                                                Combined Subtotals by subperiods

1850-59                          9                             10,862                         32          68
1860-69                         20                             56,705         41              12          47
1870-75                         22                             73,270                         60          40
Source: Marichal (1989, 80).




                                                41
Table 6. Defaults and Settlements of Latin American Loan Following the Crisis of 1873
                                       Original date
Govt                      Interest          of issue          Nominal value         Date of
defaulting                     rate         of loans of unredeemed principal        default                Settlement
Bolivia                        6%              1872                    1654       1/1/1875                        1880
Costa Rica                     6%              1871                     940      1/11/1874                        1885
                               7%              1872                    2362       1/4/1874                        1885
Guatemala                      5%              1856                      73       1/2/1875                 1882/1887
                               6%              1869                     469       1/4/1875                 1882/1887
Honduras                       5%              1856                      79       1/4/1873                      still in
                              10%              1867                     901       1/1/1873                     default
                               7%              1869                    2177       1/3/1873                  by turn of
                              10%              1870                    2243       1/1/1873                the century
Paraguay                       8%              1871                     957      15/6/1874                        1885
                               8%              1872                     548       1/7/1874                        1885
Peru                           5%              1869                     265       1/1/1876                        1890
                               6%              1870                   11142       1/1/1876                        1890
                               5%              1872                   21547       1/1/1876                        1890
Santo Domingo                  6%              1869                     714       1/1/1873                        1888
Uruguay                        6%              1871                    3165       1/8/1876                        1879
Source: Marichal (1989, 120).




Table 7. Foreign Loans of Five Latin American States, 1880–1890
Country                         No of loans                                     Nominal value (thousands of pounds)
Argentina                                50                                                                  77,985
Brazil                                    8                                                                  38,914
Chile                                     4                                                                   9,525
Mexico                                    5                                                                  21,850
Uruguay                                   4                                                                  18,782

Note: These five states received close to 90% of the total Latin American foreign loans in this decade.




                                                    42
