NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROECONOMIC RESPONSES BY
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES TO CHANGES
IN EXTERNAL ECONOMIC CONDITIONS

Willem H. Buiter

Working Paper No. 1836

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1986

Jim Tobin, Gus Ranis, Dick Nelson and Joe Peck made very helpful
comments on an earlier draft. This document was prepared for the
World Development Report - Core Group of the World Bank as a
background paper for the 1986 World Development Report. The views
expressed are those of the author alone. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1836

February 1986

Macroeconomic Pesponses by Developing Countries to

thanges in External Economic Conditions

ABSTRA

The paper presents a non—technical szrvey of soue of the issues involved

ifl the design of stabilization policy 10 developng cotsstrse with special
euphasis on policy responses to external shocks. First, the six imost inortant
external economic paraneters of develcping countries are reviettd; I) the
terms of trade5 2) the growth of t'nrld arkets, 3) the cost and auai lability
of private external finance, 4) the cost and availability of official and
other concessional finance, including aid, 5) the nrld rate of inflation and
6) the exchange rates bett'een the cirrencies of the jor industrial
countries.
The paper then reviews the nacroeconomic policy arsenal and the denand
and supply effects of the various policy instrunents (nDnetarv and credit
poiicy, the entire array ot fiscal nstrunents, exchange rate policy, the use
of exchange and capital controls and incones policy). Finally, there is a
discussion of stabilization responses to I oir esternal shocks: a
deterioration in the terms of trade, a slovdovn in the rate of qrowth of
export dEmand, an increase in the interest rate at itxchdeveio?ainq countries
borrow abroad and an increase in the external rate of inflation. The
prevalence of repressed I inarrcial nanets anti creut rat toninc wakes ettective
denard and effectitie supoly responses to wonetery fiscal and enchance rate
policy quite dxfterent from ;tat they are in nnst of the industrxal vnrld.

Willem

H. Buiter

Department

of Economics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520

Introducti on

Policy responses by developing countries to changes in the external
economic environment can conceptually be subdivided into macroeconomic
stabilisation policy and structural adjustment policy.1 Stabilizatiofl
policy aims to influence (and, one hopes, to minimize) deviations from
full employment equilibrium or full capacity utilization equilibrium.
Structural adjustment policy or allocative policy aims to influence the
full employment equilibrium configuration itself.2
While the distinction between stabilisation policy and structural
adjustment policy is clear in principle, in practice (both in the real
world and in the ulpracticer of the theoretical aodels we tend to work:

with) virtually every fiscal, firancial, monetary or regulatory policy

iThis section draws on Buiter tl984].

2Note that accordino to this definition there can be no stabilization
policy in the instantaneous Wairasian equilibrium models o the New
Classical School. It is possible to modify the definition by
differentiating between a "full information equilibrium, i.e. an
equilibrium in which agents possess complete information on all relevant
contemporaneous and past endogenous and exogenous variables, and an
incomplete information equilibrium. Even in the hyperactive
invisible—hand models of the New Classical School, alternative budgetary
and financial policy rules can, in qeneral, alter the information
content of currently observed endogenous variables such as prices and
thus influence the deviation of the actual from the full information
equilibrium. (Turnovsky £1980], Weiss £1980], Buiter [1980, l98l) king
(1982], Marini (1985]). Such "stabilization" policy can then be
distinguished from ailocative policy actions or rules which aim to
influence the full information equilibrium itself.

action will have both stabilisation and allocative (and indeed also

distributional) consequences. Consider e.g. a policy of cutting
exhaustive public spending on goods and services and reducing tax rates
simultaneously, in such a way as to keep the public sector deficit

constant. The objectives are the allocative or structural adjustment
ones of freeing resources for private absorption and of creating more
favorable tax incentives for the supply of effort.

If there is any

merit in the balanced budget multiplier theorems this budgetary action

will have contractionary stabilization consequences. The distributional
consequences both of the spending cuts and of the ta reductions are
likely to be important but are seldom analyzed satisfactorily.
Unintended longer—term allocative consequences from public spending cuts
are possible if the important distinction between current and capital
spending is overlooked and exhaustive spending cuts fall

disproportionately on public sector capital formation.
One operationally useful but not completely satisfactory way of
fleshing out the distinction between stabilisation and structural

adjustment is the following. Macroeconomic stabilisation policy
concerns monetary, fiscal, exchange rate, exchange control, capital
control and incomes policy actions within the historically given
inmtitutional framework and the domestic and international market

structure.

3

Structural adjustment policy concerns changes in the in5titutioraJ
framework and in the laws, rules and regulations that govern property
rights, liability, incentives and the flow of information, which
together constitute the parameters within which production, exchange and

distribution take place. Structural adjustment is about changes in
regime. Macroeconomic stabilization policy is about policy actions
within a regime, that is for a given institutional framework and a given
market structure and/or non—market allocation and distribution
mechani mm.

4

A problem with this characterization is that it suggests that
stabilisation policy actions can always be implemented more swiftly than
structural adjustment policy actions and that they have short—run
effects only, i.e. effects which do not last longer than a typical

There is a rich and varied literature on stabilization policy in
developing countries. Important references are Diaz—Alejandro Ei3,
19814 1983], Kapur [197à3, Bruno [1979], Cline and Weintraub eds.
(1981], Taylor [1981], Schydlowsky [1981), Dornbusch (1962, 1985b1,
Branson (1983].

The role of the IMF in macroeconomic adjustment in developing countries
is discussed in J. Williamson [1982, 1983 (ed.)]1 J. Muns, ed. (1984],
1. Killick, ed. [1982, 1984a, b), A Crockett [1981], A Buira [1983), P.
Keller [1980], Khan and Knight [1981, 1982), Katseli [1983), Branson
[19B4], IMF E19B5). Goldstein and Montiel [1985]. The evolution of the
Fund's views up to 1977 can be found in IMF (1977].

4See also Lal (19843.

4

business cycle. While monetary stabilization policy can4 in 'cst
countries, be adjusted promptly, fi5cal stabilisation policy often is

the prisoner of unwieldy budgetary procedures. The "inside lag° of
fiscal policy may therefore range from weeks to years. To the extent
that stabilisation policy affects domestic capital formation, its
effects may be long—lasting instead of merely cyclical.

Structural adjustment may be a long drawn—out process e.g.
achieving a significant change in the sectoral composition 04 production
and employment) or a once—off shift of short duration (replacing a
system of price controls for a single commodity by one of subsidies and

a market—determined price). The administrative and expert knowledge
required for the design and implementation of successful stabilisation
policy is not a world removed from that necessary for an effective
structural adjustment policy.
A final practical distinction between stabilisation and structural
adjustment is that the former tends to be formulated at the
macroeconomic or aggregative level and concerns the overall balance
between effective demand and effective supply and their relationship to

the full employment levels of output and employment. Structural
adjustment policies frequently are disaggregated or microeconomic in

design and are aimed at the sectorai industrial or regional composition
of production and employment.
Structural measures can be differentiated along many different

dimensions. A useful two—dimensional classification distinguishes first
between measures aimed at domestic markets and measures affecting the

5

conditions

of international exchange and second between reform of

financial markets and reform of urealu goods and factor markets. The
matrix in Table 1 represents this classification and provides some
illustrative examples of the structural adjustment policies in question.
While this paper is concerned with macroeconomic stabilisation
policy in response to external shocks and disturbances, it is clear that
structural issues cannot be ignored, even in the discussion of

stabilisation

policy narrowly conceived.

At the very least, the

institutional setting and rules oi the game, and the domestic and
international financial and real market structures condition the
appropriate monetary, fiscal, exchange rate and incomes policy responses

by developina countries to a change in the external environment. A
temporary worsening of a countrys terms of trade, for instance, will
call for a very different macroeconomic policy response if the country
has easy access to private international financial markets than if it is
effectively excluded from further access to private international credit

markets. Where optimal maroeconomic policy responses to external shocks
depend on the nature of the structural adjustment policies that are
being pursued, this dependence will be made explicit.
In principle, it would be better to speak of stabilisation and
structural aspects or consequences of a given fiscal4 financial or
monetary policy action or rule, rather than of stabilisation and

structural policy. The inferior usage seems to be too well—ingrained,
however, to try to dislodge it.

In a number of cases, one or the other

set of consequences clearly dominates. E.g. liberalisation of domestic

5a

Table 1

A Classification o Structural Adjustment Policies

DOMESTIC

INTERNATIONAL

FINANCIAL
Domestic Financial Reform
Introduction of market—
determined deposit and
loan rates
Creation of a domestic
equity market
Mobilization of rural savings

REAL
Labour Market Reform
Land reform
Reform of public sector
pricing and investment

Reform of exchange controls
and of laws, rules, and
regulations affecting

Reform of trade policy

internatior'al capital

biiit

Reform of marketin
boards

Import taris
Export subsidies
Quotas

a

factor

and goods markets or of a urepressedh domestic financial system

would seem to have mainly structural consequences, as do policies to
change the degree of export—orientedness of domestic production or to
alter the extent of integration of domestic financial and goods markets

into the global financial and trading systems.5 (But see Buffie
[19841).

Reducing public spending, lowering the rate of growth of domestic

credit and devaluing the exchange rate to reduce domestic absorption and
improve the external current account balance would seem to be examples

of policies with mainly stabilization consequences. Changes in the
volume and composition of public spending will, however, also tend to

have important long—run structural consequences. A devaluation,
possibly accompanied by a change in the rate of crawl of the exchange
rate in a crawling peg regime, may also be one element in a structural
adjustment package aimed at increasing the share of exports in domestic
output.

Like all forms of government intervention in the economic process,
the case for macroeconomic stabilization policy rests on empirical

judgements about the workings of the economic and political systems
and/or on a normative judgement.

5The locus classicus of financial repression is McKinnon [1973]. On
trade liberalisation and export—promoting vs. import—substituting
development strategies see Krueger [1978], Balassa E1992a, b, 1984], and
Bhagwati and Srinivasan [1979]. The important practical issue of the
right order of libera]isation and reform is discussed in Harberger
(1982], Barletta, Blejer and Landau, eds. (1983], Edwards E1984a, b, ci
and Obstfeld [1994).

7

The empirical economic judgement concerns the presence and severity
of market failure and the existence, taking into account only the
6

technical (or uacadem1cI) constraints on policy design, of
performance—and—welfare—enhancing pa1 icy interventions or interventi on

rules. The empirical political or politico—economic Judgement concerns
the likelihood that these potentially feasible, performance—and
welfare—enhancing policy measures will in fact be imp.lemented given the

actual political and administrative constraints an the design and

conduct of economic policy.
The ethical or normative judgement that can either substitute for

the positive diagnosis of market failure or reinforce it, concerns the
desirability of government interventions in the income and wealth

distribution process. The ethical judgement that any particular
distribution of wealth and income is undesirable leads to a policy

prescription of redistributive measures only after (and to the extent
that) it has been complemented with the empirical politico—economic
judgement that the proposed cure isn't worse than the disease because Of

negative

side effects (in terms of efficiency and/or stabilization).

The identification of widespread market failure is not a very
challenging task in many developing countries (as in most industrial

countries). Cf course, many of the distortions that lie behind these
examples of market failure are the direct consequences of past and

61.e.

assuming a unified, benevolent, credible economic policy maker.

B

present government policy. The policy measures to rectify the situation
often are of a structural or allocative rather than of a macroeconomic

stabilization kind. For instance, the cure for financial repression
involves the abolition of artificial ceilings on interest rates ana

other rates of return. Part of urban unemployment is due to
artificially high wage rates in the formal urban sector (where the
government often is a (or the) major employer and unions are stronger
than in the rural sector), a problem that is sometimes compounded by a
policy of paving higher food subsidies to urban than to rural consumers.
Many other forms of government—created or government—sponsored

market failure can be thought of. While the ultimate remedy for these
problems lies in structural reform and not in macroeconomic policy
intervention, as long as the structural distortions are part 04

the

actual economic environment, they are apt to have important implications

for design of macroeconomic stabilization poiicy. The potential for
acute financial crowding out problems in a financially repressed econocnv

will be discussed below. While one may wish for financial
liberalization, government budgetary policy design should be sensitive
to the actual crowding out mechanism and not to the nechanism that one
might have hoped for.

The forms of market failure that are the sine qua non of

stabilization policy are 1) the capital market imperfection" that
(most) individuals and firms cannot borrow on the same terms as their
government and 2) the absence of instantaneous competitive market
clearing in (some) goods and labour markets or, more accurately, the

9

existence and persistence of non—Wairasian, quantity—constrained
rationing equilibria or imperfect competition equilibria in some of
these markets.

Even if one subscribes to the view that such non—Wairasian
equilibria are endemic in the major industrial countries, the very
different structure of developing countries' labour markets and their
often very distinct composition of production make it by no means

self—evident that stabilization approaches designed in the laboratories
of the industrial countries' business cycles are transferable to all or

any of the developing countries. As a first approximation it Is
probably safe to say that the larger the share of the modern industrial
and service sectors in total 6DF, and the larger the TM+ormal sector

relative to the "informal' sector, the more relevant the stabilizatIon
policies derived from the experience of the industrial countries are

likely to be. This means that the more developed 'Southern Cone'
countries will ignore macroeconomic stabilization policy at their peril,
even if mutatis definitely sunt mutandis, with particular attention paid
to important differences in the structure of the labour market, the
capital market and in the organization of production.
Countries with a small modern industrial sector, a large informal
urban sector and a large share of 6DP derived from subsistence
agriculture are unlikely to provide a welcoming environment for

traditional macroeconomic stabilization policies. Demand management
also is unlikely to play an important role when the production of
agricultural cash crops for a competitive global commodity market

'C)

accounts for a major share of GDF. Supply management, i.e. policies to

maintain a competitive real exchange rate or reduce real marginal labour

and capital costs

do

play a crucial role in determining overall economic

performance, but Keynesian—style quantity—constrained demand for output

is unlikely to hold back production; an individual country (and

certainly the individual

producer in

such a country) faces a very

elastic global demand schedule for its products.

The identification of the observable empirical correlates of

potentially successful stabilization policy in developing countries
should be a research priority in the years to come. The almost

bewildering variety of

experiences, modes of economic organization and

stages of economic development make it very unlikely that a single
prototype policy model will serve for such a heterogeneous col1ectior o
countri

es.

Even when this first task is done

and the economic models are

ready to roll', the expected payo from the practical design and
implementation of macroeconomic stabilization policy still is uncertain.

In the second stage of the analysis——the evaluation of the real—world
political, administrative and institutional feasibility of economic
performance—and

welfare—enhancing stabilization policy——political

judgement and an understanding oi the art of

the possible (not at all

the comparative advantage of the economist) are essential. It is to be

hoped that political

market failure is not

so serious as to preclude the

formation of viable, effective coalitions capable either of designing
compensation schemes that turn potential Pareto

improvements into actual

11

Pareto improvements, or of resisting veto attempts by losers +rom policy
reforms that are deemed desirable according to some generally accepted

social welfare criterion. it is my belief that, without dismissing the
real dangers of destabilisation policy", there is likely to be a
sufficient reservoir of economic understanding and political
common—sense to make "supply side—friendly" demand management policy and
"aggregate demand—sensitive" supply side policy a practical possibility
in a large number

of developing countries.

The outline of the rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2

illustrates

the dangers of engaging in financial reform or trade

liberalization without paying attention to the budgetary and monetary

implications of such reforms. After this slight digression, Section 3
reviews the external environment of the developing countries and Section
4 the stabilisation policy instrument arsenal at their disposal.
Section

contains a discussion of stabilisation policy responses to

four external shocks: a deterioration in the terms of trade, a slowdown
in the growth of export demand; an increase in the interest rates at

which developing countries borrow abroad and an increase in the eternal
rate of inflation.

2. Budgetary, Monetary and Inflation Consequences of Two Kinds of
Structural Reform: A Cautionary Tale
Just as inappropriate macroecormic stabilisation policies can
interfere with the success+l implementation of structural adjustment
policies, so !tructural adjustment policies can have unexpected and

unintended macroeconomic consequences which must be taken into account
lest both sets of policies are reversed or abandoned for entirely the

wrong reasons. Two important examples are the budgetary, monetary and
inflationary consequences of domestic or international financial reorn
and the budgetary consequences of export—oriented liberalization
measures.

Domestic financial reform, the budget deficit. seignioraqe and inflation

From the public sector budget identity we know that any excess of
public spending (6 +i-+ *) over public revenues CT) must be

financed by borrowing domestically

by borrowing abroad (eB*: b

printing money \—)or by running down the stock of official foreian
excnange reserves C

—eZR*.7
-

B
B
iB
eB* e
6+i—+ej*——T—-f—+
P
F

j

-

Consi der the following not unrepresentative case: a
afford

to

country cannct

lose any more foreign exchange reserves and considers the cost

s real public spending on goods and services, I real taxes net f
transfer5, i the domestic nominal interest rate. i* the foreign nominal
interest rate. B the nominal value of domestically held public debt
(assumed to be denominated in domestic currency), B* the nominal value
of foreign—held public debt (assumed to be denominated in foreign
currency), e the exchange rate (the price of foreign currency which

for simplicity, assumed to be the same for current and for capital
transactions, P the domestic price level, N the nominal stock of
government abase" or high—powered money and P* the stock of foreign
exchange reserves.

is,

13

of

accumulating additional reserves to be too high. Both the internal

and external debt burdens have reached their upper limits.8 These
limits are to be viewed relative to some measure of debt servicing

capacity, which for concreteness I take to be GDP. The maximal internal
debt—6DP ratio is denoted b and its external counterpart b*.

It follows

that s, the real seigniorage the government has to extract by printing
new money, as a proportion of 6DPI is given by

1 6—1fr—n h
——+
y —

PY

—

Y

_*

(r*+rl

c 'v•

—n h

or

*

2)

s

& + (r—g )b +
y

(r*

+ g
— g )b
C

y

*

Barring repudi ati on or default, b and b cannot be changed at any

rate in the short run. For a 5mall country the foreign real interest

8These limits can represent both economic

and political constraints.

is the primary public sector deficit (the deficit excluding interest
payments) as a proport3on of GDP, r is the domestic real interest rate.
r* is the external (world:' real interest rate, V is real 6DP, g is the
growth rate of real GDP and g is the proportional rate of increase in
competitiveness or the proportional rate of deterioration of the terms
of trade.

14

rate, r*, and the proportional rate of decline of the terms of trade,

are exogenous. With unrestricted international capital Mobility,
the domestic real interest rate would be governed by the external real

interest rate, Even with restricted international capital mobility,
there are likely to be rather strict bounds on the ability of

the

authorities to influence their debt service burden by varying the

internal real interest rate. 10 More rapid growth of real 6DF, ano
therefore of the
external

economys

capacity for servicing both internal and

public debt, relaxes the debt

service constraint and lowers

the

real amount of revenue to be raised by seigniorage, (the inflation tax)

for any given primary deficit. Except for this last potentially
important channel, the only way in which the government can limit its
need for seigniorage (for

recourse to the inflation tax) is by reducinc

the primary deficit i.e. by some combination of spending

cuts and/or- tax

increases.

10The internal domestic market for government debt is in many in5tances
of negligible importance. When private domestic bank! are required to
absorb and hold more government paper than they would willingly do at
current interest rates, an effective tax is levied on the banks equal to
the excess holdings times half the difference between the market rate
and the rate paid by the government. This tax can be viewed as another
form of seigniorage. Many developing countries have complicated
arrangements between the government (or the central bank) and the
private banking system.
It is not uncommon for governments to borrow
from the banks (at rates below the shadow price of funds to the banks.
and to lend to them simultaneously through some other arrangement. This
complicates the practice (but not the principle' of the calculation of
seigniorage (or equivalently of the true stock of outside money or
monetary base)

15

Seigniorage as a proportion of 6DP, s can be written as the
product of the proportional rate of growth of base money, M

and the

reciprocal of v, the income velocity of circulation of base money

S

(X

or

3)

bc

= sv

Given s, an increase in the velocity of circulation of base mone
(a reduction in the demand for base money relative to income increases

the proportional rate of growth o the nominal stock of base money and
thus, sooner or later, the rate of inflation. Therefore, any reform4
financial or other, that does not lower the real interest rate paid on
the public debt or raise the growth rate of real output, but increases

the velocity of circulation of government base money will tend to raise
the rate of inflation unless fiscal measures are taken to lower the

primary deficit. Many intrinsically desirable proposals for internal
monetary and financial reform have as one of their consequences an

increase in the velocity of circulation of base money. The lifting of
interest rate ceilings on commercial bank deposits, the encouragement c+

private financial innovation and the removal of artificial barriers to
private financial intermediation all tend to enhance the availability
and the attractiveness of financial claims (both public and private)

lo

that pay market interest rates. Increasing international financial
openness may lead to direct international currency substitution (e.g.
dollarization) which depresses the demand for domestic base money (see

Ortiz [1983]). Non—interest—bearing government money experiences a
decline in demand; the inflation tax base shrinks.

If the required

seigniorage revenue is unchanged, the inflation tax rate wiii have to

increase. To avoid higher inflation several steps are possible.

If s

is not changed, the inflation tax base can be expanded, say, by
increased (non—interest—bearing) reserve requirements on domestic

monetary and financial institutions. This is equivalent to imposing a

tax on the private banking system. Alternatively scan be lowered,
which for all practical purposes involves reducing public spending or
raising taxes.

The issue is important because the velocity of circi.iation of base

money is much lower in many developing countries than in most
industrialized countries, (reflecting the frequently rudimentary and/or
repressed nature of the internal monetary and financial system) and
seigniorage sometimes is an important source of government finance.
Table 2 shows the importance of seigniorage as a source of revenue in a

number of developing countries. For social, political and
administrative reasons, the tax base in many developing countries is

narrow and difficult to expand. The position of mast indu!triaiized
nations is quite different bath as regards the importance of seignioraae
revenue (which tends to be negligible (see Buiter [19B5]) and as regards

the breadth and expansibility of the tax base. Table 3 shows some

16a

Table 2

Seigniorage as

Percentage of GDP in Selected Developing Countries

8ANGLADEBH

ID

NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

1961
1962

1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
i9b9
1970
1971

1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980

1.22
.82

5.35

SENEGAL
NA

PHILIPPINES

NA
—2.44

.93
1.31
1.25

4.58

.51

—.65

—.63
—1.09
—1.13

.79
.60

.32

.92

1.89
3.54
—1.55
2.90

—.05

5.39

i.3
3.84

.10

7.18
4.20
5.42

1.42
1.77
.94

5.26
6.97
7.62

1.28
—.95

1.40
1.56
1.53

1.07

17.52

1.88

.89

.58

9.34

3.79

.58
1.79

12.83
12.78

3.11

.65
.34

2.19

6.78

—.17

IFS

EGYPT

3.15
—.20
2.12

2.3á

1981
1q82
1983
1984

Source:

a

1.54
.35
.33

.71

1.03
2.31

—.42
—.08

2.13

.2
-.93
2.66
.78

1.80
1.00
1.73
.85
.78

2.75
1.52

16b

Table

3

Seigniorage as a Percentage of 6DF in Selected Industrial Count-es

ID

GERMAN'

1961
1962
1963

.41

1964
1965

1.24
.74

1966

.67

1967
1962

—.31

.58
.78

.72

.2
22

196
1970
19i1
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980

1.52
2.74
.89
—.13

.31

1.07
.84

1.40
—.40
—.16

1981
1982

.50

1983
1984

Source:

IFS

us

JhPAN

2.50
.78
1.82
1.20
.22

L.]
133
1.B
1.6
1.42

1.2

2.55
3.40
1.77

.4

.86
.81
1.40

.74
.63

.2b

.5

.51
.2

.39
.17
.30
.76
1.04
.59

.20
.23
.39
.47
.51

.53

.46
.38
.19
1.04

.45
.70
.33
.50

—.47

.91

1.64
2.67

.39

.89
1.53
.41

.69
.64
—.18

.20
.21

.14
.76

.ai

.47
.42
.51

.3
.50
.38
21

.13

.36

.18

.37

17

illustrative examples of industrialized countries with a much higher

income velocity of circulation of base money, a broader genera] ta base
and a small and often negligible contribution of seigniorage to total
government revenue.

The implications of financial liberalisation for the seigniorage
base and thus, given the public sector's revenue needs, for inflation
are but one example of

the

often unfamiliar ways in which structural

adjustment policies can have consequences for macroeconomic
stabi I isation.

Budgetary Consequences of Outward—Looking Trade Liberalization
Measures
Trade liberalisation measures such as the reduction or removal of
import tariffs or the relaxation of import licensing requirements and
export promotion measures such as export subsidies may have important

budgetary consequences. It is not true, of courses that lowering tariff
rates or even abolishing tariffs altogether necessarily lowers revenue.

A higher than unitary price elasticity of import demand or a prohibitive
(zero revenue) tariff are obvious cases in point. Many import
restraints furthermore take the form of non—revenue—raising, non—tariff

barriers such as (non—auctioned) quotas. Even so, tariff revenues
represent a significant share of total public sector revenue in a number
of developing countries, as shown in Table 4.
The budgetary implications of trade liberalisation must be taken
into account lest seigniorage be forced to make up any revenue

17a

Table 4

Tariff Revenues as a Percentage of Central Gov!rnment Tax ReventeE
in Selected Developing Countries

ID

1973
1974
1975

1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981

1982
1983

INDIA
NA
19.88
17.88
16.86
16.92
20.24
25.86
27.18
28.36
28.06
NA

Source: G.F.S.

TURKEY

GHANA

13.52

13.94

14.12
13.24
16.64
15.14
16.26
10.38
5.34
4.87
NA
NA

12.1
17.23
15.14
15.54
17.30
13.65
12.24
14.59
11.66
17.59

18

shortfall, with adverse consequences for the rate of inflation. The
structural adjustment implications and the macroeconmic stabilization
aspects of the spending and/or taxation measures undertaken to
compensate for any adverse budgetary consequences of trade
liberalisation must be entered into the overall cost—benefit
calculation.

.

11

The Eternal Environment of the Developing Countries
The most lmportant exogenous features of the international

environment for developing countries are the following;

12

1. The level and variability (both anticipated and unanticipated.)

of the terms of trades now and expected for the future. This will
reflect the behaviour of all price and non—price aspects o
international trades such as e>port prices, non—price conditions o
access to export markets (such as non—tariff protectionist barriers),
prices of final goods imports and prices of intermediate, raw materials
and energy imports.

Figure 1 gives the behaviour of some important international
relative prices.

It includes the terms of trade since 1970 of all

For a full discussion of the macroeconmic consequences of trade
liberalisation, see Khan and Zahier £l9B] and Buffie (1984].

12See e.g. Dornbusch E1985a] and Sachs and 1cKibbin (1985].

1 8a

I 30
120
110

so
. .-

70

so
50
40
30

1370

1377

sALL
iit

'OIL

Figure 1

The behavior of the terms of trade for three groups of developing countries
Source: World Bank internal calculations

19

developing countries (all), of the low income developing countries (low)
and of the middle income, oil exporting developing countries (oil).

Figure 2 shows the behaviour of the dollar price and the real price o
OPEC oil since 1960.

2. The level and variability of the growth of world markets for
developing country exports where developing countries are "large'
relative to the size of the market and face a less than perfectly

elastic world demand schedule. Four countries small enough to take
world prices as parametric, the growth of world demand for their

products will appear as an exogenous rise in their export prices. Again
both current and prospective future developments matter, as do

anticipated variability and true uncertainty. Figure 3 gives the growth
rate since 1957 of real GDP in the industrial world, a crucial indicator
of the growth of global markets for developing country exports.

3. The cost and availability of external finance. This includes
the "supply conditions", now and in the future, of private and official
external credit and aid.

The level and variability, now and anticipated in the future, of
U.S. dollar interest rates, both short and long, are key parameters in

the external environment of the developing countries. The spread over
Libor at which countries actually borrow is not a good indicator of the
external financial constraints on borrowers, as it is in part determined
by the behaviour and characteristics of the borrowing country itself.

1 9a

40

30

20

10

0

cur

194

1372

13S0

Figure 2

The nominal and real price of OPEC oil since 1960

cur: weighted average OPEC crude current price (US $'s)
con: weighted average OPEC crude constant (1980)

Source:

World Bank Commodity Handbook

price

19b

+s
+4

+3
+2
+1

0
—1

171

13S7

Figure 3
The growth rate of GDP in the industrial world (%)

Source: IFS

184

2o

Creditworthiness and credit ratings are in part a choice variable, at

any rate in the long run. Where credit rationing takes place, market
rates are a poor proxy for the shadow price of investible resources.

At

constant interest rates, the degree of external financial pressure can

vary greatly. Figure 4 shows the behaviour since 1957 of short (RUSS)
and long (RUSL) interest rates on U.S. dollar denominated debt. The
availability of external resources at below—market cost is represented
in Table 5 by the real value of private and official aid and credit
extended at concessional rates..
4.

The level, variability and uncertainty, now and in the future

of the world rate of inflation.13 Figure 5 shows the behaviour of the
external inflation rate faced by the developing countries since 1957.

5. The level and variability of exchange rates between major
industrialized countries. While this affects developing countries
mainly through the first four channels mentioned above it is worth
emphasizing in its own right. There is a robust empirical regularity
which associates a weakening of the U.S. dollar with a lower real price

of oil and an improventent in the terms of trade of non—oil LDCs. It
has also recently tended to be associated with lower dollar interest
rates and a narrowing of the spread between Libor and the 1—Bill rate
Cflornbusch 1985a). While this remains a set of observations in search

of a theory (and could be no more than the reflection of a fortuitous

13See e.g. W.R. Cline and Associates [1991].

20 a

Figure 4

Cost of external finance for Developing Countries

20

UI

10

0

137

1S71

Source: RUSS: 1957—1969

,

6 month US Treasury Bill Rate

1970—1977 , 6 month EurocoJ.lar rate

1978—1984 , 6 month Libor rate

RUSL: US government long term bond rate (20 year)

j:4

20b

Table 5

Availability of Aid and Concessional Finance

Total net IDA flows
Total ODA
(Millions of U. S. $ at 1980 constant prices)
1975
1978

1979
1980
1981

1982
1983

1,727.57
1,222.26
1,481.73
1,553.90
1,924.96
2,470.54
NA

31,520.00
33,920.00

33,240.00

3,860.00
34,180.00
33,830.00
32,970. :o

Source: WDR and World Bank Debt Tables
Total ODA: Overseas Development Assistance by OPEC and OECD

20c
Figure 5
Inflation in the industrial world (%)

i2

ii
10
S
S

7

4
3

2

13S7

1371

Source: Percentage rate of change in P deflator of
industrial countries. IFS

1384

21

and once—off concurrence of events> it appears that debtor, non—oil

developing countries have an interest in a weaker U.S. dollar. Figure 6
contains the behaviour of the US $ effective exchange rate since 1970.
The significance and the welfare implications of changes in these

external parameters will of course depend crucially on the domestic
circumstances of the country in question. E.G. an increase in export

volume (at given terms of trade) only represents an increase in welfare
if there are idle resources whose shadow prices are below their market

prices. i.e. in Keynesian demand—constrained regimes rather than in
classical or supply—constrained regimes.

In what follows full

employment (or a high level of capacity utilization), price stability
and balance of payments equilibrium are taken to be the objectives of
stabilisation policy.
4.

The Macroeconomic Stabilisation Policy Arsenal
Macroeconomic stabilisation policy aims to influence the level and

composition of effective aggregate demand as well as the level and
composition of effective aggregate suppply in the short to medium term.

It contains both demand management and short—run supply management. The
main instruments are the following:

a) Monetary policy. This includes changes in the level and/or
rate of change of the stock of domestic credit (under a managed exchange
rate regime) or of the money stock (under a market—determined exchange

rate). A narrow monetary aggregate like M1 (or even the monetary base)
is the relevant one in most developing countries other than the
semi—industrialized group that tends to have a more developed financial

21 a

FIgure 6

150
4

——

I

130

/
I
/

—

120-

I

p

N
I$1/f

110-

/
__-w-

100I

1370

iS??

1S4

Source: US $ erfective exchange rate, IFS. (Increase denotes appreciation)

22

system.

In a repressed financial system with interest rates controlled

at below market—clearing levels and consequent credit rationing,
variations in controlled interest rates and in the degree of stringency

of credit rationing are further important policy instruments. Changes
in the allocation of rationed credit between sectors or between
consumption credit and credit for working capital or fixed capital

formation will also have potentially long—lasting supply side effects.14

Demand effects of monetary policy. Tight money impacts on
aggregate demand in a familiar manner. Higher nominal and real interest
rates and implicit and explicit required rates of return on other aseets

depress demand, reinforcing any real balance effect. More severe credit
rationing also squeezes demand (especially inventory accumulation and
fixed investment), when financial markets are underdeveloped and/or
repressed and bank credit is the major external source of investible

funds for firms. With a greater or lesser lag, nominal wages and the
general price level adjust downwards (in terms of the level or rate of
change, depending on the nature of the monetary contraction).

In the

long run real activity effects disappear and monetary policy is

reflected only in changes in nominal magnitudes. The duration of the
adjustment process depends on the details of the institutions of labour

'4From the government budget identity it is clear that monetary, fiscal
and financial policy possess one fewer degrees of freedom than one might
have thought (or hoped). Given the deficit and the amount of internal
and external borrowing, domestic credit expansion is residually
determi ned.

and product markets, but will be shorter when the monetary authorities

are blessed with credibility a to the firmness of their long—run

commitment to monetary control. Painless, instantaneous adjustment has
never been observed and is riot a practical possibility.

Monetary restraint will tend to improve the official settlements
balance of the international balance of payments under a managed
exchange rate and put upward pressure on the nominal exchange rate path
under a market—determined exchange rate.

In the short run, nominal

exchange rate appreciation (more or less) equals real exchange rate
appreciation and tight money worsens international competitiveness,
either by reducing the relative price of traded to non—traded goods

and/or by raising the relative price of exports to imports. Where thee
is very limited international capital mobility, the behaviour of the
current account surplus mirrors that of the official settlements

balance. When there is a high degree of capital mobility, monetary
policy has, under a managed exchange rate regime, a negligible effect on
real activity and spill5 aver directly and immediately into the overall

balance of payments. Few developing countries are in this position.
Effective supply side effects of monetary policy.

In an economy

with limited international capital mobility, a deceleration in the rate
of growth of domestic credit (under a managed exchange rate) or in the

rate of growth of the domestic money stock (under a floating exchange
rate) will cause a temporary increase in real interest rates and/or
(especially in a financially repressed system) a temporary increase in

the severity of credit rationing faced by industry. The increase in the

24

cost of working capital (or the reduction in its availability) that this

represents acts like an adverse effective supply shock. Notional supply
(supply in the absence of credit rationing and with the real interest
rate equal to the marginal social cost of borrowing) exceeds effective

supply. (See Blinder (1985]). Together with the demand—depressing
effects of tight money, this suggests the likelihood of a transitional
stagflationary phase in response to a deceleration of credit or money

growth. Longer—run effects of changes in the rate of inflation
associated with changes in the rates of growth of money on the capital
intensity of full employment production (through Tobin effects, etc.)

fail outside the scope of cyclical stabilisation policy and are probably
quite insignificant quantitatively.
$)

Fiscal policy. This includes changes in the level and

composition of real public spending on currently produced aoods and

services (uexhaustive spending), changes in transfer payments (social
security, pensions) and subsidies or in eligibility and and entit1eent

rules, changes in direct and indirect tax rates etc. Aspects of
commercial policy and of industrial policy with major public sector
revenue consequences also properly belong to fiscal policy.

(Tariffs

and the revenue consequences of the pricing and investment poli:ies of
public corporations that can fall back on the government as the lender
of first resort come to mind).
Demand effects of fiscal policy.

Public spending cuts and ta increases lower the level of aggregate
demand, except in the special case of 10) percent or full crowding out.

25

In the standard IS/LM model this will occur in the short run if the
income velocity of circulation of money is constant (unless the economy
fixes its exchange rate and faces a perfectly elastic international

supply schedule of capital). Con+idence effects" may lower the risk

premia and thus nominal and real interest rates when credible policies
to reduce fiscal deficits are implemented or announced. There is no
evidence that these effects are sufficiently strong to reverse the
conclusion that the impact effect of tight fiscal policy is a
contractIon of real effective demand.

In the longer run, the

accumulation of debt associated with any continuing deficit will either
put upward pressure on real interest rates, (if it proceeds sufficiently
rapidly to raise the debt—output ratio, the real debt burden), or lead

to credit rationing by external creditors. Ultimately any policy
involving a primary (non—interest) deficit and a real after—tax interest
rate in excess of the growth rate of capacity output becomes

unsustainable and will require correction lest the deficit be monetized

and/or the debt repudiatco. Fiscal stabilization policy must be
reversible, i.e. should not imply any increase in the trend debt—6DF
ratio.

Public spending cuts also change the compositon of demand. The
distinction between current and capital spending is crucial in this

regard. Tax cuts will tend to crowd out private investment if they take
the form of personal income tax cuts, but will crowd it in if they take
the form of private investment incentives.
In a financially repressed economy with credit rationing the degree

of crowding out of private borrowing by public borrowing will tend to be

-

26

greater (for a given interest—sensitivity of the demand for money) than
in an economy with market—clearing interest rates, and even 100 percent
crowding out becomes a theoretical possibility again.
Fiscal policy measures that reduce the public sector budget deficit
also tend to reduce the current account deficit of the balance of
payments, but less than one—for—one, except in some special cases.

Supply side effects of isca1 policy.
Well—designed tax cuts and cuts in benefits or entitlements can
increase the incentives to work, save and invest, with obvious short—run

and long—run effects on capacity output, i.e. on notional supply. The
distributional consequences of such measures are of course central to

any determination of their overall desirability. Cuts in exhaustive
public spending are likely to have adverse long—run notional supply side
consequences if they fail on public sector capital spending, (on
infrastructure investment or investment by public enterprises) or on
mai ntenance.

Spending classified as current (e.o. education and training) may
have an important human capital formation dimension and spending cuts

that affect such components will have long—run adverse notional suppy
consequences. Cet. Par., lower deficits are associated with lower
interest rates, reduced credit rationing and enhanced incentives for

private investment. The tax increases or spending cuts that bring about
these lower deficits may, however, adversely affect private saving and
investment (and a fortiori total national investment if the public
spending cuts take the form of cuts in public sector capital formation.

27

where the foregone public sector capital is complementary with private

capital, as in the case of infrastructure). The desiqn of fiscal policy
is therefore a lot more complicated than the determination of the

magnitude of the public sector financial deficit. Financial crowdina
out, especially if it occurs via credit rationing4 may depress effective
supply below national supply.
')

Exchange rate policy.

Under a managed exchange rate, monetary policy becomes subordinate

to exchange rate policy. This is true even in the very short run, if
the degree of international capital mobility is very high and the money
stock is demand—determined. With limited international capital

mobility, the short—run 'offsetcoefficient' of reserve losses on
domestic credit expansion is less than unity, but in the long run, money
becomes fully endogenous again.

Demand side effects of devaluations
In the simple IS-LM model, devaluation expands demand if the

Marshall—Lerner conditions are satisfied, (from an initial position of
balanced trade, the trade balance improves if the sum of the export and

import price elasticities exceeds unity). That this proposition is very
model—specific is clear from the simplest one—commodity monetary model

of the balance of payments in which relative price changes play no role
but absorption is reduced and the trade balance is improved through the
real balance or wealth effect of the increase in the general price level

brought about by the devaluation of the nominal exchange rate. Even
when devaluation does change relative prices in the short run, the

22

effect on the trade balance of such a temporary worsening o the terms

of trade is ambiguous on theoretical and empirical grounds. A permanent
worsening in the terms of trade! i.e. a permanent reduction in the real
income (measured in terms of the purchasing power over the economy's
consumption bundle) represented by a given volume of domestic
production, might well lead to an equal reduction in consumption, with

no effect on saving or on the trade balance. The temporary
worsening of the terms of trade expected after a devaluation may well
lead to a smaller reduction in current consumption then in current reai
income, because consumption is, at least in part, governed by permanent

income which has gone down by less than current income. The result
would be a worsening of the trade balance, not an improvement. Credit
markets in developing countries are probably too imperfect to give too
much weight to the permanent income hypothesis, where behaviour in
accordance with this hypothesis would require borrowing against
anticipated future labour income or the realization of illiquid real or
financial assets.

It remains true that the effects of devaluation on

the trade balance and on real demand are by no means obvious unless one
is willing to put a very significant weight on the real balance effect.
(which would seem to be an empirical non—starter), or on the effect of a
devaluation on the real value of credit in a credit—rationed financial
system with incomplete indexing of bank loans to firms.
There are many other theories arguing the possibility of
(short—run) adverse effects on the current account of a devaluation.
The i—curve, which relies on low short—run demand and supply

29

elasticities is probably the best—'nown example. Other arguments about
the possible contractionarY demand effects of a devaluation have been
made by Kurgman and Taylor [1978) and by Dia:—Aleiandro 11981]. (See
also Taylor [1983]).

If the balance of trade and real demand effects are ambiguous the
price level effects are auite unambiguous.

Devaluation raises the price

level (through a temporary increase in the rate of inflation) in the
long run by the same proportion.

higher rate of "crawling"

depreciation will after a lag lead to an equal increase in the rate o
inflation.

Supp1y—id effects of devaluation
In the short run, a devaluation will raise the price of traded

relative to non—traded goods. Resources will flow out of the non—traded
goods sector and into the traded goods sector. The magnitude and
duration of this resource transfer (which will have to be reversed wnen
relative prices revert to their pre—devaluation values) will be
dependent on the expected duration of the depreciation of the real
exchange rate.

If there is short—run rigidity of money wages, and if

employment is "real wage constrained", a devaluation and the associated
increase in the general price level will, by temporarily

lowering real

wages, permit a temporary expansion of output supply and employment. 1+
there is a rapid pass—through of cost_of—livingchaflqes

into factor

payments, whether by de—jure or by dc—facto indexation, and if
demand—constrained employment regimes emerge frequently during cyclical

downswings the importance of this positive supply—side effect of a

30

devaluation is probably quite minor. The opposite argument1 that
devaluation, to the extent that it worsens the terms of trade and raises

the real product wage corresponding to any given real consumption wage1
reduces labour demand and output also seems unimportant empirically.
6)

Exchange controls and capital controls

It is fairly arbitrary whether one views capital controls or
foreign exchange controls in general as instruments of stabilization
policy or as important parameters conditioning the consequences of
variations in the other macroeconomic policy instruments (as I would
prefer). A good case can be made for the view that strict limit! or' the
international mobility of financial capital are essential for orderly
macroeconomic development if domestic financial markets are
underdeveloped and domestic factor markets do not fit the idealized

competitive paradigm. Countries that have liberalized international
capital flows before domestic factor and goods market! have frequently
undergone traumatic overvaluations of the exc$'ange rate (brought about

by rapid capital inflows), followed by a loss of confidence and a
financial collapse with serious consequences for the real economy (see
e.g. the Southern Cone experience reviewed in Harberger E1982],

Barletta, Bleer and Landan eds. [1983], Edwards ti984a, b, c} and
Obstfeld [19843). Tight capital controls are of course quite consistent

15E.g. with a fixed (fully indexed) real consumption wage, a worsening
of the terms of trade raises the 11product' supply price of labour and
reduces employment where this is real—wage constrained.

31

with a welcoming attitude towards long—term foreign direct investment.
While it is possible, in principle, to use variations in the scope and
degree of stringency of exchange controls as a cyclical stabilization

device, there is neither an academic literature on the subject, nor any
practical experi ence.
€)

Incomes policy

Incomes policy can be used as an instrument of nominal wage
restraint (Or wage and price restraint), i.e. as an intervention to
achieve a given desired reduction in the rate of inflation at least cost
in terms of output and employment forgone, or as an instrument for real
wage control.

In the latter case it will have obvious supply—side

effects by permitting an increase in employment if this is real

wage—constrained. By raising profit rates, private investment is likely
to be stimulated (assuming no adverse aggregate demand effects from a

redistribution from labour to capital). Since the public sector is a
major (often the largest) employer in the formal sector in many
developing countries, there will always have to be at least a public

sector incomes policy. Policies affecting the relative wages of
different categories of labour (young vs. adult, skilled vs. unskilled
etc.) will have important supply side consequences but cannot be used

easily for stabilisation purposes. Nominal incomes policy can be used
to add credibility to monetary and fiscal disinflation programmes and to
break through the 'after you" non—cooperative stance of individual

groups of workers in segmented labour markets. Real incomes policy is
unlikely to meet with lasting success unless the underlying balance of

32

forces in the labour market is consonant with its objectives or is
altered to become so.
5.

External

Shocks and Domestic Policy Responses

Before turning to a discussion of specific macroeconomic policy

responses to particular exogenous shacks, the followin live points
should be made. First, macroeconomic stabilisation policy is (and
should be) conducted not only in response to external shocks but also in
response to internal shocks and disturbances that originate outside the

government sector. Second, stabilisation policy errors (combinations ol
selecting the wrong instrument, the wrong dosage and the wrong timini
often have been a source of macroeconomic disruption and an obstacle to

efficient and fair structural adjustment. The first task of
macroeconomic policy design is of course to prevent macroeconomic policy
itself from putting unnecessary strain on the economic system. Third,
there is no convincing case (but only a misapplication of the theory of

th best) for correcting' misconceived macroeconomic stabilisation
policy by making changes in structural adjustment policies that would

not otherwise have been implemented. E.g. an excessively lax fiscal
policy stance is likely cet. par. to result in an increased deficit or'

the current account of the balance of payments. 11Correcting" such an
imbalance through protectionist measures (such as import restrictions)

would be unwise and counterproductive for two reasons. One the effect
of an increase in the degree of protection on the current account is

ambiguous. Protection is a two—edged sword, as it tends to reduce
international trade in general, both imports and exports. Such a

reduction in the "openness" of an economy can be accompanied either by a
worsening or by an improvement in the current account.16 Two, to the

cost of correcting a macroeconomic imbalance is added the efficiency
loss associated with a shift in the pattern of production and resource
allocation away from the economy's underlying comparative advantage.1'
Fourth, as will become apparent in the subsequent discussion of

specific shocks and policy responses, the effectiveness of macroeconmic
adjustment policy and indeed the very nature and magnitude of the proper

policy responses depend crucially on the credbilitv of the policy
announcements of the government. The current behaviour of the exchange
rate (where it is free to reflect market forces), of capital flows, of
interest rates, of wages, prices, savings, investment, employment and
output depends on past policy actions, on current policy actions and on

past and current expectations concerning future policy actions. The
effects of current fiscal and monetary policy may be reinforced or
neutralized by the effect that current policies and current policy

announcements have on domestic and international perceptions about the

likely future course of policy. Credibility is a function of reputatlDn

'6This point is closely related to the well known theorem of the
equivalence of an import tariff and a tax on exports in a static
economic system with full employment and balanced trade (Lerner Ei9á]).

17Assuming the initial configuration corresponded (more closely) to the
one dictated by comparative advantage.

34

which in turn reflects past policy actions and the extent to which
governments can convincingly commit themselves in advance to a sequence

of future policy moves. Multilateral institutions like the World Bank
and the IMF can play a crucial role in supplying credibility to
countries with poor track records, in exchange for a commitment to
pursue structural or financial adjustment policies.
Finally, other things being equal, larger policy responses are
required for permanent than for transitory disturbances.

(More

generally, longer—lasting shocks require larger and/or longer—lasting

policy responses). Nominal shocks should not lead to policy responses
that imply lasting real effects. E.g. higher world inflation shcild be
met with a lower rate of depreciation of the home currency, not with a

fiscal response. The policy re5ponse to shocks should begin when they
are first anticipated, not when they finally occur. In the presence of
adjustment costs to changes in employment, in the capital stock, in the
sectoral allocation of resources etc., a policy response conducive to a
gradual adjustment of these endogerious variables will in general be
optimal, even if the shock is permanent.

If adjustment costs are

associated with variations in the values of the policy instruments
themselves (say because of administrative bottlenecks) a gradual

response of the policy instruments themselves will be desirable. The
degree of confidence with which expectations concerning the future
evolution of the external environment are held will determine the
magnitude and speed of the policy response as well as the range 0+

policy instrumentarium to be deployed. Irreversible or

the

35

costly—to—reverse policy actions will tend to be postponed if the
passage of time is likely to resolve at least some of the uncertainty.
5a) Stabilization policy responses to a deterioration in the te.'-ms

of trade of a small open economy.

A deterioration in the terms of trade will, holding public
spending, tax—transfer programmes, domestic credit expansion, the (rate
of crawl of the) exchange rate and the pressure of incomes policy
constant, have the following demand and supply effects.
The real income corresponding to any given level of production of

domestic output is lower. To prevent the emergence of a current account
deficit, real absorption (in terms of the consumption bundle) should
decline by the same amount as real income.

If the terms of trade

deterioration is permanent, real private consumption may well decline in

line with real private permanent disposable income. However, there is
no similar mechanism ensuring that the other two components of
absorption, private investment and public exhaustive spending, will (or
should) follow suit.

First consider the case where the deterioration in the terms of

trade involves the terms of trade of final consumption goods only. This
means

that

private investment should stay constant in terms of home

output, i.e. decline in terms of the consumption bundle. Real public
consumption and investment also should remain constant in terms of home
goods; that means a cut in volumes if part of this spending is on

imports which now are more expensive. Contractionary fiscal policy
balanced budget cut in public sector consumption spending) would seem
the appropriate fiscal response in this case.

a

3á

An increase in the relative price of an imported intermediate, raw
material or energy input lowers the value added corresponding to any
given amount of gross output. Again, private agents following permanent
income principles would make the required corresponding reduction in

private consumption spending. Public consumption should also be cut to
reflect the objective worsening of the sustainable national standard of

living. The short—run response of private and public investment, actual
and

desired, is
A

ambiguous, however.

rise in the price

of energy, say, is likely to reduce the

long—run desired stock of capital and other complementary factors.

In a

vintage capital model, the energy price increase may, especially if it

was unanticipated, lead to large—scale scrapping of energy—intensive
older vintages, while sharply raising the return to net investment in

new energy—efficient technology. The result could be a temporary
investment boom, associated with a current account deficit that is quite

sound and above board provided the returns to the investment cover the
cost

of external borrowing.
An increase in energy prices also lowers the uwarranted real

wage,'8 the real wage, in terms of the price of gross domestic output
(and

thus also the

real consumption wage) corresponding to any given

level of employment, including full employment.

18Strictly the "warranted real marginal cost of labour", including wage
and non—wage costs.

37

Without a lowering of the actual real wage, classical unemployment

would result (if the real wage initially constrained employment). The
warranted real rental rate of capital also declines. Any policy,
including tighter incomes policy, that facilitates this transition to a
lower real wage will help maintain employment.
The deterioration in the terms of trade can either raise or lower
the domestic general price level at a given exchange rate depending on

whether it takes the form of an increase in dollar import prices or a

cut in dollar export prices. Price level stabilisation calls for an
exchange rate revaluation in the former and a devaluation in the latter

case. There is no clear case for any monetary policy response.
If the terms of trade worsening is pretty confidently expected to

be long—lasting, the policy response should be as swift and as complete
(in terms of the adjustment to the new long run equilibrium) as is
consistent with a proper allowance for costs of adjustment.

When the terms of trade change is in the opposite direction the
policy prescriptions are reversed. For net energy importers. the
decline in the real price of energy calls for the following policy
responses (all relative to what would have been done otherwise).
I) — a fiscal relaxation (specifically a balanced budget increase

in public consumption spending).
2) — an increase in the warranted real wage, say through a

relaxation of real incomes policy, and in the warranted real
rental rate.

3) — a devaluation if the relative price decline of energy

imports is a dollar price decline of imports, a revaluation if

it

takes the form of an increase in the dollar price of

exports.

36

4) — no monetary response
5) — a swift and full response (subject to adjustment costs) under

1), 2), and 3) if the oil price decline is confidently
expected to be permanent, a slower and partial response
otherwi se.

For net energy exporters, 2), 3), 4) and 5) are the same, but 1)
is reversed.

5b) Stabilization policy responses to a slowdown in the rate of
growth of export demand for a developing country with some market oower.
In the absence of any policy response in the developing countries,
a slowdown in the rate of growth of export demand for their output (say
because of industrial country protectionism in the OECD or because of a
recession in the industrial world) constitutes a contractionary shock to

aggregate demand. The equilibrium adjustment to such a shock would be a
transition (maintaining full employment of resources) to less favourable
external terms of trade and a shift in the composition of production
away from exportables and towards import—competing or non—traded goods.
If the slowdown is perceived to be cyclical and therefore temporary,
total absorption would, if external credit is available, decline by less
than real income and the current account would go into deficit.
Provided matching surpluses are run during periods of above normal

growth of export demand when the terms of trade have an exceptionally
high value, such cyclical deficits are nothing to worry about.

If the

weak growth of demand and the associated unfavourable terms of trade are
perceived as permanent, there would be no justification for maintaining
private plus public consumption at its previous level.

39

Without proper fiscal and monetary policy responses1 the actual
transition is likely to be rather more painful than the equilibriurn

transition. Labour and product markets do not clear
instantaneously,factor mobility is limited and excess capacity and
unemployment will follow the deceleration of export demand growth.

Expansionary fiscal policy could provide the 5hort term demand stimulus
required to maintain full employment, but unless it were to take the
form of a "balanced budget" expansion, it would add greatly to the

pressure on the current account. Expansionary monetary policy is called
for, accompanied by a devaluation of the nominal exchange rate and an
incomes policy aimed at translating nominal exchange rate depreciation
into improvements in real competitiveness.

5c) Stabilization policy responses to an increase in interest
rates in the industrial world
In the case where the increase in nominal interest rates is also an
increase in real interest rates, even the equilibrium adjustment to the
increased cost of borrowing will involve painful choices for the

developing countries that are net debtors. The only exception to that
rule would occur in the felicitous but unlikely event of an increase in
aid and other concessional resource transfers from the industrial world
to the developing countries, which compensates them fully for the

increase in their debt service costs. As long as the marginal cost of
external debt is increased, there will be a reduction in the optimal

amount of debt for a borrowing country. The transition to this lower
level of external indebtedness requires the debtor countries to run

4 C)

current account surpluses, that is to effect a net transfer of resources

to the creditor countries. First consider the case where the higher
interest rates are considered to be a permanent feature of the external

economic environment. At full employment, part of the required
reduction in absorption would come from the private sector (even without
any increase in taxes), if the increase in external real interest rates
is reflected in the cost and/or availability of domestic credit.
Private investment will fall and so will private consumption.

19

Attempts to insulate the domestic economy from the global increase in
interest rates will merely postpone the inevitable adjustment process
and may well end up making it sore painful than it need have been.

In

the new high interest rate long—run equilibrium, the capital intensity
of production will be lower than it would have been otherwise and the
equilibrium 9warranted" real wage is lower also.
Public consumption spending too should be cut, unless the marginal

valuation of public consumptionexceeds that of private consumption over
the entire relevant range, which would indicate a serious misallocation

of resources in the initial equilibrium. The increase in the oreian
rates of interest would put downward pressure on the exchange rate
and/or induce a loss of foreign exchange reserves.

19For the economy as a whole, both substitution and income effects (in
the case of a net debtor) favour saving. The private sector, however,
could be a net creditor even if the private and public sectors combined
are a net debtor. The statement in the text ignores this possibility.

41

Again the transition to the new equilibrium with its lower external

debt burden and its lower capital intensity of production is unlikely to
be achieved at full employment, in the absence of a well—designed
stabilization policy package.

If

the exchange rate is not permitted to

weaken, the lower aggregate demand associated with the higher real
interest rates will cause a recession.

(I am assuming that the

effective domestic cost and/or availability of credit goes up in line
with the external cost; if this is not permitted to happen, the
correction of the resulting current account deficit Wjli require other
contractionary, absorption—reducing policy measures.)

If the exchange

rate is devalued (or permitted to depreciate), if nominal exchange rate
changes correspond, at any rate in the short run, to real exchange rate

changes and if "real devaluations have an expansionary effect on
demand, then employment and capacity utilization can be maintained in

the face of an increase in world real interest rates. The devaluation
will lead to an upward shift in the path of the price level, but there
need be no long run increase in the rate of inflation.
To converge to the sustainable long—run equilibrium with its
reduced external debt, its lower capital—output and capital—labour

ratios and its lower real wage, requires on balance a fiscal contraction
along the adjustment path, as well as a policy for reducing real

marginal labour costs. Unless non—wage labour costs (esployers. social
security contributions, other social premiums paid by employers as a
function of their wage bills, and rules and regulations limiting
managerial discretion in hiring, firing etc.) can be reduced, a cut in

42

reel take—home pay is inevitable. Many of the policies that lower
non—wage labour costs (but not all, vide relaxing employment prote:tion
legislation) have adverse consequences for the public sector deficit.

This is especially unfortunate when the overall stance of fiscal policy
should be favouring a reduction of public sector financial deficits.
Incomes policy may well be an essential ingredient of any attempt to
lower real wages.across the board.
If the increase in world real interest rates is expected to be
temporary rather than permanent, there is of cause no ground for
pursuing any long—run adjustment, and the management of the short—run

problems should also be simplified. Larger current account surpluses
(or smaller deficits) will have to be achieved temporarily in order to
finance the temporary increase in the real debt service burden
associated with the higher interest rates.

tempo-ary tightening of

the fiscal stance is required4 and the contractionary effects of this
combined domestic fiscal tightening and external interest rate increase

imply the need for a balancing devaluation and monetary expansion. This
will lead to a higher price level and therefore a temporary increase in

inflation, but no increase in the long—run rate of inflation. The
expansionary e+ect of the combined devaluation—monetary expansion will
erode over time as the rising domestic price level restores the original
real exchange rate and real stock of money balances.

5d) Monetary, fiscal, exchange rate and incomes policy responses
to an increase in the world rate of inflation

For once the appropriate policy response is straightforward. 1+
the initial domestic rate of inflation was optimal, there can be no

42a

Table

low

low

1.00

con

—.8

g

y

.

RUSS

con

pi

1.00
—.62

1.00

RUSS

—.54

.74

—.53

1.00

pi

-.47

.27

—.57

.32

1.00

.24

—.14

—.69

—.17

—.64

e

C

Correlation matrix of six external parameters1 1970—1983

1.0')

43

reason for following the rest of the world into hiaher infiatin by

maintaining

the (proportional rate of crawl) o the exchange rate.

The

country should reduce the rate of crawl of its exchange rate by the saie
amount as the increase in the world rate of inflation3 thus maintaininQ

its original rate of inflation. No further monetary or fiscal action is
required. Incomes policy too is redundant.
5e>

Stabilization policy responses to increased variability of

the external parameters and to increased uncertainty
These kinds of shocks can be visualized as mean—preserving

increases in the total variance (increased variability or in the
unanticipated variance (increased uncertainty) of the parameters o the
external environment. Any operational measure of the external
instability or uncertainty faced by a country probably invoies. scie
(possibly quite complex) function of the variances and cavariances Cf

the entire set of external parameters. Furthermore, it may be
misleading to analyze external sources of instability and uncertainty in

isolation from the internal4 domestic sources. Without attempting such
a theoretically and empirically ambitious undertaking, some interestin
information can be gained from a simple inspection of tne correlatlcn

matrix of six external parameters (the terms of trade of low income
developing countries (low)1 the real oil price (con) OECD real GDF

growth (g) the short dollar interest rate (RUSS)

•

the OECD rate f

inflation (pi) and the level of the US effective exchange rate e)
during the period 1970—1983. This information is given in Table e.
Table 7 gives the correlation matrices for four of the external

parameters (con, g, RUSS and pi) for the subperiods 1960—1973 an
1974—1983, as well as their means and variances.

43a

Table 7
con
can

9

y
RUSS

pi

Correlation

1.00
.35
—.15
.10

1.00
—.12
—.09

1.00

1.00

.84

matrix of 4 external parametes, 1960—1973

—
con

con
1.00

g

—.43

1.00

.77

—.4

RUSS

RUSS

pi

— . 5 C)

1 . 00
. 07
matrix of 4 external parameters, 1974—1983

— . 32

Correlation

pi

RUSS

Mean
1 960—1 973

Mean

Variance

1 974— 1 983

1 960— 1 973

Variance
1974— 1 984

con

4.85

24.21

.27

66.19

Q

4.85

2.1

.93

3.50

RUSS

5.87

10.49

4.18

13.43

pi

4.04

8.45

2.a6

3.94

44

Tables 6 and 7 show, not surprisingly, that external shocks dont
come in isolation.

If e.a. it is fiscal policy in the DECD as a whole

that is the source of the disturbances to the developing countries
external environment in a particular period, then we would expect
declining interest rates and declining growth rates of OECD GDP to go
together (both being the short—run consequences of contractionary fiscal
policy).

If OECD monetary policy were the major driving force instead.

we would expect to see declining interest rates associated
(contemporaneously) with rising OECD BDP growth.

Table 7 shows the worsening o the external environment c the
oil—importing developing countries after 1975 in a summary fashion. The
mean oil price shoots up and its variance increases dramatically. seen
growth of real GDF in the OECD is more than halved while its variance

increases. World nominal interest rates double and the varian:e of

interest rates triples. World inflation more than doubles. The strcn
positive correlation between OECD inflation and nominal interest rites
of .84 in

the

early period fails to .07. The early positive correlation

between OECD growth and the real price of oil (presumably reflecting
demand effects) becomes negative in the later period as negative oil

supply shocks dominate. Beneraily speaking. the correlation patterns
differ dramatically.

Tables 6 and 7 only show measures of total variability (anticipated
plus unanticipated).

mechanical and imperfect measure of uncertairt

(which is likely to overstate the true extent of ignorance because
information other than past time series observations on the variables in

45

question is in reality used to form expectations of them) can in
principle, given sufficient data, be obtained from the contemporaneous

variance—covariance matrix of the residuals from a vector—autoregressive

representation of the external environment variables. Lack of degrees
of freedom precludes such an exercise at this stage.
From the point of

view of a debtor country, aiven the variability

in its terms of trade, greater variability of the interest rates it
faces is not necessarily a bad thing.

If e.g. whenever the terms of

trade move against a debtor country, the interest rate on its external

debt were more likely to decline, the overall position of this country
ught well be superior to that of a country experiencing a variable (or

uncertain) terms of trade and a constant interest rate. Negative
covariances between adverse external shocks can provide something akin

to portfolio diversification and thus reduce the overall riskiness of a
country's external exposure.
Conclusi on

While much of the knowledge concerning stabilization policy that
has been developed in the context of the industrial world can be

transferred, mutatis mutandis to a wide range of developing countries
(basically those with a non-negligible modern industrial sector),
certain important modifications to the industrial country paradigm

deserve special attention. Rudimentary and/or repressed financial
markets lead to credit rationing. Financial crowding out on the demand
side and effective supply effects from fiscal and financial policy are
likely to complicate macroeconomic management.

4
An i5sue worth emphasizing is the distinction between two kinds of

devaluations. The fir5t is a devaluation of the exchange rate that
merely serves to speed up or facilitate a real adjustment which is
taking place anyway.

It is aimed at a correction which would, in the

absence of the devaluation, take place through an adjustment of nominal

prices and wages. The second is a devaluation as a means for correcting
a persistent and well—entrenched real disequilibrium. The former will

be successful, but the benefits will be modest. The benefits from
achieving the latter might well be major, but the policy will be
unsuccessful unless it is backed up by other measures.
Without an effective real incomes policy or another set of labour
market policies and/or industrial policies that change the balance of
power between labour and (private or public) capital, a devaluation of
the exchange rate is unlikely to have any lasting notional supply

effects. As predetermined nominal contracts come up for renewal, the
temporary effect on real wages of any incomplete indexing 04 wages will

erode.
With real wages and the real exchange rate unchanged, any

absorption—reducing effects of a devaluation have to came through the
real balance effect or the ureal credit effect".

In a reasonably

efficient financial system with market—clearing interest rates and other

asset returns, the real balance effect isnt likely to count for much.

In a repressed financial system with credit rationing and incomplete
indexing of loans, the general price level increases associated with a

devaluation will reduce the real flow of credit. This will lower both

47

credit—constrained forms of spending (inventory accumulation, fixed
capital formation etc.) and credit—constrained forms of production

(production relying heavily on working capital). The possible
stagflationary consequences of devaluations (and of tight money) in a
financially repressed economy cannot be ignored in the design of

macroeconomic policy. Changes in the severity and indeed in the
mechanism of financial crowding out under credit rationing deserve close

attention. Blinder C19B5] has argued that these lessons apply, if
perhaps to a lesser degree, to the industrial countries as well.

One clear implication f any analysis of policy design in a
variable and uncertain economic environment is that such variability and
uncertainty increase the importance I) of controlled access to
international credit and capital markets by developing country

governments and private agents and 2) of OECD macroeconomic policies
conducive to the least—restricted availability of credit at low real

interest rates. Access to international financial markets potentially
enhances a nation's capacity for smoothing consumption over time by

breaking the closed economy identity of absorption and income. A closed
economy or an open economy restricted to balanced trade can use only
variations in domestic capital formation to influence the time profile

of total national consumption. An open economy with access to
international credit markets can vary both domestic capital formation

and net foreign investment in pursuit of that same objective. This
extension of the nation's Nintertemporal consumption po5sibility set"

would be important even in a world without uncertainty if countries are

4G

perturbed by predictable variations in the weather or in other exogenous

variables. It is even more important when uncertainty plays a major
role, because international credit and capital markets can provide de
facto partial insurance against incompletely correlated national
contingencies.

Restrictions on capital mobility and other forms $ e<charge
control are likely to be necessary in the second, third or nth best
world inhabited by most developing (and developed) countries, in order
to protect the domestic real economy from the severe damage that a
sudden massive influx or outflow of financial capital can cause.
Finally, it is the responsibility of the industrial countries to ensure
that the potential benefits from access by developing countries to
international financial and good! markets are not thrown away or turned
into actual losses through policies that result in persistently high
global real interest rates, unfavourable terms of trade for developing
countries and disappointing growth of their export markets.

49

Ref erences

B. Balassa C1982a1. Development Strategies in Semi—Industrial
Economies, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

B. Balassa E1982b). "Adjustment Policies and Development Strategies in

Sub—Saharan Africa, 1973—78. Mimea, World Bank.

B. Ba]assa and F. Desmond McCarthy (1984).

'Adjustment Policies in

Developing Countries 1979—83'. Unpublished mimeo. World Bank.

N. Ardito Barletta, M. I. Blejer and L. Landau eds [1983).
Economic Liberalization and Stabilization Policies in Argentina.

Chile, and Uruguay: Applications of the Monetary ADproach to the
Balance of Payments. Washington D.C.

The World Bank.

3. Bhagwati and T, N. Srinivasan (19793. "Trade Policy and
Development" in R. Dornbusch and 3. Frenkei, eds.

International Economic Policy: Theory and Evidence, Johns
Hopkins University Press.

Alan S. Blinder (1985]. "Credit Rationing and Effective Supply
Failures" NBER Working paper No. 2a19, May.

5

W. H. Branson (1983]. "Economic Structure and Policy for External

Balance". IMF Staff Papers, 30, No. 1, March, pp. 39—66.

W.H. Branson [1984]. 9tabilisation Programs, Stagfiation and
Investment: The Case of Kenya'. Mimeo, Nov. 1984.

M. Bruno (1979). "Stabilization and Stag+lation in a Semi—industrial
Economy," in R. Dornbusch and 3.

Frenkel eds., International

Economic Policy, Johns Hopkins University Press.

E. Buffie [1984] .

"The Macroeconomics of Trade Liberalisation",

Journal of International Economics, 17, No, 1/2, August,p. 121—3G.

Arid Buira [1983].

"IMF Financial Programs and Conditionality".

Journal of Development Economics, 12, 1983, pp. 111—136.

W. H. Buiter (1985].

"A Guide to Public Sector Debt and Deficits',

Economic Policy, Vol. 1, no. 1, November 1985.

W. H. Buiter (1984] 'Allocative and Stabilization Aspects of Budgetary
and Financial Policy"! Centre for Economic Policy Research Working
Paper no. 2, January.

W. H. Buiter [1980]. "Monetary, Financial and Fiscal Policy Under
Rational Expectations." IMF Staff Papers, 27, Dec. pp. 758—613.

51

W. H. Buiter [19813. The Superiority of Contingent Rules Over Fixed
Rules in Models With Rational Expectations,° Economic Journal,
91, Sept. pp. 6477—670.

W. R. Cline and Associates [19813. World Inflation and the Developing
Countries, Brookings Institution, Washington, D. C. 1981.

W. R. Cline and S. Weintraub eds. [19813. Economic Stabilization in
Developing Countries. The Brookings Institute.

A. Crockett [1981]. 'Stabilization Policie5 in Developing Countries:
Some Policy Considerations'1. IMF Staff Papers, 28(1), March.

C. Diaz—Aleiandro [1965]. Exchange Rate Devaluation in a
Semi—Industralized Economy: The Experience of Argentina1 MIT
Press.

C. F. Diaz—Alejandro [1981]. 'Southern Case Stabilization P1ans, in
W. R. Cline and S. Weintraub eds., Economic Stabilization in
Developing Countries, The Brookings Institution.

C. F. Diaz—Alejandro (1983). 'Some Aspects of the 1982—83 Brazilian
Payments Crisis", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
2, pp. 515—550.

52

R. Dornbusch (1982). Stabilization Policies in Developing Countries:
What Have We Learned? World Development, 10, Dec. pp. 141—153.

R. Dornbusch E1985a].

"The Effects of OECD Macroeconomic Policies on

Non—oil Developing Countries: A Review". Mimeo, World Bank, WDR.

R. Dornbusch El9B5bJ. "External Debt, Budqet Deficits arid

Disequilibrium

Exchange Ratest, in 3. T. Cuddington and 6. .

Smith, eds., International Debt and the Deve1opin CountricE, The
World Bank, Washington, D. C.

S. Edwards (1984a]. "The Order of Liberalisatjon of the External Sector
in Developing Countries". Princeton University International
Finance Section, Essays in International Finance, no. ISo, Dec.
1984.

S. Edwards E1984b). "The Order of Liberalization of the Current and
Capital Accounts of the Balance of Payments". NBER Working Paper
No. 1507 November.

S. Edwards [1984c). "The Order of Liberalisation of the Balance of

Payments. Should the Current Account Be Opened Up First? World
Bank Staff Working Papers, No. 710.

M. Soldstein and P. Montiel (1985). "Evaluating Fund Stabilisation

Programmes with Multi—Country Data; Some Methodological Pitfalls
October; unpublished mimeo, IMF.

53

A. C. Harberger [1982].

'The Chilean Economy in the 1970's: Crisis

Stabilization, Liberalization, Reform in Economic Policy in a
World of Change Karl Brunner and A. H. Melt:er eds.
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series in Public Policy, Vol. 17,
Amsterdam, North—Holland.

IMF (1977). The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments.
IMF, Washington, D. C.

IMF (1985). "Formulation of Exchange Rate Policies in Adjustment

Programs". Occasional Paper No. 36, August.

Basant K. Kapur [1976].

"Alternative Stabilization Policies for Less—

Developed Economies'. Journal of Political Economy, 84, No. 4,
p1. 1. August, pp. 777—795.

L.T. Katseli [1983].

uDevaluation: A Critical Appraisal of the IMFs

Policy Preecriptions", AER, 73, No. 2.

May, pp. 355—64.

P. N. Keller [1980]. "Implications of Credit Policies on Output and the
Balance of Payments", IMF Staff Papers, September.

P1.5. Khan and M.D. Knight [1981]. Stabilisation Programs in Developing

Countries: A Formal Framework", IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 28,

No. 1. March.

54

M. S. I<han and ti. D. Knight [1982]. "Some Theoretical and Empirical

Issues Relating to Economic Stabilization in Developing Countries'.
World Development, 10, No. 9, pp. 709—730.

fl. Khan and R. Zahier (1983). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Changes in

Barriers to Trade and Capital Flows: A Simulation Analysis". IMF
Staff Papers, 30, June, pp. 223—282.

7. Killick ed. [1982). Adjustment and Financina in the Developing
World, IMF.

1. Killick, ed. (19B4a]. The Quest for Economic Stabilization: The
IMF and the Third World.

T. Killick, ed. 11984b]. The ItlF and Stabilization: Developing
Country Experiences, Heinemann, ODI.

R. King (1982). "Monetary Policy and the Information Content of
Prices". Journal of Political Economy, 90, April, pp. 247—279.

A. 0. Krueger (1978) "Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
Liberalization Attempts and Consequences, Cambridge, Mass.,
Ballinger.

P. Krug.an and L. Taylor [1970). "Contractionary Effects of a
Devaluation". Journal of International Economics, 8, August, pp.
445—56.

D. Lal £1984].

"The Real Aspects o Stabilization and Structural

Adjustment Policies —— An Extention of the Australian Adjustment

Model'. World Bank Staff Working Paper No. 636, March.

A. P. Lerner £1936]. "The Symmetry Between Import and Export Taxes"
Economica, 3; pp. 306—313.

6. Marini [1985]. "intertemporal Substitution and the Role o
Planetary Policy," Economic Journal, March.

R. I. McKinnon [1973]. Money and Capital in Economic Development.
Brookings Institution, Washington, D. C., 1973.

J. Pluns,

ed. [1984]. Adjustment, Conditionality and International,

Financing. IMF.

M. Obstfeld [1984].. "Capital Flows, the Current Account, and the Rea!
Exchange Rate; Consequences of Liberalization and Stabilization'.
NBER Working Paper, No. 1526, December.

6. Ortiz [1983]. "Dollarization in Mexico, Causes and Consequences" in
P. A. Armelia, R. Dornbusch and M. Obstfeld, eds., Financial

Policies and the World Capital Market: The Problem 4

Latin

American Countries. University of Chicago Press.
J. Sachs and W. McXibbin [1985]. "Macroeconomic Policies in the OECD
and External Adjustment in Developing Countries". NBER Discussion
Paper No.1534, January.

56

David M. Schydlowsky. "Alternative Approaches to Short—Term Economic
Management in Developing Countries in T. Killick ed.

(1982).

Adjustment and Financing in the Developing World.

L. Taylor (1981). "IS/LM in the Tropics; Diagrammatics of the New
Structural Macro Critique, in W. R. Cline and S. Weintraub eds.,

Economic Stabilisation in Developing Countries. The Brookings
Institute.

L. Taylor (1983]. Structuralist Macroeconomics, Basic Books.

S. J. Turnovsky (1980). "The Choice of Monetary Instruments Under
Alternative Forms of Price Expectations," Manchester School,
March, pp. 39—62.

L. Weiss (1980). "The Role for Active Monetary Policy in a Rational
Expectations Model," Journal of Political Economy, 88, April,
pp. 221—233.

J. Williamson (1982]. The Lending Policies of the International
Monetary Fund, Institute for International Economics, Washington,
D. C.

J. Williamson, ed. [1983). IMF Conditionality, MIT Press.

