                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               DEBT FRAGILITY AND BAILOUTS

                                           Russell Cooper

                                        Working Paper 18377
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18377


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




Previously circulated as "Fragile Debt and the Credible Sharing of Strategic Uncertainty." I am grateful
to Antoine Camous, Andrew Gimber and Guillermo Ordonez for many comments on a previous version
of this paper, and to Hubert Kempf and Dan Peled for discussions on this topic. Comments from conference
participants at the ECB "Global Sovereign Debt" workshop in June 2012 are appreciated. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Russell Cooper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Debt Fragility and Bailouts
Russell Cooper
NBER Working Paper No. 18377
September 2012, Revised March 2015
JEL No. E61,E63,F34,H87

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies debt fragility and the sharing of the resulting strategic uncertainty through ex post
bailouts. Default arises in equilibrium because of both fundamental shocks and beliefs. The probability
of default depends on borrowing rates and, in equilibrium, on the beliefs of lenders about this probability.
This interaction creates a strategic complementarity and thus the basis for strategic uncertainty. The
paper analyzes the role of credible ex post bailouts as a means of sharing both fundamental and strategic
uncertainty. While bailouts may occur in some states, debt fragility remains.


Russell Cooper
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
611 Kern
State College, PA 16802
and NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com
                                     Debt Fragility and Bailouts∗

                                                    Russell Cooper†

                                                    March 30, 2015



                                                         Abstract

            This paper studies debt fragility and the sharing of the resulting strategic uncertainty through
         ex post bailouts. Default arises in equilibrium because of both fundamental shocks and beliefs. The
         probability of default depends on borrowing rates and, in equilibrium, on the beliefs of lenders about
         this probability. This interaction creates a strategic complementarity and thus the basis for strategic
         uncertainty. The paper analyzes the role of credible ex post bailouts as a means of sharing both
         fundamental and strategic uncertainty. While bailouts may occur in some states, debt fragility remains.



1        Motivation
This paper provides a framework for understanding credible guarantees in the presence of strategic uncer-
tainty over the valuation of sovereign debt. The analysis is motivated by the recent experience of European
countries who have witnessed large movements in the price (bond spreads) of their government debt and
the consequent policy discussion of debt guarantees and bailout. What are the sources of the variations in
these spreads? What are the effects of credible bailouts on the valuation of sovereign debt?
     The framework addresses these questions.1 The model highlights the interactions between fundamental
and strategic uncertainty underlying the volatility of spreads. The first form of uncertainty arises from the
stochastic nature of underlying economic variables, such as productivity. The second source of uncertainty
reflects the interaction of investors, each responding to the beliefs of others. In this model, as in Calvo
(1988), the power of expectations reflects a strategic complementarity linking the beliefs of investors about
repayment, interest rates and default probabilities.2 If investors believe that default is likely, a large
    ∗Iam grateful to Antoine Camous, Andrew Gimber and Guillermo Ordonez for many comments on a previous version of
this paper, and to Hubert Kempf and Dan Peled for discussions on this topic. Comments from conference participants at the
ECB “Global Sovereign Debt” workshop in June 2012 are appreciated.
   † Department of Economics, The Pennsylvania State University; Research Associate, NBER, russellcoop@gmail.com
   1 This paper builds upon Cooper (2012). It has essentially the same model of fragility for a single country but it has new

results regarding conditions for bailout. This paper also adds a third country, following the suggestion of Guillermo Ordonez.
   2 A similar logic is present in Cole and Kehoe (2000) though that paper has a dynamic element missing in this formulation.

Eaton (1987) studies capital flight in a model with multiple equilibria generated by a complementarity through the government
budget constraint. More recently, Corsetti and Dedola (2012) also use a variant of the Calvo model to look at the European
debt situation. While that model shares foundations with Calvo (1988), one of the distinguishing features of this paper is the
construction of a multi-country environment to study bailouts and guarantees and thus the sharing of strategic uncertainty.


                                                              1
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                                  2   MODEL


premium will arise in equilibrium. Given this large premium, a country is indeed more likely to default.
Taken together, these forms of uncertainty underlie the pricing of sovereign debt and its fragility.
    As its main contribution, the framework is used to evaluate bailouts as a means to deal with volatile
debt prices. Here a bailout entails the assumption of the debt obligations of one country by a federation
to which it belongs. The analysis emphasizes a couple of points.
    The provision of guarantees, i.e. an ex ante commitment to bailout, as in the standard models of deposit
insurance, provide a means of sharing strategic uncertainty.3 But, these guarantees are valuable only
if they are credible.
    The framework is used to provide sufficient conditions for the provision of an ex post bailout. There
are two gains to a bailout. The first entails the avoidance of a default cost through the spreading of the
debt obligation across federation members. The second gain, following the consumption smoothing motive
highlighted in Cooper, Kempf, and Peled (2008), arises when a bailout yields a more equitable consumption
allocation across households in countries within a federation compared to default. One leading case for
bailouts is when the country on the verge of default has lower output and consumption, both with and
without a bailout, than the country providing the bailout. In this case, the bailout leads to consumption
smoothing across the countries in a federation.
    Despite the gains to ex post bailouts, the debt of a country is still subject to strategic uncertainty. This
is because bailouts are state contingent and thus do not occur for all realizations of fundamentals. As a
consequence, default occurs in equilibrium and strategic uncertainty remains.
    Overall, the results indicates that credible debt guarantees do matter: in some states a bailout occurs
and this reduces default risk. In this sense, the strategic uncertainty is shared. But generally these
guarantees, because they are required to be credible, do not eliminate default in all states. Consequently
debt prices remain influenced by strategic uncertainty



2     Model
The model studies the issues of debt valuation and bailout in a multi-country setting with two periods.4
The analysis focuses on the pricing of a predetermined stock of government debt as a function of the
repayment decision of a second country issuing the debt and the bailout decision of second country (or a
coalition of countries as in the European Union). The first and second country, of population size Ni for
i = 1, 2 belong to the same coalition. The third country, of size N3 , consists of households outside of the
coalition of countries involved in the bailout.5
   3 Bigelow, Cooper, and Ross (1993) and Cooper and Ross (1999) study guarantee funds in a variety of interactions in which

complementarities are prominent.
   4 The interaction can be embedded in a dynamic equilibrium model allowing for the choice of B, for example, as in Cooper,

Kempf, and Peled (2008). But the essence of determining the interest rate on the outstanding debt and the conditions for
bailout are aptly captured by the interactions described here.
   5 The main results in Calvo (1988) only have insiders though international lending is mentioned in Section III. Guillermo

Ordonez made the invaluable suggestion to amend the model to include households outside of the coaltion.




                                                    2
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                                2   MODEL


2.1    Households within the Coalition
Consider first the optimization problem of households in countries 1 and 2. These households are distinct
from those in country 3 as they are part of a coalition in which a bailout is possible.
   In the initial period, households make portfolio decisions. Two factors influence the return to debt
holders. First, there is fundamental uncertainty over the future tax base of the borrower. This is represented
through a productivity shock that determines the level of output and ultimately the tax base. Second,
there is strategic uncertainty: the likelihood of repayment depends, in part, on the beliefs of the lenders.
In the model, the fundamental and strategic uncertainty interact to determine asset prices.
   At the start of the second period, the government in the country 1 decides to default or not. Repayment
of the debt entails the reallocation of tax revenues from domestic to foreign debt holders. Default avoids
the repayment but is costly. The potential of a bailout influences this choice.
   More formally, household utility over period 2 consumption is represented by u(c), which is continuously
differentiable with u0 (c) > 0 and u00 (c) ≤ 0. Agents have a fixed endowment of ω in period 1, allocated
between a riskless asset with a return of x and risky government debt. Holdings of both assets must be
non-negative. Agents in country i have a random period 2 endowment denoted Ai , with a cdf given by
F (·). These endowment draws are independent across countries. Suppose that the domain of A1 is given
by A ∈ [A− , A+ ] with A− > 0.
   Government debt has a market determined return of R, paid to debt holders in all period 2 repayment
states. In the event of default, the return on government debt is 0. For simplicity there is no partial
default.
   In period 1, country i = 1, 2 agents choose debt holdings to solve


                                 maxb≥0 EAi ,R̃ u((ω − b)x + bR̃ + Ai (1 − τi )).                         (1)


The optimal choice of bonds by country i agents, denoted bi , satisfies


                            EAi ,R̃ (R̃ − x)u0 ((ω − bi )x + bi R̃ + Ai (1 − τi )) = 0.                   (2)


Here the expectation is taken over the endowment Ai as well as the random return on sovereign debt, R̃
where R̃ = R in repayment states and R̃ = 0 under default. Variations in the return on government debt,
as explained below, reflect the uncertainty in Ai , through the effect of this endowment on the tax base,
and strategic uncertainty over default.
   In this problem, τi is a tax rate levied on household income in country i. If country 1 repays its debt
in period 2,
                                                           BR
                                                    τ1 =                                                  (3)
                                                           A1
where B is the predetermined stock of country 1 debt outstanding per country 1 agent. In the event of



                                                3
Preliminary and Incomplete                         3   EQUILIBRIA WITHOUT BAILOUT


repayment, there is no tax on country 2 households, τ2 = 0. If instead there is a bailout of country 1, then
τi for i = 1, 2. The revenues collected from country 2 households are used to finance transfers to country
1 under a bailout as detailed below.
    In solving their optimization problems, households take the distribution of R̃ as given. It is determined
in equilibrium of the period 1 market for government debt and reflects expectations about the default and
bailout decisions of period 2. The holding of the country 1 debt is also determined in equilibrium.


2.2       External Households
Households in country 3 are risk neutral. They consume in both periods of life. These agents have a large
endowment in period 1 which they can store for period 2 consumption. As with households in countries 1
and 2, they can either store through a storage technology at a return of x or hold country 1 government
debt. These households will play a primary role in the pricing of country 1 debt.



3     Equilibria without Bailout
This section studies equilibria without bailout. An equilibrium has three components. First, the default
decision of the government in country 1, taken in period 2 is optimal. Second, households in all countries
optimally choose their holdings of debt and storage in period 1 taking as given the state contingent default
decision of the country 1 government in period 2. Third, the market for country 1 debt clears in period 1.
    Let bi be the demand for government debt by a representative country i household and θi the fraction
                                                       bi Ni
of the debt held by country i households, i.e. θi =    BN1 .
                                                         Further define θ = (θ1 , θ2 , θ3 ). It is useful to
                                                                                            P
determine an equilibrium through these shares. The condition for market clearing is that i θi = 1 with
θi ≥ 0.


3.1       Period 2 Repayment Decision
In period 2, country 1 decides to repay its debt or default. It does so in the interest of households in that
country. Debt is repaid through a tax on the period 2 endowment of the households in country 1.
    If the debt is repaid, the representative household in country 1 has consumption of


                   V r ≡ (ω − b1 )x + b1 R + A1 (1 − τ1 ) = (ω − b1 )x + A1 − BR(1 − θ1 ).                (4)

The value if repayment, V r , comes from consuming the after tax level of output, (1 − τ1 )A1 plus the
return to the portfolio of assets. The representative household owns a fraction θ1 of the per capita debt,
B, and hence recoups BRθ1 when the debt is repaid. Using the government budget constraint, (3), the
consumption if repayment can be rewritten as in the second term of (4).




                                              4
Preliminary and Incomplete                                3   EQUILIBRIA WITHOUT BAILOUT


   If there is default, then consumption of the representative country 1 household is given by


                                            V d ≡ (ω − b1 )x + A1 (1 − γ).                                             (5)


In this case, the country defaults on both internal and external debt. A fraction of output, γ, is lost. This
is a conventional assumption in the debt default literature meant to capture a wide range of costs stemming
from default including a reduction in trade and risk sharing opportunities, exclusion from markets in the
future, etc. The details of those costs do not concern us at this stage, it is only important they are present
in the analysis.
   The values of repayment and default and the default decision are calculated ex post, after the realization
of the fundamental uncertainty through the productivity shock.6 Ex ante A1 is not known. It is common
knowledge that the shock is drawn from F (·).
   Using (4) and (5), the debt will be repaid iff A1 ≥ Â, where

                                                          BR(1 − θ1 )
                                                   Â ≡               .                                                (6)
                                                             γ

From (6), Â depends on (B, R, θ1 ) as well as the default costs, γ. If enough debt is held internally, so that
θ1 is near 1, Â can be small enough that default will not occur: i.e. A− > Â > 0.


3.2     Period 1 Pricing of Government Debt: Risk Neutrality
Assume that households in countries 1 and 2, like households in country 3, are risk neutral. Let p denote
the probability of repayment of country 1 debt. With risk neutral households, (2) becomes a standard
arbitrage condition


                                                          pR = x.                                                      (7)

   As long as (7) holds, households in all three countries are indifferent with respect to the composition of
their portfolios. So the share of government debt held by residents of the three countries, θi for i = 1, 2, 3,
is not determined in equilibrium. As we shall see though, θ will influence bailout and default decision.
   The probability of repayment in (7) is determined by a comparison of V r and V d conditional on the
realized value of A. Since the loan is made ex ante, p is the probability that A falls outside the default
range determined by (6), i.e. p = 1 − F (Â).
   The strategic uncertainty comes from the dependence of the probability of repayment on the interest
rate together with the dependence of the interest rate on that same probability. There is a natural strategic
complementarity here: if investors think that default is likely, they demand a high interest rate and thus
   6 Calvo (1988) excludes fundamental uncertainty and focuses solely on the endogenous determination of a repudiation rate

by a government that lacks commitment.




                                                    5
Preliminary and Incomplete                                3   EQUILIBRIA WITHOUT BAILOUT


there is default unless a very high A1 is realized.7 This is consistent with the high default probability
believed by investors. This interaction between beliefs, interest rates and default decisions is brought out
by the equilibrium analysis.
   An equilibrium is determined by the values of (Â, R) that jointly satisfy (6) and (7), with p = (1−F (Â)).
If (7) holds, the distribution of government debt holdings, θ is not determined. Yet θ influences Â from
(6). The following equilibrium characterization is for a given value of θ.
   With some algebra the critical value of A, denoted Â, determining the bound of the default region
solves
                                                                  Bx(1 − θ1 )
                                     Γ(A) ≡ [1 − F (A)]A =                    ≡ Z.                                (8)
                                                                      γ

From (6), default occurs for A1 < Â where Â is a solution to (8). The value of R is then determined from
(7). Solutions to (8) will be called interior equilibria.

                                                Figure 1: Locally Safe




                 Γ(A− )      default free                 default
                                                                                             Z

                                                                       Γ(Â)




                                                                                                         Â
                        A−                                                          A+
                      This figure show the existence of a locally isolated equilibrium without default
                      as well as other equilibria with default.


   Note that Γ(A− ) = A− and Γ(A+ ) = 0. The product of (1 − F (A)) and A may not be monotone in A.
This is the source of the multiplicity of interior equilibria.
   In addition to the equilibria solving (8), there can be other more extreme equilibria. If Γ(A− ) ≥ Z,
then there is an equilibrium without default. Further Γ(A+ ) = 0 so there is always an equilibrium with
certain default and hence a zero value of debt.
   Figure 1 shows the determination of an equilibrium for the model when Γ(A− ) = A− > Z. In this case,
there is an equilibrium without default, implying R = x. There is another equilibrium at a much higher
value of Â with R > x. The second equilibrium has default for A ∈ [A− , Â). Clearly, strategic uncertainty
is present even in the case where there is an equilibrium without default. In this case, there is a single
   7 The complementarity takes a dynamic form in Cole and Kehoe (2000). The prospect of a future default increases the

cost of rolling over the current stock of debt and thus makes current default more likely.



                                                    6
Preliminary and Incomplete                                3   EQUILIBRIA WITHOUT BAILOUT


interior equilibrium. The set of equilibria is robust to small variations in Z.
   For there to be an equilibrium without default requires, all else the same, a relatively low value of Z.
From (8), a low value of Z comes from a small debt burden, i.e. BR is small relative to output. Also, if θ1
is large so that most of the debt is held internally, the incentive to default is reduced and Z is low as well.

                                        Figure 2: Multiple Interior Equilibria




                                                                                         Z

                        Γ(A− )
                                                                      Γ(Â)



                                                                                                 Â
                               A−                                                A+
                                 This figure show the existence of multiple equilibria with
                                 default.



   There are other cases to consider. Figure 2 shows a case with four interior equilibria. Here Z is
sufficiently high so that there is no default-free equilibrium. There are multiple interior equilibria with
different critical values of Â satisfying (8) and therefore different default probabilities and associated values
of R. The multiplicity of interior equilibria reflects the non-monotonicity of Γ(A).8 And, as in Figure 1,
there is the equilibrium in which default always occurs.
   This case is one where the debt burden is high enough relative to the lower support of A that repayment
with certainty is not possible. In this case, the fundamental uncertainty is large enough that no promises
of certain repayment are credible. Interestingly this creates at least two interior equilibria, in addition to
the equilibrium with certain default.
   If Z is sufficiently high and Γ(A) does not increase rapidly enough, then there may be no equilibria
with repayment. This is shown in Figure 3.
   As noted earlier, this analysis takes θ as given. Since θ is not pinned down as long as (7) holds, this
implies that there is another dimension to the multiplicity. Clearly, the more debt held externally, the
lower is θ, and the higher is Z. This means that an economy can transition from a situation of certain
repayment to strategic uncertainty as external debt is substituted for internally held debt.
   For the analysis of bailout equilibria that follows, it is useful to summarize results on multiplicity given
the holdings of debt. The analysis assumes there exists an equilibrium without default and builds other
  8 Examples   like this can be generated from a uniform distribution of A so that Γ(A) = (1 − A)A.



                                                    7
Preliminary and Incomplete                                  3   EQUILIBRIA WITHOUT BAILOUT


                                      Figure 3: Equilibrium with Certain Default




                                                                                           Z



                          Γ(A− )
                                                                        Γ(Â)



                                                                                                Â
                                A−                                                 A+
                                   This figure shows an economy where there is no equilibrium
                                   with repayment, just certain default.


equilibria from it.9

Lemma 1. If Γ(A− ) = A− > Z, then there exists an equilibrium without default and another with a
positive probability of default. For some distributions, F (·), there exist multiple equilibria with positive
probabilities of both repayment and default.

Proof. Γ(A− ) > Z implies the existence of an equilibrium without default. There is always a solution to (8)
in which debt has no value with R = ∞. By continuity, there always exists at least one other equilibrium
with R finite. For some distributions F (·), Γ(A) = [1 − F (A)]A is not monotonically decreasing in A. In
that case, multiple interior equilibria, i.e. solutions to (8), can be constructed by the appropriate choice of
θ and hence Z.

   To be clear, Lemma 1 provides sufficient but not necessary conditions for multiplicity. Figure 2 shows
a case in which there is no equilibrium with certain repayment, though there are multiple equilibria with
positive probabilities of default.


3.3     Period 1 Pricing of Government Debt: Risk Aversion
If households in either country 1 or country 2 are risk averse, then their demand for risky government debt
will be zero. The valuation of government debt will be set by the arbitrage of the risk neutral agents in
country 3 and the risk averse households will set θi = 0 for i = 1, 2. The bond market will then clear based
upon the demands of country 3 agents as long as their endowment is large enough to purchase BN1 .
   The default decision of country 1 is again determined by (6), evaluated at θ1 = 0. Repayment occurs
                 BR
iff A1 ≥ Â =     γ .   Using the Lemma 1, it is straightforward to construct multiple equilibria in this case as
well.
  9 This   follows the construction in Camous and Cooper (2014).



                                                      8
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                                     4   BAILOUT


4     Bailout
The prospect of default opens the possibility of a bailout of country 1 debt by the coalition of countries
1 and 2.10 If the federation was able to simply commit to a bailout of country 1 debt, then the strategic
uncertainty would simply disappear. But, of course, such an ironclad guarantee of debt repayment is not
feasible.
    Accordingly, this section addresses two questions. First, under what conditions will a bailout be provided
ex post? Second, will the bailout eliminate strategic uncertainty?
    To study bailouts, the model must be enhanced to be specific about the interaction between the coun-
tries. A key issue is whether a bailout will be provided. The analysis focuses on two motives for bailout.
The first is avoiding default costs and the second is consumption smoothing across countries within the
federation. For both motives, sufficient conditions for bailout are provided. Importantly bailout is generally
state contingent, i.e. the federation prefers bailouts for some but not all realizations of (A1 , A2 ).
    The bailout decision occurs in the last period and thus takes θ as given. To construct equilibria, we
then return to the period 1 choices of households in the three countries. In this way we address the second
question about the impact of strategic uncertainty when (state-contingent) bailouts are provided.


4.1      Bailout Incentives
The federation has two members. One country 1, whose choice of default or repay was analyzed above. The
other member is a composite of the other countries in the federation, denoted country 2 in the preceding
analysis. Country 3 households, while they hold government debt, do not have any direct influence on the
choices in of the country or the federation.
    The interaction between country 1 and the federation is shown in Figure 4. Country 1 chooses first and
can repay its debt or default. If it chooses not to repay, then the federation has an option of a bailout or
allowing default. The default cost is incurred by country 1 only if the federation chooses not to bailout
that country.

                                                Figure 4: Repayment Game


                                                      Country 1

                               repay                          no repay              bailout


                                                 Federation

                                                                                    allow default

    The underlying assumption in this game is that the Federation is always able to come to the rescue
 10 As   noted earlier, country 2 represents all other countries integrated into the single federation.


                                                        9
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                                4   BAILOUT


of the country. Regardless of the many stages of “negotiation” over repayment or not, ultimately if the
country is not going to repay its debt, then the Federation has an option to bailout. This is highlighted in
this extensive form game.11
    We first make explicit the consumption allocations for households in countries 1 and 2 under the
alternative outcomes of debt repayment, debt default and bailout. We use these to construct equilibria.
The consumption for households in country 3 does not factor into these choices.
    To recall notation, Ni is the population in country i = 1, 2, 3. Let N = N1 +N2 be the population of the
coalition. Recall that B is the total debt outstanding of country 1 per capita of that country. Further θi is
                                                                                              θi BN1
defined through the debt holdings of a representation country i household: bi =                  Ni .   Let θ ≡ (θ1 , θ2 , θ3 )
be the vector of debt holdings. As Ai is the realized productivity in country i, Yi = Ni Ai is total country
                   P
i output and Ȳ = i=1,2 Yi is total output of the federation.


Repayment Looking first at the representative household in country 1, using (4), the consumption
allocation under repayment is cr1 = A1 (1 − τ1 ) + b1 R + (ω − b1 )x = A1 − BR(1 − θ1 ) + (ω − b1 )x.
When θ1 = 1, the repayment of debt is just a reshuffling within a household’s budget constraint without
any real implications. Using (5), the consumption allocation for country 1 agents under default is cd1 =
(1 − γ)A1 + (ω − b1 )x.
    Similar expressions hold for the consumption of agents in country 2 under repayment and default on
country 1 debt. If there is repayment, cr2 = A2 + b2 R + (ω − b2 )x, while if country 1 defaults, cd2 =
A2 + (ω − b2 )x.


Bailout In the event of a complete bailout, a common tax rate is set and levied on agents throughout
the federation. The tax rate, denoted τ̄ , is sufficient to cover the total debt obligations of country 1:
τ̄ Ȳ = N1 BR. The consumption of country i = 1, 2 agents under a bailout is cbi = Ai (1− τ̄ )+bi R+(ω −bi )x.


Objective The last ingredient of the model is the objective of the federation. Assume that the federation
has an objective of the weighted average of utility from the consumption levels of the households in the two
                         P
countries: W (c1 , c2 ) = i ∆i v(ci ) where ∆i is a welfare weight and v(·) is strictly increasing and concave.
                     P
Normalize so that i ∆i = 1. The weights might coincide with population shares or could reflect broader
objectives of the federation.
    The bailout incentive arises from the curvature in the objective function of the federation. This curva-
ture could come directly from the risk aversion of the households, so that v(·) = u(·). More generally, it
could reflect the views of the policymakers that take into account the joint welfare of all households in the
federation or a political process that puts more value on equality of consumption across members of the
federation.
 11 Cooper, Kempf, and Peled (2008) studies the opposite timing and hence provide somewhat different conditions for bailout.

The timing adopted here highlights the effects of federation bailout on the choices of country 1.




                                                    10
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                            4   BAILOUT


   This maximization of a weighted sum of the strictly concave utilities obtained from the member coun-
tries, creates, as in Cooper, Kempf, and Peled (2008), a consumption smoothing motive for bailout. In
the leading case where ∆i equals the population share of country i, the federation prefers to equalize
consumption across agents, given a fixed amount of resources.


4.2    Risk Neutral Households
Suppose all households are risk neutral and are treated so in the federation objective: v(c) = c. We first
look at bailout incentives and then study the presence of strategic uncertainty.


Bailout Incentives From Figure 4, the federation chooses between bailout and default, given that
country 1 has decided not to repay its debt. Under bailout, the welfare of the coalition is given by:


                  W b = ∆1 [A1 (1 − τ̄ ) + x(ω − b1 ) + Rb1 ] + ∆2 [A2 (1 − τ̄ ) + x(ω − b2 ) + Rb2 ]      (9)

             RBN1
where τ̄ =    Y     is sufficient to repay the outstanding debt. If instead the federation allows default, then
welfare of the coalition is given by


                            W d = ∆1 [A1 (1 − γ) + x(ω − b1 )] + ∆2 [A2 + x(ω − b2 )].                    (10)

Using the budget constraint to determine τ̄ , write the difference in values between bailout and default as
                                                                          
                                                   ∆1      Y1   ∆2      Y2
                         W b − W d = RBN1             (θ1 − ) +    (θ2 − ) + γ∆1 A1 .                     (11)
                                                   N1      Y    N2      Y

   To highlight different influences on the bailout decision, assume ∆i = Ni and normalize N = 1 so that
population and welfare weights are the same. In this case, the desired social outcome is equal consumption
across households in the federation. The following proposition provides a sufficient condition for a bailout
to occur. The sufficient condition depends, in part, on who holds the debt of country 1 and the realization
of country 1 output.

Lemma 2. Given θ, if ∆i = Ni , then there exists a critical level of country 1 output, Ã, such that a bailout
occurs iff A1 ≥ Ã.

Proof. At ∆i = Ni , from (12), W b − W d becomes


                        W b − W d = RBN1 (θ1 + θ2 − 1) + γN1 A1 = γN1 A1 − RBN1 θ3 .                      (12)

           RBθ3
Let Ã ≡    γ .   Clearly W b − W d ≥ 0 iff A1 ≥ Ã.




                                                   11
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                             4   BAILOUT


   Note that bailout is state contingent and occurs only for high values of output in country 1. With
risk neutral households, bailout is only a way to reduce the total costs of default. The level of output in
country 2 is irrelevant for determining the costs of default. Though the tax rate adjusts to variations in
both A1 and A2 , the total tax payment in the event of bailout is RBN1 and thus independent of country
i output.12
   It is interesting to contrast the incentives of the coalition with those of country 1 acting alone. From
                                                                                            RB(1−θ1 )       RB(θ2 +θ3 )
(6), without the prospect of a bailout, country 1 chooses repayment iff A1 ≥ Â ≡              γ        =       γ       .
   Clearly Ã ≤ Â, with equality if θ2 = 0 so that 1 − θ1 = θ3 . If θ2 = 0, Proposition 2 implies that the
bailout option does not reduce the default probability. Instead, it is exactly those states in which country
1 wishes to default that the coalition is content to allow that default.
   If, ceteris paribus, θ2 > 0, then debt holders in country 2 benefit from the repayment of debt. Hence
Ã(θ3 ) < Â when θ2 > 0. In this case, the possibility of bailout reduces the set of default states.
   Taking as given the bailout decision of the federation, country 1 retains the option to repay rather than
grant the option of a bailout to the federation. If θ2 > 0 so that Ã < Â, then there are states in which the
federation prefers bailout while country 1 prefers default to repayment. Even if country 1 prefers default
to bailout, it can only prevent a bailout by repaying its own debt. But clearly country 1 is always better
off under bailout then repayment as bailout allows it to share the debt burden. Thus in these states, a
bailout will occur. But, from Lemma 2, a bailout will not occur for low realizations of A1 .
   With the prospect of bailout in some but not all states, will there nonetheless exist strategic uncertainty
in the valuation of country 1 debt? The key, as in the analysis absent bailout, is in the potential for multiple
solutions to the risk neutral pricing equation,(7), rewritten here as:


                                                      pr(r ∪ b)R = x                                                 (13)

where pr(r ∪b) denotes the probability that the realization of (A1 , A2 ) leads to either repayment by country
1 or bailout.
   The following proposition uses the logic of Lemma 1 to argue there can be multiple solutions to (13).
As highlighted earlier, there are two sources of multiplicity. First, if there exists an equilibrium without
default, then by continuity there is an equilibrium with default in some states. Second, if the default
probability is increasing in R, then multiple interior equilibria can be constructed. Both of these forces are
present in Lemma 1 as well as the propositions that follow concerning the presence of strategic uncertainty
along with bailouts.

Proposition 1. If Lemmas 1 and 2 hold, θ3 > 0 and A− is sufficiently low, multiple equilibria in the
valuation of country 1 debt remain despite the prospect of a bailout.

Proof. Under the hypothesis of Lemma 1, there is a solution to (13) with no default and R = x. There is
 12 Country   2 productivity would matter if there was a distortion in labor supply.



                                                     12
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                       4    BAILOUT


always an equilibrium with certain default: as R gets sufficiently large, Ã does as well, exceeding A+ so
that bailout does not occur.
   As shown in Lemma 2, bailout occurs iff A1 ≥ Ã. As long as the lower support of the distribution of
the shocks is low enough, Ã > A− . For A1 ∈ [A− , Ã], country 1 chooses between default and repayment
as a bailout is not forthcoming in these states. Since Ã < Â, country 1 will default in these states.
   For this case, the arbitrage condition, (13), becomes

                                                          
                                                 1 − F (Ã) R = x.                                             (14)

          RBθ3                                                                                     Ãγ
As Ã =    γ     is increasing in R, the probability of default is increasing in R. Using R =      Bθ3 ,   the non-
monotonicity in the left side is sufficient to generate multiple solutions to (14), following the construction
in Lemma 1.



   Here the existence of a default region requires θ3 > 0. If all debt is held within the federation, then
Ã = 0 and repayment occurs for every realization of A1 . There is no reason to incur a default cost since
the bailout entails a welfare neutral redistribution within the households of the federation.
   The multiplicity arises despite the prospect of bailout. This has the same basis as the multiple solutions
to (8). The key is the underlying complementarity: if investors are pessimistic about repayment, R will
increase to compensate and this will increase the set of default states. This interaction arises even if bailout
is possible because a credible bailout occurs iff A1 ≥ Ã and Ã is increasing in R.
   Now consider the case in which the ∆i differ from the population weights. In this case, the redistribution
effects of bailout will matter. To highlight this, suppose θ3 = 1 so that all debt is held outside of the
federation. In this case, (9) and (12) imply that a bailout is desired only if γ ≥ τ̄ . Otherwise, households
in both countries are better off under default. Second, if a bailout is desired, it redistributes from country
2 to country 1. This also follows directly from γ ≥ τ̄ so that the burden of the debt for country 1 is less
than the default cost. Third, the welfare weights and the realized values of (A1 , A2 ) will determine if the
redistribution under a bailout increases federation welfare.

Lemma 3. If all debt is external to the federation, i.e. θ3 = 1, then there exists Ã such that bailout occurs
                                                                                     ∆2
iff A1 ≥ Ã with Ã is increasing in the relative welfare weight of country 2,       ∆1 ,   and decreasing in the
                              N2
relative size of country 2,   N1 .


Proof. If θ3 = 1, then debt market clearing implies θ1 = θ2 = 0. Consequently, the gain to bailout is
proportional to

                                                                     A2 ∆2
                                     W b − W d = A1 γ − τ̄ (A1 +           ).                                  (15)
                                                                      ∆1
   The first step shows that if there is a gain to bailout, then it is increasing in A1 . A necessary condition


                                               13
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                                   4   BAILOUT


for W b ≥ W d is γ > τ̄ . Under this condition, an increase in A1 increases W b − W d for a given τ̄ . Further,
             RBN1
using τ̄ =   P        ,   the tax rate falls as A1 increases, thus further increasing the gain to bailout.
              i Ni Yi

   The second step characterizes the unique critical level of A1 determining the bailout region. Define Ã
                                                               RBN1
as the value of A1 such that W b = W d . Using τ̄ =            P        ,   and setting W b = W d yields:
                                                                i Ni Yi

                                                               "                 #
                                                          RB               ˆ2
                                                                   1 + Â2 ∆
                                                     Ã =                                                              (16)
                                                           γ       1 + Â2 N̂2

      ˆ2 =
where ∆          ∆2
                      is the relative welfare weight for country 2, Â2 =            A2
                                                                                          is the productivity of country 2
                 ∆1                                                                  Ã
                                N2
relative to Ã and N2 =         N1    is the relative welfare weight for country 2.
   The right side of (16) is monotone in Â2 and thus in Ã1 . Whether it is increasing or decreasing in Ã
depends on the sign of ∆ˆ 2 − N̂2 . If ∆
                                       ˆ 2 = N̂2 , then Ã = RB as in Lemma 2 as here θ3 = 1. Thus there
                                                              γ
exists a unique Ã solving (16) given A2 .
                                                                                                                  ∆2
   Since W b − W d is increasing in A1 , bailout occurs for A1 ≥ Ã. From (16), Ã is increasing                  ∆1   and
                 N2
decreasing in    N1   given A2 .

   There is an interesting contrast between the conditions for bailout in Lemmas 2 and 3. In the first
result of Lemma 2, the critical value of A1 that determined the bailout region was independent of A2 . The
relative productivities did not matter since the weights in the objective function mirrored the population
weights used to determine the tax shares. But, in Lemma 3, Ã depends on A2 , both directly and through
                                                                ˆ 2 > N̂2 , then Ã is increasing in A2 .
the common tax rate in the event of bailout, τ̄ . From (16), if ∆
   Overall, a bailout is more likely if country 1 has a larger relative welfare weight and is relatively small.
Further when the relative welfare weight of country 1 is larger than its relative population, then bailout is
less likely as A2 increases. In this case, the welfare cost of the shared tax dominates the reduction in the
tax rate for high country 2 output.

Proposition 2. If Lemmas 1 and 3 hold and A− is sufficiently low, multiple equilibria in the valuation of
country 1 debt remain despite the prospect of a bailout.

Proof. The proof follows the proof of Proposition 1. Under the hypothesis of Lemma 1, there is an
equilibrium without default. If A− is sufficiently low, then there is a non-empty default region, i.e. A− < Ã.
Further, the default region becomes larger as R increases as Ã is increasing in R. As R increases, τ̄ increases
                       τ̄ A2 ∆2
and so does Ã =      ∆1 (γ−τ̄ ) .   With the default range increasing in R, the resulting complementarity is sufficient
to create multiple interior valuations of the debt following the argument of Lemma 1.


4.3    Risk Averse Households
This section considers the case of strictly concave valuations of country i consumption, v(ci ), in the fed-
eration’s social welfare function. As noted earlier, this curvature may reflect the tastes of households in



                                                        14
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                                   4   BAILOUT


these countries or some elements in the determination of social welfare that implies the distribution of
consumption matters. The following sections study these two cases.
   For each, there are two types of results. First, the conditions for bailout are provided. Second, the
dependence of the set of default states on R is shown to lead to multiple solutions of the debt valuation
equation, (13). Throughout we focus on the importance of this curvature and ignore differences across
countries due to size. Accordingly, assume N1 = N2 for this analysis.


4.3.1      All External Debt

First consider the case in which all households in countries 1 and 2 are risk averse and curvature matters
in the federation objective, i.e. both u(·) and v(·) are strictly concave. Country 3 households remain risk
neutral.


Bailout Incentives In equilibrium, the debt is priced by these risk neutral households and they hold all
of the country 1 debt. In this case, θ1 = θ2 = 0 and θ3 = 1 and social welfare under bailout and default
become:


                                  W b = ∆1 v(A1 (1 − τ̄ ) + xω) + ∆2 v(A2 (1 − τ̄ ) + xω)                                   (17)



                                      W d = ∆1 v(A1 (1 − γ) + xω) + ∆2 v(A2 + xω)                                           (18)

respectively.
   As noted in the discussion leading to Lemma 3, these expressions immediately imply that a necessary
condition for bailout is γ > τ̄ . The bailout redistributes from country 2 to country 1. With risk averse
households, the welfare effects of this redistribution will depend on the realizations of (A1 , A2 ).

Lemma 4. If the weight on country 1, ∆1 , is large enough, country 1 output, A1 , small enough and
federation output, Y , large enough, then a bailout will be preferred to default.

Proof. Assume A1 = A2 and ∆1 = ∆2 so that the two countries are symmetric in terms of size, output
                                                                                                 BR
and the weight in federation welfare. From Lemma 2, if θ3 = 1, then Ã =                          γ .   From (17) and (18),
at A1 = A2 = Ã, the total resources available to country 1 and 2 agents is the same under default and
repayment. That is, (A1 + A2 )(1 − τ̄ )=A1 (1 − γ) + A2 at A1 = A2 = Ã implying the level of federation
output is such that γ = 2τ̄ .
   So, at A1 = A2 = Ã, τ̄ < γ, else default would dominate for all households. Further, the curvature in
v(·) implies W b > W d since bailout implies a more equitable division of consumption across households in
the federation compared to default.13
 13 In   fact, as the two countries are symmetric, bailout generates the social welfare maximizing distribution of goods.




                                                      15
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                                  4   BAILOUT


   With τ̄ < γ, bailout redistributes federation output from country 2 to country 1. Therefore, an increase
in ∆1 (relative to ∆2 ) would increase the value of a bailout.
   Further, suppose A1 falls relative to A2 , leaving Y unchanged. Then the redistribution to country 1
under a bailout would be even more desirable.

   This result highlights the role of consumption smoothing, as in Cooper, Kempf, and Peled (2008), as a
rational for bailout beyond the desire, highlighted in Lemma 2, of avoiding costly default. These gains are
illustrated in Figure 5 when A1 = A2 = Ã. The bailout redistributes from country 2 to country 1 relative
to default. As the social welfare function is strictly concave, this redistribution is welfare improving as the
consumption of country 2 exceeds that of country 1 both under default and bailout.

                                             Figure 5: Gains from Bailout

Country 2 consumption

                                              Welfare if Bailout

                                       D




                                                          B




                                           Welfare if Default


                                                                                     resource constraint
                                                                                                             Country 1 consumption
    This figure shows two indifference curves. The solid (blue) curves is social welfare under a bailout. The dashed (red)
    curve is social welfare under default. The point D is the outcome under default and the point B is the outcome
    under a bailout. There is a common resource constraint as γ = 2τ̄ .


   To be clear, the result in Lemma 4 depends on the ex post realization of (A1 , A2 ). This result does not
imply there is a bailout in all states.

Lemma 5. If the weight on country 1, ∆1 , is small enough, country 1 output, A1 ≤ Â, defined in (6), and
federation output, Y , small enough, then country 1 will default.

Proof. For A1 ≤ Â, with Â defined in (6), country 1 prefers default over repayment. With ∆1 and Y small,
the common tax rate is very high and the redistribution from country 2 to country 1 is not desirable. So
the federation will prefer default to bailout. In fact, for Y sufficiently low, τ̄ > γ and bailout is worse than
default for both countries.

                                                    16
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                                     4   BAILOUT


     Taken together, Lemmas 4 and 5 provide conditions such that bailout occurs in some states and default
in others. Even if there is an equilibrium without default on country 1 debt, so that R = x, Lemma 1
implies the existence of other interior equilibria.

Proposition 3. If v(ci ) is strictly concave for households in country i = 1, 2 and linear for households in
country 3, multiple interior equilibria in the valuation of country 1 debt remain despite the prospect of a
bailout.

Proof. The first step is to establish conditions for country 1 to prefer default to repayment. With θ3 = 1,
                                                                                BR
a default is preferred to repayment by country 1 occurs if A1 ≤                  γ .   The default states are increasing in
R.
     The second step is to establish conditions for the federation to prefer default over bailout. For realiza-
                                        BR
tions of (A1 , A2 ) such that Y <        γ ,   γ ≤ τ̄ and the federation prefers default. The set of states such that
default is preferred to bailout by the federation is increasing in R.
     From Lemma 1 multiple solutions to the debt valuation equation can be constructed. An increase in
R implies that the set of default states is larger. Thus, using Lemma 1, multiple interior solutions can be
constructed.


4.3.2      Only Internal Debt

Within some federations, such as the EU, a large fraction of debt is held internally to both the country
issuing the debt and the federation as a whole. This subsection studies this case by looking at a situation
in which households in country 1 and 2 are risk neutral but country 3 households are risk averse.14 In this
case, risk neutral pricing remains and θ3 = 0.
     We study the incentive for bailout under the assumption of risk aversion in the federation’s welfare
function, i.e. v 00 (·) < 0. As above, the curvature of v(·) promotes a consumption smoothing motivation for
bailout by the federation.
     There are a couple of ways to motivate this combination of household and federation preferences. First,
households may indeed be risk neutral. Nonetheless, the political process within the federation leads to
outcomes which balance the relative interests of the parties.15 Or the federation may internalize preferences
over consumption equality that competitive households ignore. In this case, the curvature in the welfare
of the federation comes from internal political considerations rather than the risk aversion of households.
Second households may be risk averse but funds are managed by risk neutral investment firms within
countries 1 and 2. The households though ultimately own these firms and thus the proceeds from their
  14 If all households are risk averse, the of course (8) does not price the debt. It is possible to show, by continuity, that if

there are multiple solutions to (8) under risk neutrality, then there are multiple equilibria for risk aversion close to zero using
a continuity argument.
  15 For example, the Nash cooperative bargaining solution selects an allocation from a feasible set using a nonlinear objective.

This same allocation maximizes the sum of strictly concave utilities of the two agents given welfare weights. Thanks to
Alessandro Dovis for a discussion on this point.




                                                      17
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                                    4   BAILOUT


activities.16
   The conditions for bailout are given in the following lemmas. The first considers a symmetric situation
and finds that a bailout is provided in all states. The second highlights conditions for default in some
states. Throughout, assume ∆1 = ∆2 .

Lemma 6. If θ1 = θ2 , the federation prefers bailout to default for all realizations of (A1 , A2 ).

Proof. Suppose default costs are zero. The consumption levels under default for i = 1, 2 are cdi = Ai + (ω −
bi )x. The consumption levels for i = 1, 2 under a bailout are cbi = Ai (1 − τ̄ ) + bi R + (ω − bi )x. Therefore
the consumption gain from bailout is

                                                                                Ai
                                          cbi − cdi = bi R − τ̄ Ai = R(θi −           )                                   (19)
                                                                              A1 + A2
where the third term uses τ̄ =            PN1 BR        from the government budget constraint. With N1 = N2 , τ̄ =
                                           i (Ni Ai )
PBR .
 i (Ai )
                                              b
                                                  − cdi ) = 0. Bailout has only redistribution effects when γ = 0.
                                       P
   Equation (19) implies that             i (ci
   If θ1 = θ2 , (19) implies that the redistribution is always in favor of the relatively poor country. This is
welfare increasing as it leads to greater consumption equality. Thus bailout occurs in all states. If there
are positive default costs, bailout is even more desirable.

   Interestingly, in the case of the closed federation, when θ1 = θ2 conditions for bailout are independent
of R. Of course, bailout may also be undesirable if the redistribution is from poor to rich. This can arise
when debt holdings are not equal, i.e. θ1 6= θ2 . The following lemma studies conditions for a bailout when
country 1 debt is largely held by households in that country.

Lemma 7. Suppose θ1 large and γ small. If A1 > A2 , then the federation prefers default to bailout. If
A1 < A2 and A1 is small enough, the federation prefers bailout to default.
                                                                                                 Ai
Proof. Assume γ = 0. From (19), for realizations of (A1 , A2 ) such that θ1 ≥                  A1 +A2 ,   country 1 gains from
bailout even if A1 > A2 . With A1 > A2 , this redistribution implies consumption is less equitable under a
bailout compared to a default and this reduces social welfare. For these realizations of (A1 , A2 ), a bailout
will not be provided.
   With A1 < A2 , consumption in country 1 is lower than that in country 2 under default. If A1 is
                                        Ai
sufficiently low, so that θ1 ≤        A1 +A2   even with θ1 large, bailout redistributes from country 2 to country 1.
This increases social welfare.
   These arguments hold by continuity for small enough default costs.

   Again note the conditions for bailout do not depend on R. What matters is the direction of the
redistribution, not its magnitude. Of course, the bailout must itself be feasible, i.e. τ̄ ∈ [0, 1]. Thus for
sufficiently large R, the bailout is not feasible and default will occur. Hence, Lemma 1 applies.
 16 Implicitly,   the managers act in a risk neutral fashion despite the risk aversion of the owners.


                                                         18
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                  5   CONCLUSION


Proposition 4. If all debt is held by countries 1 and 2 and v(ci ) is strictly concave for households in
country i = 1, 2, and θ1 is sufficiently large, then multiple interior equilibria in the valuation of country 1
debt remain despite the prospect of a bailout.

Proof. The first step demonstrates that default occurs. Fix A2 < Â, where Â was defined in (6) as the
value of A1 such that country 1 defaults iff A1 < Â. Using Lemma 7, either a bailout occurs or country
1 repays its own debt for realizations of A1 < Â. For realizations of A1 ∈ [A2 , Â] there is no bailout and
country 1 prefers to default. For A1 > Â country 1 repays.
    Hence, for θ1 large, there is a range of default: A1 , A2 ) such that A1 ∈ [A2 , Â]. Further, since Â is
increasing in R, the probability of default is increasing in R.
    Lemma 1 holds in this economy since for R large enough, bailout is not feasible. This, along with the
fact that the default probability is increasing in R is sufficient for multiple equilibria.




5     Conclusion
This paper studies the conditions for debt runs. It does so in a model where default is possible due to
fundamental shocks. Prices reflect this risk. In addition, the beliefs of investors have an independent
influence on debt prices. Thus debt prices reflect both fundamental and strategic uncertainty.
    The model is a vehicle to explore policy measures intended to stabilize debt prices. A key issue is the
incentive for a federation to bailout the debt of a member country, particularly in the presence of strategic
uncertainty. The analysis highlights the sharing of fundamental and strategic uncertainty as well as the
conditions for a bailout.
    There are a number of interesting extensions to consider. First, the model ignores an active monetary
authority. If a monetary authority controls the real interest rate, then a channel exists between monetary
policy and the volatility of debt prices. Integrating the model into a monetary framework would allow
a more thorough investigation of this channel as well as the consideration of bailouts through monetary
policy. Camous and Cooper (2014) studies monetary and fiscal actions within a country and provides a
starting point for the introduction of monetary interventions.
    Second, there is no banking sector in this economy. Informally, there seems to be another important
complementarity at work between country debt and the banking system. As in Cooper and Nikolov (2013),
if investors are pessimistic about debt repayment, the value of country debt falls and the balance sheets
of banks worsen. This implies a higher liability for countries under deposit insurance schemes and/or
guarantees (either implicit or explicit) of the banking system. But the assumption of these additional
liabilities supports the initial pessimistic beliefs about debt repayment. Formalizing this interaction and
using it to explore additional policy measures through active monetary interventions could prove insightful.
    Third, moral hazard effects are ignored. These can arise as a consequence of a bailout in a couple of


                                               19
Preliminary and Incomplete                                                 REFERENCES


forms. As studied by Cooper, Kempf, and Peled (2010), for example, the prospect of bailout can induce
countries to issue more debt. Moreover, for countries under pressure to reform, a bailout can relax that
pressure and be counterproductive.



References
Bigelow, J., R. Cooper, and T. Ross (1993): “Warranties without commitment to market participa-
  tion,” International Economic Review, pp. 85–100.

Calvo, G. (1988): “Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations,” The American Economic Review,
  pp. 647–661.

Camous, A., and R. Cooper (2014): “Monetary Policy and Debt Fragility,” Working Paper 20650,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cole, H., and T. Kehoe (2000): “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 67(1), 91–116.

Cooper, R. (2012): “Fragile Debt and the Credible Sharing of Strategic Uncertainty,” Working Paper
  18377, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cooper, R., H. Kempf, and D. Peled (2008): “Is it is or is it Ain’t my Obligation? Regional Debt in
  a Fiscal Federation,” International Economic Review, 49(4), 1469–1504.

         (2010): “Regional Debt in a Monetary Union: Is it Inflationary?,” European Economic Review,
  54, 345–58.

Cooper, R., and K. Nikolov (2013): “Government Debt and Banking Fragility: The Spreading of
  Strategic Uncertainty,” Working Paper 19278, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cooper, R., and T. Ross (1999): “Public and private guarantee funds with market fragility,” Journal
  of Risk and Insurance, pp. 163–184.

Corsetti, G., and L. Dedola (2012): “Fiscal Crises, Confidence and Default A Bare-bones Model with
  Lessons for the Euro Area,” mimeo.

Eaton, J. (1987): “Public Debt Guarantees and Private Capital Flight,” The World Bank Economic
  Review, pp. 377–396.




                                           20
