NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A STUDY OF THE EXTENT AND POTENTIAL CAUSES OF ALTERNATIVE EMPLOYMENT
ARRANGEMENTS
Peter Cappelli
JR Keller
Working Paper 18376
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18376
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Support from the Russell Sage Foundation is gratefully acknowledged.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Peter Cappelli and JR Keller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

A Study of the Extent and Potential Causes of Alternative Employment Arrangements
Peter Cappelli and JR Keller
NBER Working Paper No. 18376
September 2012
JEL No. J2,J21,J41,M12,M51,M54,M55
ABSTRACT
The notion of regular, full-time employment as one of the defining features of the U.S. economy has
been called into question in recent years by the apparent growth of alternative or “nonstandard” arrangements
– part-time work, temporary help, independent contracting, and other arrangements. Identifying the
extent of these arrangements, whether they are increasing, and where they occur is the first step for
understanding their implications for the economy and the society. But this has been difficult to do
because of the lack of appropriate data. We present estimates of the extent of these practices based
on a national probability sample of U.S. establishments, evidence on changes in their use over time,
and analyses that help us begin to understand why they are used.
Peter Cappelli
The Wharton School
Center for Human Resources
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6358
and NBER
cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu
JR Keller
University of Pennsylvania
2000 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
jkel@wharton.upenn.edu

3
1. Introduction
It is common to refer to all individuals who are working on behalf of an organization as
employees, yet organizations increasingly use an array of alternative arrangements other than
employment for engaging workers. Alternatives to employment relationships include temporary
help, leased employees, independent contracting, and using Professional Employer Organizations
(PEO’s). Part-time work, though a type of employment, is often included in the set of alternative
arrangements because employers typically treat workers in those roles differently (e.g., no
benefits or career advancement prospects). Despite their importance in the economy, we know
surprisingly little about how extensively these alternative arrangements are used.
Part of the challenge in identifying their use has been the difficulty in agreeing on the
common elements of these alternative arrangements (Cappelli and Keller 2013). The phrase
“nonstandard work,” for example, is all-inclusive, but ignores the considerable variation in the
attributes of the different components within that classification. The term “contingent work” is
also common and refers to the sense that the relationships on average are less secure and more
contingent on short-term changes in employer demand than is regular employment. Yet some of
these alternative arrangements can be reasonably regular and stable, especially part-time jobs,
and some full-time, regular jobs can nevertheless be quite insecure. As a result, it is perhaps best
to examine each of the specific alternative arrangements and see how extensively they are used.
We examine these alternative arrangements using national probability data from the
Census. The 2000/2001 National Employer Survey is the largest and most recent nationally
representative establishment-level survey on alternative work arrangements, and it contains
detailed information of employment in alternative work arrangements as a fraction of direct-hire
employees, data which is not found in any other source. And unlike previous establishment-level

4
surveys, multiple versions of the NES have been conducted over time, providing an opportunity
to examine trends in their use.
The descriptive data from the survey allows us to address three quite important questions.
The first is simply, how extensive are each of these alternative arrangements? Second, how has
the incidence of their use changed over time? Finally, what can we add to what little is known
about why employers choose different arrangements? While the results below are best seen as
descriptive and preliminary, given the relevance of the topic and the difficulty in accessing these
data again, it seems appropriate to present what is available.
Overall we find that these alternative arrangements are used extensively, but there is
considerable variation in the use of each of the different arrangements. Their use is highly
concentrated among relatively few establishments who use them very intensively, suggesting that
establishment-level factors must be involved in understanding that variance. The data over time
suggests an overall increase but, again, the growth varies considerably across arrangements.
Finally, we present preliminary analyses examining prior hypotheses about the establishmentlevel attributes likely to be associated with greater use of these alternative arrangements. We
find relatively little support for the notion that their use is driven by either cost savings or
flexibility needs, but some support for the idea that they vary with the ease of monitoring tasks
and job performance.
2. Interest in alternative arrangements
What we now think of as the traditional employment relationship in the Anglo-U.S.
context evolved from the traditions of agrarian economies in England, where employment
relationships were based on crop cycles. Unless otherwise stated, hired help on farms was
engaged for one year, following the cycle of crops from planting to harvest, to prevent farmers

5
from hiring laborers from Spring through Harvest and then laying them off in the Winter when
there was nothing much for them to do but, as a consequence, nothing much to eat. This
arrangement was canonized into common law and carried over to the U.S. and commonwealth
countries. On the European continent, similar arrangements were put in place through legislation
(Feinman 1976).
The “at will” employment model in the U.S. developed later in a context where labor was
scarcer than in England. The notion that employees and employers could walk away from
employment arrangements at any time – the “at will” idea – was a sharp departure from earlier
arrangements (Miles 2000). The rise of industrial employment in the early 1900s created
opportunity to apply the “at will” model on a large scale and led to arrangements where a
reasonably stable group of skilled workers was surrounded by an ever-changing casual
workforce. While turnover rates of 300 percent or more were common in U.S. industry through
the 1920s, the rise of capital-intensive, mass production arrangements created the need for many
more semi-skilled workers and, in turn, a need for greater stability in the workforce. The notion
of stable, full-time jobs for average workers that could last a lifetime began relatively late, after
the Depression, and was enforced by collective bargaining agreements in union facilities and
similar arrangements (seniority-based provisions, etc.) in non-union firms. That model of
“standard” employment became the basis for modern employment law in The New Deal, for
assumptions about labor markets and the economy that governed policy, and for much of civil
society1.
The experiences of the 1980s represented a sharp rift in that model of standard
employment as downsizing waves eroded what had been lifetime jobs. Initially, temporary help

1

The historical background to nonstandard work can be found in Cappelli (2000), and the more recent context is
outlined in Cappelli (1999), Chapters 2 and 3.

6
engaged through agencies provided a means for lowering labor costs in this period and was
followed by a steady rise in the variety of alternative arrangements, supported by the efforts of
the temp industry to legitimize these alternatives as acceptable practices (Smith and Neuwirth
2008). These other practices included contract or leased employees, similar to temporary help
except that the relationships are often long-term; independent contracting where relationships
can be short-term like temps but lack an intermediary between worker and employer; engaging
temp workers directly without an agency intermediary (“direct-hire” temps); Professional
Employer Organizations (PEOs) that become the legal employer while leaving the day-to-day
management of workers to the client’s supervisors (see, e.g., Cappelli 1999); vendor-on-premise
services where workers are employees of the vendor but can be attached permanently to the
client’s location (see Theodore and Peck 2002) .
There are several reasons for both practical and theoretical interest in these arrangements,
the first being that they appear to be both widespread and growing. Lou, Mann and Holden
(2010) report, for example, that temporary agency workers doubled as a percentage of the total
US workforce from 1990 through 2000, accounting for 10 percent of all employment growth
during this period. The number of workers in PEO arrangements has risen even faster, albeit
starting at a very low base, with Lombardi and Ono (2008) reporting a 386 percent growth
between 1992 and 2002. Many of these arrangements reduce the fixed costs of having workers
engaged in tasks for the organization, allowing organizations to adjust the amount of work and
the pay while making it easier to end the relationship2.
A large subset of these arrangements pushes work outside of the usual definition of the
boundary of the firm, separating the legal employment relationship from the day-to-day

2

Part-time workers may be the exception here. While they do create the opportunity for more flexible staffing
arrangements, the fixed costs of recruiting and hiring new workers may be similar for full- and part-time positions.

7
management of employees (Muhl 2002; Stone 2006). Such arrangements typically introduce a
third party into the relationship, raising new issues about how workers are managed and the
extent to which the different parties involved are able to exercise control over the work process.
In general, alternative arrangements give a greater role to the market in shaping the terms and
conditions under which work is performed. Together, they represent a dramatic shift from
traditional employment.
Data on the use of specific arrangements is especially important given the recent interest
in understanding the issues raised in situations where employers use multiple alternative
arrangements. For example, how is the choice among temps, contractors, and full-time workers
determined (Kalleberg et al. 2003)? What are the challenges for mangers who have different
workers engaged on their behalf under very different arrangements (Smith 2001)? How do the
workers operating under these different arrangements interact with each other (Davis-Blake and
Broschak 2003)? All of these issues become more important as these alternative arrangements
become more widespread.
3. Measuring the extent of nonstandard employment
Efforts to collect data on these alternative arrangements have largely relied on individuallevel data surveys, especially the Contingent Work Supplement (CWS) to the Current Population
Survey (CPS) conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). While studies using these data
have done much to further our understanding of alternative arrangements and their effects on
workers, they are of necessity limited in the picture they can present of the prevalence of such
arrangements in the U.S. economy.
The BLS has been particularly interested in contingent work, which it defines as "any job
in which an individual does not have an explicit or implicit contract for long-term employment"

8
(Polivka 1996). The key criterion in the definition of contingent work, therefore, is the
employee’s perception of the stability of their job3 and not the actual nature of the relationship.
By 2005, 4.1 percent of the workforce were in arrangements that workers perceived as
contingent, almost identical to the 4.0 percent reported in 2001 and slightly lower than the
estimates from previous surveys in 1999 (4.3 percent) and 1997 (4.9 percent) (von Hippel et al.
2006). The stability of these figures despite business cycle variations and other changes leads to
the question as to whether perceptions of instability and insecurity may self-adjust.
Another concern about individual-level data is whether individual workers are able and
willing to identify the type of arrangement they are in. Other researchers have noted that if the
many respondents who were unable to answer whether their work was contingent were included
in the BLS measure, the percentage of contingent workers would be nearly 10 percent or almost
two and a half times the current estimate of 4.1 percent (Gleason 2006: 4; Belman and Golden
2000). Dey and colleagues (2006) similarly observe that despite the addition of clarifying
questions, difficulties with reporting accuracy remain (Dey, Houseman, and Polvika 2006).
Contingent work does not map neatly onto categories of non-standard work. For example, a
1999 BLS survey reports that only 10 percent of part-time workers say that their jobs are
contingent (Hipple 2001).
The most important limitation to the CPS data on individuals is that asking a worker
about the nature of their working arrangements does not tell us how often or even if they are
working at all. For example, individuals may correctly identify themselves as independent
contractors even if they have no work, similar to temp agency workers who have no

3

“Any job in which an individual does not have an explicit or implicit contract for long-term employment” (Hipple
2001)

9
assignments4. Social desirability biases may also affect how individuals respond (e.g.,
consultant/independent contractor sounds better than temp). Finally, most attempts to measure
the use of alternative arrangements with individual-level data have not used the full range of
intermediaries or arrangements, such as engagement through Professional Employer
Organizations.
An alternative approach to mapping the extent to which nonstandard arrangements are
being used is to ask employers directly about their use. The most obvious advantage to this
approach is that the responses tell us about the actual use and extent of these arrangements in the
workplace. Employer respondents may not have data on the number of individuals working
under each arrangement at their fingertips (sometimes true even for the number of direct
employees), but they are likely to be well aware of the different alternative arrangements, as each
has implications for their budgets and for compliance with both tax and employment law.
Data from employers has been examined in the past by other researchers relying on a
variety of survey instruments. Abraham (1990) used a survey from the Bureau of National
Affairs, Houseman (2001) used data from the 1995 W.E. Upjohn survey of 550 establishments,
and Kalleberg and colleagues (1995, 2003) surveyed HR managers at 1,002 establishments as
part of the 1996 National Organizations Survey (NOSII, see Kalleberg et al. 1995 for details).
Abraham and Taylor (1996) examine the related question of the propensity of establishments to
contract out certain business services, such as janitorial and accounting services, with a
supplement to the Industry Wage Survey conducted by the BLS.

4

The Bureau of Labor Statistics attempted to measure how many individuals worked for vendors/contractors by
asking whether they performed their work for an organization other than their employer and did so solely for that
other organization for a period up to a year. That definition would seem to capture many individuals who work as
contractors, but it might also exclude others, for example, who work in one place for more than a year or performed
work for two organizations, as the cutoffs are reasonably arbitrary. See
http://www.bls.gov/news.release/conemp.nr0.htm for details of the CPS survey.

10
Houseman (2001) found that in addition to part-time help, 78 percent of employers used
at least one other alternative arrangement (agency temps, on-call workers, independent
contractors and workers from contractors), slightly higher than the 70 percent reported by
Kalleberg et al. (2003) using the NOSII data. It is somewhat more difficult, however, to estimate
the use of each arrangement in any simple way given the response options in these surveys,
which were categorical. The design of the most recent NES survey extends these prior
approaches in important ways.
The National Employer Surveys (NES I, NES II & NES III)
The National Employer Survey is an establishment-based survey conducted by the
Census Bureau. It was first conducted in 1994 (NES I) with a second major version in 1997
(NES II). The third version of the NES, the focus of this study, began in late 2000 and was
completed in early 2001. (For convenience we refer to it as the 2000 survey, or NES III). All
three were sponsored by the National Center on the Educational Quality of the Workforce
(EQW). The NES III was motivated by concerns about the corporate restructuring of the 1990s,
and employer practices more generally. Among those new concerns was an interest in
identifying the extent of nonstandard work in the U.S. economy. These data are not publicly
available and have not been used to examine workplace issues before5.
The NES I sample was drawn from the Standard Statistical Establishment List (SSEL), a
listing of establishments drawn from Internal Revenue Service records and based on mandatory
tax reporting by employers. As such, it is the definitive list of employers and should be superior
5

Access to the data has been on delayed for much of the period since it was collected and on indefinite hold since
2009 pending resolution of issues between the Census, which administered the survey, and the Internal Revenue
Service, which “owns” the sampling frame. The challenge for researchers is that this means that all requests to, 1)
access the data, 2) have the analyses approved, and 3) approve any publications, must be vetted by two agencies that
disagree over who owns the data. In short, issues out of any researcher’s control have prevented this data from
being used despite its being developed, in large measure, in response to social science researchers’ argument that the
absence of a representative survey data about organizations represented a serious gap in our knowledge about the
economy and society.

11
in its representativeness to other commonly used employer sampling frames (see, e.g., Kalleberg
et al. 1990). The sampling frame is limited to private sector establishments with more than 20
employees that are not uniquely a headquarters. Sampling establishments leads to more precise
responses than sampling firms as firm-level data, especially in larger firms, represents averages
across establishments where practices may be quite different. The decision to exclude small
establishments was made because they are less likely to have formal programs and practices,
which were the focus of the survey, and they also account for a relatively small percentage of the
workforce. A 72 percent response rate yielded 3,173 usable responses.
The NES II sampling frame was also drawn from the SSEL using identical criteria, with a
78 percent response rate yielding 3,463 usable responses. The sampling frame included a subset
of the establishments that completed the NES I. Seventy-five percent of those establishments
which were resurveyed responded, creating a longitudinal panel of 915 establishments surveyed
in both 1994 and 1997.
The sampling frame for the NES III was drawn from the establishments that also
responded the NES II, some of which also responded to the NES I, with an 85 percent response
rate yielding usable responses from 2,825 establishments. The NES III survey responses thus
created two additional longitudinal panels: 814 establishments who responded to all 3 NES
surveys (1994, 1997, 2000), and 2,011 establishments surveyed in both 1997 and 2000. The
longitudinal aspects of the survey make it easier to examine changes over time in practices,
especially in the same establishments, albeit at the expense of representativeness of the sample at
each point in time. The survey was conducted between December 2000 and January 2001, with
questions referring to the 2000 calendar year. Because of the sampling decisions in the prior
surveys, it oversamples manufacturing establishments. As we note below, however, the

12
estimates we present from each of the surveys are weighted to make them more representative of
private sector establishments with more than 20 employees.
The survey was administered by the Bureau of the Census as a telephone survey using
computer-assisted telephone interviewing (CATI), allowing the interviewer to clarify any
questions about meaning of different arrangements or what data was being requested. Several
questions asked about the number of workers engaged through the broad range of alternative
arrangements, as opposed to categorical responses, enabling more precise estimates. A caveat is
that the questions asked in the three surveys have not been entirely consistent in their wording
over time, an issue we address below. Some types of nonstandard work emerged after the initial
surveys were conducted, such as Professional Employer Organizations, and questions about
others were not asked in earlier surveys. Nevertheless, the NES III data are the most recent
available for examining alternative arrangements in the U.S. workplace and while other surveys
have asked about individual arrangements, none to our knowledge have examined the set we
consider here. Finally, the longitudinal aspects of the survey design provide a unique opportunity
to examine trends in nonstandard work over time.
Descriptive Results for Nonstandard Arrangements
Table 2 presents mean responses from the establishments surveyed in the 2000 NES.
These estimates are weighted by the proportion of total employment in the private sector
workforce associated with each industry to make them more representative of the population of
all workers in the private sector workforce. There are other choices for weighting results like
these (e.g., by establishment size) that might yield different results, but weighting by industry
seemed particularly important here given that the sample over-represented manufacturing-related
industries.

13
The first column indicates the percentage of all establishments that report using a given
arrangement, irrespective of the level of use. The second and third columns report the extent of
use as a percentage of the total workforce – first as a percentage of regular “employees” of the
establishment (including full-time, part-time, and direct hire temporary workers) and second as a
percentage of total workers at the establishment, which includes those individuals who are not
direct employees of the establishment but are nevertheless working at that establishment
(including workers employed by agencies, PEOs and vendors on premise).6
{{Place Table 2 about here}}
This cross-sectional view of the pattern of use is broadly consistent with, but not identical
to previous survey results. “Agency temp” arrangements have arguably been the focus of much
of the prior research. Prior employee surveys found that they accounted for roughly 2 percent of
the workforce (Lou et al. 2000; Autor 2003; von Hippel et al. 2006). That is the case here as
well, where the average establishment has the equivalent of 2.1 percent of its on-site workers in
the form of agency temps. As other studies have also found, the number of temps engaged
directly by the employer, as opposed to through an agency intermediary, is even greater than the
use of agency temps, 2.8 percent of on-site workers in these data. The total temporary workforce
at the average establishment, therefore, is just under 5 percent of the total workforce.
Approximately 43 percent of all establishments report using at least one temp agency worker,
which is significantly greater than the 29 percent reported by Kalleberg et al. (2003) but quite
similar to the 46 percent reported by Houseman’s (2001) survey. Interestingly, the NES III

6

What the survey cannot capture is work that is being performed for the establishment but being conducted
elsewhere. Such work could be embodied in components purchased from a supply chain or in tasks that are
contracted out. These areas would typically be seen as outside the boundary of the firm and not alternative
arrangements for managing tasks within the firm. They are conceptually quite difficult to capture, requiring, e.g.,
working backward from estimates of value added to track where all the value came from.

14
shows that only 23 percent of establishments use direct hire temps, slightly less than the 30
percent reported in the NOSII (Kalleberg et al. 2003) and significantly less than the 40 percent
reported in the 1995 Upjohn survey (Houseman 2001). The Upjohn survey, however, was based
on firms, which are larger than establishments and therefore more likely to use direct hire temps
somewhere in their operations.
Whereas worker surveys have routinely estimated the percentage of independent
contractors at greater than 6 percent of the overall workforce (Hipple 2001; von Hippel 2006),
the NES III data indicate that independent contractors actually at work in a representative week
comprise less than 1.5 percent of the average organization’s on-site workforce. Taken together,
these two sets of findings suggest that there are many people calling themselves independent
contractors who may not be engaged very often or for very long by clients.
Workers provided by on-site vendors excludes vendors who are doing work that could
not be performed by regular employees, such as a repairman called in to service leased
equipment, and asks only about vendors who are working on the premises every week. To our
knowledge, these are the first systematic data available on the extent of on-site vendor use, and
they show the surprising finding that while they represent less than 1 percent of on-site workers,
almost 40 percent all establishments use such arrangements.
Approximately 21 percent of establishments use PEO arrangements, though workers in
such arrangements account for less than 1 percent of all on-site workers, similar to the figures
reported by others (Lombardi and Ono 2008; von Hippel et al. 2006; Hipple 2001). It is difficult
to compare these values to those reported in the Upjohn and NOSII studies, as workers in PEO
arrangements are included in broader measures of “contract” workers in those surveys. As in

15
other surveys, part-time workers constitute by far the largest share of nonstandard work – just
under 16 percent of all employees here.
Temporary Agency Work in Detail
The survey asks several additional questions about the use of agency temporary help, and
these results are reported in Table 3. First, the survey reports the “peak use” of temps and finds
that the average employer used agency temps equivalent to 3.7 percent of the workforce in their
peak week over the course of the previous year. Among those who use temps at all, however,
the figure is much greater, 8.7 percent. By comparison, only 8 percent of employers in the
earlier Upjohn survey reported that temp agency workers exceed even 5 percent of their total
workforce (Houseman 2001). The difference in these estimates may reflect the rapid growth of
the temp agency industry during the latter half of 1990s (Lou et al. 2010; Peck and Theodore
2007) and suggests a larger role for temp agencies than previously thought.
{{Place Table 3 about here}}
Second, the survey also reports in which jobs agency temps are used. The stereotype of
the temp worker is an office employee, and, indeed, 41 percent of all agency temp workers are
used in office jobs. But even more of them – almost 44 percent – are used in production-related
jobs. Though not all establishments have production-like jobs, there are more workers overall in
such jobs in the economy than in office jobs. This result, therefore, does not imply that the
percentage of workers who are agency temps is greater in production jobs than in office jobs, but
it does suggest that more agency temps are doing what could be thought of as “core” jobs in their
establishments. Our results are consistent with recent findings indicating that even though white
collar jobs are well represented in the list of growing occupations for temp agency workers (Lou

16
et al. 2010), the rise in such work has been accompanied by a similar or greater rise in blue collar
temp work (Dey et al. 2006).
Perhaps the most interesting statistic in the study concerns the percentage of workers who
are hired by the establishment into regular employment from the pool of agency temps working
in that establishment. Over 90 percent of establishments have converted temp agency workers to
permanent employees. In fact, converted temp workers constitute 1.7 percent of the average
establishment’s on-site workforce. That may not seem like a huge number compared to the
remaining 98 percent of the workforce, but it does seem significant when one compares it to the
fact that agency temps represent only 2.1 percent of all workers in the average establishment.
Hiring may be a very important part of what temp agencies do for their clients.7
Overall Use of Alternative Arrangements
We can also use the above data to summarize the use of alternative work arrangements
according to commonly used classifications. For example, all of the above categories
collectively are at least conceptually close to the definition of nonstandard work (assuming our
categories exhaust contemporary instances of non-employment), and they account for 23.43
percent of all workers across all establishments. On peak days, including peak agency temp use,
the figure rises to 24.96 percent across all establishments and 30.04 percent in establishments
that regularly use agency temp workers.
Because part-time work is often regular and reasonably long-term, we remove it to
generate a measure of the insecure or contingent component of non-standard work. This yields
an overall level of 8 percent of workers across all establishments in insecure jobs, rising in peak

7

Autor and Houseman (2006) examine hiring from temp agencies into regular employment by client firms for
disadvantaged workers as a route out of poverty.

17
weeks to 9.7 percent across all establishments, and 14.5 percent in establishments that regularly
use agency temps.
Off-roll workers are those workers who are doing work for an establishment but are not
employed by that establishment. The employer is physically separated from the location where
the employees work, and the day-to-day supervisor directing their work is not necessarily their
employer.8 Off-roll is equivalent to non-standard work minus part-time and direct-hire temps.
Off-roll workers account for 5.4 percent of workers across all establishments, rising in peak
weeks to 7.1 percent across all establishments and 11.8 percent in establishments that regularly
use agency temp workers.
Average use is only one aspect of the extent to which these arrangements operate in the
workplace. Additional information about the distribution of use for each employment category
across establishments provides us with more detail. Table 4 presents information on that
distribution, and the results are striking. The median use of all arrangements other than part-time
work is zero. Even the median use of part-time work is extremely low, at 3.7 percent. In all
cases, the median use is well below the mean use. In fact, the majority of establishments appear
not to use nonstandard work at all, and few use even low levels of nonstandard work. Instead, a
small group of establishments seems to make very extensive use of these alternative
arrangements. The top 10 percent of establishments (by use of each arrangement) have a
majority of their workforce in the part-time category, nearly a quarter in all other arrangements,
and 13 percent in arrangements involving labor market intermediaries.
{Place Table 4 about here}}

8

The important caveat here is the legal concept of a joint employer, which arises under various laws when on-site
supervisors have substantial control over workers who are otherwise directly employed by an outside organization.
In such cases the on-site organization and the offsite organization become jointly liable for legal issues concerning
the workers.

18
Current but less reliable data derived from the labor market intermediaries themselves
paints a strikingly similar picture of the great variance in use of these practices across
organizations. A 2009 survey of U.S. employers by Manpower revealed that a majority of U.S.
firms do not consider the use of alternative arrangements to be a key part of their workforce
strategy (Manpower 2009), and the American Staffing Association found that, on average, only
15 percent of U.S. businesses use staffing services (agency temps and leased employees) in a
given year (Berchem 2011). Among other things, these results reinforce the point that the
variation in the use of alternative arrangements at the organization and establishment level is
perhaps the central issue in understanding these arrangements.
Trends in Nonstandard Work over Time
Unlike previous establishment level surveys, comparisons across the various versions of
the NES conducted since 1994 provide an opportunity to examine trends in alternative
arrangements work over time. The caveats, as noted earlier, are that the questions asked in each
of the various surveys have not been entirely consistent in their wording, an issue we address
below, and not all types of alternative arrangements were examined in each survey.
Nevertheless, it is possible to draw some general conclusions about trends in the use of
nonstandard arrangements over time from the data.
Our initial approach involves a simple reporting of the mean use of various forms of
nonstandard work in each period, repeated cross-sectional samples of the population of
establishments. Because all respondents to the 2000 NES replied to the 1997 survey and a subset
of the respondents replied to all three surveys, it is also possible to make comparisons of the
same establishments over time. A second approach, therefore, involves looking at how mean use
compares for a set of respondents over time. This approach focuses on survivors, establishments

19
that were around in 1994 and survived six years later. It reveals something about how individual
establishments have adapted over time, but it also excludes new establishments and those that
have failed in the interim. Comparing the former approach (all respondents) to the latter (the
survivors from 1994) can reveal some of the factors driving changes in the incidence of these
practices within organizations and in the population. The Census conducted a small, 1000
establishment supplemental survey to the NES in 1996 drawn from respondents to the 1994
survey that asked some similar questions, and we include the results of that survey for robustness
purposes.
Trends across all organizations
Table 5 reveals the use of all types of nonstandard work across the different years of the
NES. Looking first at part-time work, the mean level of use declined slightly but steadily over
time. The percentage of temporary workers who work directly for the establishment – excluding
those employed by agencies – jumped sharply from 2.7 percent in 1994 to 4.3 percent in 1996,
and 5.7 percent in 1997, but then dropped sharply again in 2000, back to 2.8 percent. The rise in
use during the economic boom of the 1990s is in line with the general view of temporary help as
a pro-cyclical activity.9 The fact that the 2001 recession had begun (albeit barely) when the
survey was being completed may have had some influence on the decline in the 2000 figures.
{{Place Table 5 about here}}

9

The questions in the surveys explicitly ask respondents to exclude agency temps from their estimates and to only
include their own “on-payroll” employees. The 1994 survey is less clear in defining temp workers. The prior
question asks about the total number of the establishment’s direct employees and then goes on to ask what
percentage of those were temps. The 1997 and 2000 estimates explicitly include seasonal workers in the definition
of on-roll temps, whereas earlier estimates do not. It is possible that respondents in the 1994 and 1996 surveys did
not think of summer workers or other seasonal employees as temporary help even though seasonal workers are, in
many ways, even more temporary than the typical direct hire temp: their employment will clearly stop at the end of a
season (generally four months or less) whereas temps can be employed indefinitely. Any bias associated with this
response, however, would not explain the sharp jump in the 1996 survey results nor the sharp decline in the 2000
results.

20
Off-roll workers, defined as non-employees, constituted less than 1 percent of the total
workforce in 1994. By 1996, however, the comparable figure rose to 4.2 percent, rising again in
1997 to 5.4 percent, where it appears to have remained steady. When we think about the
structurally insecure component of nonstandard work – that is, off-roll workers as well as directhire temps whose jobs are irregular (excluding part-time employees) – the estimates from the
1994 survey suggest 3.2 percent of the total workforce was in that group. By 1996, the
percentage rose quite abruptly to over 8 percent, climbing all the way past 11 percent in 1997
before declining to around 8 percent again in 2000. Again, this pattern may reflect business
cycle expansion, at least until 2000.
Looking at how many employers report using any of these arrangements provides another
perspective on these trends. In 1994, only 9 percent of establishments reported using any off-roll
workers, and only 25 percent reported using any combination of off-role workers and direct-hire
temps. By 1996, both figures had risen dramatically, to 50 percent and 65 percent, respectively.
The 1997 figures are quite similar, 54 percent and 66 percent. The 2000 survey did not ask the
same overall question, but the percentage of firms that report using various labor market
intermediaries (ranging from the 21 percent using PEO workers to the 43 percent using agency
temps – see Table 2) suggest that both percentages remained quite high in 2000.
Trends within organizations
Table 6 compares the estimates available from establishments that responded in both
1994 and 2000. Again, this restricted sample represents employers who are “survivors,” those in
business in 1994 and 2000, and excludes new establishments that started up after 1994 and those
that failed since 1994. Changes in these results over time suggest changes in the practices of
establishments rather than changes in the establishments who responded to the survey.

21
{{Place Table 6 about here}}
The results in Table 6 suggest that the use of part-time workers seems to have declined
somewhat over time among the survivors while the use of direct-hire temporaries has expanded
considerably, nearly doubling from 2.5 percent to 4.5 percent. More generally, the various
measures of off-roll arrangements suggest only a moderate increase in their incidence, virtually
all of which seems to be explained by differences at the 90th percentile of the distribution. In
other words, a small number of employers have greatly expanded their use of these practices
since 1994. At the same time, we see more than a five-fold increase in the number of firms using
at least one type of off-roll arrangement, suggesting that many of these establishments have
begun to experiment with a small number of workers in alternative arrangements.
Summary of Trends
In addition to providing new information on aspects of direct-hire and agency temp use as
well as arguably the first rigorous data on PEO and vendor use, the above descriptive results
suggest some things that we did not know before. For example:


Temp use is more extensive than previously thought



Nonstandard arrangements of all kinds are highly skewed by establishment with a small
number making very extensive use of them



These arrangements expanded faster in the population of establishments than within
individual establishments, suggesting that new establishments to the survey, possibly
newer in age as well, given a representative sampling frame, made greater use of them10

10

Mach and Holmes (2008) find that among a representative sample of U.S. small business (fewer than 500
employees) younger firms are the most likely to use all forms of alternative arrangements (temps, leased and
contractors).

22


The increase in their use was not inexorable, however, as there were declines between
1997 and 2000.

What we cannot answer within the constraints of this paper is why these changes over time
occurred. An obvious explanation, as noted above, relates to the business cycle. The fast rate of
economic growth in late 1990s perhaps meant that employers were prepared to commit to a
higher proportion of permanent jobs. The patterns in the data reveal that such growth was
associated with changes in the mix of employment arrangements (i.e. substituting permanent jobs
for part-time and direct-hire temp jobs), but had little relationship with the mix of employment
vs. non-employment arrangements, as the percentage of the latter increased slightly between
1996 and 1997 before leveling off in 2000. Even though the economy was still very strong in
2000, the rate of increase in growth certainly slowed.
Given these trends, it is unfortunate that there have not been systematic efforts to collect
more recent data on the use of alternative arrangements by employers. The available data,
limited as it may be, does suggest that the overall patterns remained similar, even accounting for
the Great Recession. While we previously noted the shortcoming with data collected at the
individual level, estimates of the percentage of individuals employed each of the four alternative
arrangements identified in the Current Population Survey in 2005 (the last year the data were
collected) are similar to those reported in the CPS in1999 and 2001 (Table 7). If anything, the
slight increases in those identifying themselves as independent contractors and on-call workers
suggests that those arrangement may have become more prevalent.
Other data also indicates that client use of alternative arrangements appears to remain highly
skewed, with large organizations twice as likely as smaller organizations to use temporary
agency or leased workers (Figure 1: Berchem 2011). Longitudinal data on the size of the

23
temporary agency industry presented in Figure 2 suggests that the use of temporary agency
workers fluctuates pro-cyclically with the economy and has increased as the 2008 recession
fades.
Using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages,
Lou and colleagues (2010) find a similar pattern over time: after a precipitous decline during the
2001-2002 recession, the number of temporary agency workers quickly rebounded to near-peak
levels from 2005-2007 before dipping sharply again in 2008. Staffing industry data show that a
rapid recovery in temp agency employment began in 2010 and the first quarter of 2011 (Figure
2), with double-digit quarterly growth (Berchem 2011). Moreover, McKinsey’s 2011 U.S Jobs
Survey found more than one-third of firms reporting that they anticipate using more part-time,
temporary and contract workers during the next five years (Manyika et al. 2011). The pattern
over time in these data seems to be expansion of these arrangements during periods of economic
growth, declines during downturns, and then expansion again to new heights of use with renewed
growth in the economy. This pattern reinforces what we see over time in the NES data.
{{Place Table 7 about here}}
{{Place Table 8 about here}}
{{Place Table 9 about here}}
4. Explaining the use of alternative arrangements
Perhaps the most important finding in the descriptive results above is the considerable
variation across establishments in their use of alternatives to standard employment, differences
that surely relate to attributes of and decisions made by employers. Stating possible explanations
for the variation in use is far easier than operationalizing such explanations, however. The main
reason has to do with establishing causation: most every attribute of a business operation is

24
capable of being changed by the employer, reversing possible causal arrangements. Even more
likely is the possibility that employers make decisions about alternative working arrangements
simultaneously with decisions about other practices. Longitudinal data per se does not solve
these problems given that many important attributes are in place before the data begin to be
collected, and such data also cannot rule out simultaneous changes.
Most of the factors examined in prior studies to explain the incidence of alternative
arrangements vary along with the incidence of those arrangements, so it makes more sense to
suggest that the prior hypotheses we consider below are about association rather than causation.
Cost Reduction
The first and principal explanation suggested for the use of nonstandard relationships is
employers’ desire to save on a variety of employment costs. The prior evidence and arguments
are decidedly mixed, so exploring these explanations with the NES III seems especially
warranted.
There is some evidence that employers pay workers in some alternative arrangements less
than employees in comparable jobs. Temp agency workers experience a wage penalty in all
occupations other than nursing, where there is a premium (Peck and Theodore 2007; Kilcoyne
2005). Yet these savings are likely to be offset in part, if not entirely, by the margins paid to
staffing agencies (Peck, Theodore, and Ward 2005). Houseman, Kalleberg and Erickcek (2003)
find situations where nonstandard workers are used to avoid having to raise the wages of
permanent employees. Similarly, Davis-Blake, Broschak and George (2003) show that
employers may contract out high wage jobs in order to avoid perceptions of internal wage
inequality. Gramm and Schnell’s (2001) study of Alabama manufacturing establishments found
that the likelihood of contracting out certain jobs was positively related to core employee’s

25
wages, suggesting that where the costs of standard work arrangements are higher, we may expect
to see higher use of nonstandard arrangements. The Federal Fair Labor Standards Act requires
firms to pay non-exempt workers time and half for overtime hours, with exemptions for nonemployees (Coens and Storrs 2006). Firms that make more use of overtime hours may therefore
have a greater incentive to save on wages by using nonstandard workers to cover those hours,
even if they are paid a comparable base wage.11
While employers may save on wages, the most important compensation savings may
concern the provision of benefits, as non-employees are not required to receive the same benefits
as full-time employees.12 As a result, there appear to be greater incentives for employers that
offer more generous benefit packages to make more use of nonstandard arrangements in an effort
to cut costs. Lautsch (2003) shows that many companies use nonstandard workers to avoid
paying for healthcare and other fringe benefits, and Peck and Theodore (1998) find that some
employers use agency temps to save on overall compensation (including benefits). Mitlacher’s
(2007) fieldwork in American banking and catering firms revealed that the use of temp agency
workers was driven in part by the fact that these workers did not have to be included in the
companies’ retirement and pension plans.
Yet, HR managers consistently report in recent years that that they do not use these
arrangements to save on employee benefits (Houseman 2001; Kalleberg et al. 2003). While such
responses may be subject to social desirability bias, establishment-level surveys have shown that

11

The use of overtime hours may also indicate the need for numeric flexibility, which we address below.
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) and Internal Revenue Service regulations require that if
employers offer pension, health insurance, and other employee benefits that have preferential tax status to any
employees, they must make them available to all regular, full-time employees. These benefits typically increase
total compensation by 25 to 40 percent (Muhl 2002). Exceptions are allowed for workers who work fewer than
what has traditionally been seen as regular hours, effectively exempting part-time workers, and tenure eligibility
requirements (e.g., waiting six months before becoming eligible for certain benefits) are also allowed, effectively
exempting many direct-hire temporary workers. Workers who are not employees – contractors and agency temps,
e.g. – are not eligible for employment-related benefits.
12

26
the scale of benefits offered does not predict that use of nonstandard arrangements (Kalleberg et
al. 2003). Houseman (2001) finds that offering good benefits predicts the use of temp agency
workers but not independent contractors, even though both are non-employee arrangements, as
well as predicting the use of part-time and on-call workers, but not direct-hire temps, even
though all are employment arrangements. Reverse causation might be a possible explanation
(e.g., greater use of temps makes it easier to provide more generous benefits to the fewer regular
employees).
To test the cost savings hypotheses, we see whether establishments that have higher pay,
use more overtime hours, and offer more benefits, other things equal, make greater use of
alternative arrangements.
Flexibility
The second common explanation for the use of alternative arrangements is that they
provide employers with greater “numerical” flexibility, the ability to adjust the amount of
workers being used (Smith 1997; Kalleberg 2000). Surveys of human resource managers report
that all nonstandard work arrangements are used to meet variations in demand, and firms in
seasonal industries make greater use of most nonstandard arrangements, though industry
cyclicality seems to have no effect on their use (Houseman 2001; Kalleberg et al. 2003).
McLaughlin and Coleman-Jensen (2008) note that in agriculture, a notoriously seasonal industry,
45 percent of work arrangements are nonstandard. Lombardi and Ono (2008) find that new
manufacturing plants, which may be more likely to face more uncertain demand, are more likely
to used leased employees. They also find the highest rate of use in the transportation industry, an
industry especially sensitive to fluctuations in demand.

27
Restructuring decisions associated with the term “reengineering” in the late 1990s,
downsizing decisions, and outsourcing may also reflect business uncertainty and create
uncertainty in labor needs. Employers began to add temporary agency workers while laying off
permanent employees during the period of widespread downsizing and reengineering following
the 2001 recession (Peck and Theodore 2007). More directly, Screft and Sigh (2003) conclude
that substituting nonstandard for more permanent arrangements is a strategy used by firms to
meet increases in demand following layoffs.
Establishments may also turn to nonstandard arrangements for numerical flexibility when
the fixed costs of hiring and dismissing workers make it more expensive to adjust the number of
standard employees. Using temps allows employers to dismiss the temps that are not suitable for
full-time jobs without the risk of violating employment laws, which apply only to direct
employees13 and then hire those who are suitable into regular employment (see Miles 2000;
Davis-Blake and Broschak 2000). Houseman and colleagues (2003) find that using agency
temps allows firms to sample riskier employees in low skill occupations. Gramm and Schnell
(2001) found that the use of nonstandard arrangements was positively associated with the hiring
costs for permanent employees in their sample of manufacturing firms. Severance pay is one
clear factor that makes dismissals more expensive.
It has been suggested that the presence of a union may increase the employer’s interest in
using of nonstandard arrangements to get around union work, but may decrease the employer’s
ability to do so by resisting the changes in collective bargaining (see Kalleberg et al. 2003 for a
summary of this debate; Davis-Blake and Uzzi 1993, Theodore and Peck 2002, and Lombardi
and Ono 2008 for evidence).
13

Again, the exception is if a client of a vendor or independent contractor directs such workers in ways
that make them effectively employees. In that case, the client can become a co-employer, liable for the
provisions of employment law.

28
The NES III data includes several measures associated with the need for greater
flexibility, as reflected in the above hypotheses: Seasonal employment variability, reengineering
in the last 3 years, a downsizing or outsourcing of a portion of their workforce in the past 12
months, whether or not they offered severance packages to standard employees, and their
average recruiting costs. The survey also asks whether any of the firm’s employees are
represented by a union.
Ability to Use Nonstandard Workers
Non-employees are governed by contracts that specify job requirements and effort levels
in advance, performance is monitored by the client, and disputes are ultimately adjudicated by
the court system. As a result, alternative arrangements make the most sense for employers when
performance requirements are straightforward and easy to specify and where monitoring those
requirements is straightforward as well. Masters and Miles’ (2002) multi-firm analysis of hiring
decisions revealed that firms are more likely to use off-roll arrangements in positions where
performance is easy to assess. Mayer and Nickerson (2005) similarly find that firms are more
likely to use regular employees than independent contractors as the cost to verify project quality
increases. In her qualitative study of the use of contingent workers, Lautsch (2002) found that in
half of the firms, contingent workers were assigned to positions that had more narrowly defined
tasks than regular workers. To the extent that supervisors monitor the performance of tasks by
individual workers, jobs are likely to require less monitoring where the ratio of workers to
supervisors is high. Teamwork may represent the opposite situation, where individual tasks are
hard to define and had to monitor and where it is difficult to insert workers on a temporary or
casual basis. Firm-specific skill requirements may also make it more difficult to use nonstandard
arrangements. Training expenditures may represent something about firm-specific skills.

29
5. Analysis and results
We examine the above hypotheses with regression analyses shown in Table 9, using the
independent variables described in Table 8 to test the hypotheses described above. Access
limitations at Census restricted the analyses to the 2000/2001 data. Because of the difficulty in
doing follow-up analyses of the data, these results should best be considered as preliminary.
The dependent variable in each case is a percentage of the workforce, bounded between
zero and 100, in a given arrangement. We know from the descriptive data presented earlier that
many establishments use no alternative arrangements while a few use them a great deal. It is
quite likely, then, that many observations will be at or near the limits of zero and 100 percent.
Ordinary least square regressions would be biased when the range of observations is constrained
in that manner, and Tobit estimation techniques are more appropriate. The coefficients on such
estimates cannot be interpreted in a straightforward fashion, however.14
Columns 3, 4, 5, and 6 in Table 9 represent specific alternative arrangements while
column 1 represents all arrangements other than full-time, standard employment, and column 2
represents those associated with contingent work (i.e., everything but part-time work). Smaller
establishments (the omitted category is more than 1000 employees) make less use of these
arrangements.15 More generally, the relationships differ across the types of nonstandard work,
no doubt reflecting the different attributes associated with each arrangement. For example, the
factors that are associated with using agency temps are different from those associated with using
direct hire temps, perhaps suggesting that they are substitutes for each other.
14

Weighting the observations based on weights representing the actual distribution of establishments by industry in
the economy typically improves the results considerably. Weighted Tobit regression requires nonstandard software
that was not available at CES when these analyses were conducted. The Appendix contains descriptive statistics for
the subsample used in the regression analysis as the original sample is reduced because of missing data.
15
Among control variables not reported, manufacturing industries make greater use of alternative arrangements than
non-manufacturing, establishments with more women have significantly more nonstandard work as do those with a
higher level of education in their workforce.

30
Cost Reduction
There is no support in these results for the notion that higher pay and greater employee
benefits are associated with greater use of alternative arrangements. Indeed, significant results
are often in the opposite direction. While we do not have good measures as to how generous
benefits are, we do have a simple count as to how many benefits the employer offered
(“Benefits”)16. Perhaps surprisingly, the more benefits an establishment offered, the less they
made use of nonstandard work.
The ratio of overtime hours (“Overtime Hours”), however, is significantly related to the
incidence of nonstandard work. Presumably higher overtime hours suggest an opportunity to
avoid overtime pay rates by using nonstandard jobs, especially off-role workers. Average
weekly hours worked by all workers in the establishment (“Average Hours”) are also positively
related to nonstandard work, but average weekly hours specifically for non-managers/nonexempt workers, who are the focus of these practices (“Worker Hours”), are not.
Flexibility
At the two-digit industry level, we use the standard deviation of employment over the
course of the year 2000 to measure industry seasonality (“Seasonality”) and find that
establishments in industries with greater variance in employment over the course of the year are
associated with greater use of nonstandard employment. A second set of variables that may
proxy for flexibility are major restructurings. We might think of these as more “one-shot”
variations than seasonality. Reengineering in the past three years (“Reengineered”) and
downsizing in the past 12 months (“Downsized”), which change organizational structure and job
16

The list of benefits includes pensions, healthcare, dental care, child care, leave for family emergencies
(presumably beyond what is required by law), life insurance, sick pay, paid vacations, and severance pay (estimated
separately). While not a perfect estimate of how generous benefits are, it is similar to the scale of benefits score
used by Kalleberg et al. (2003), and arguably better than the categorical responses used in the Upjohn survey (see
Houseman 2001).

31
definitions, are not associated with overall use of nonstandard or contingent work, but they do
seem to be strongly associated with the use of PEO’s. Perhaps it is easier to move workers to
PEO status, a radical change, in the context of these other big changes or that it is easier to make
all these changes simultaneously. There is no relationship with outsourcing decisions
(“Outsourced”) and therefore no evidence as to whether alternative arrangements are either
substitutes or complements for outsourcing.
We examine the fixed costs of hiring workers with the average amount of money spent
on recruiting and hiring a full-time employee (“Recruiting Costs”) and find that it is positively
associated with most of the alternative arrangements, suggesting that employers do make greater
use of nonstandard employees when it costs more to higher regular employees. The one aspect
of nonstandard work for which the relationship is not significant is for the use of agency temps,
which may be surprising because employers use agency temps as an alternative means for hiring
regular employees. There is no relationship with the use of severance pay (“Severance”), which
raises the costs of involuntary dismissal, and these alternative arrangements.
We find that unionization is associated with less use of nonstandard arrangements, having
the largest negative effect on the use of agency temps. The coefficient for the direct hire temps
is positive but insignificant, while the coefficients for all off-roll arrangements are negative,
suggesting that unions primarily restrict the use of off-roll arrangements. Perhaps the reason is
that off-role workers are not eligible to join the union.
Ability to Use Nonstandard Arrangements
We examine the ability to monitor work and workers with the span of control (“Worker
to Supervisor Ratio”) and find that greater span is associated with greater use of nonstandard
arrangements. Establishments that use more firm-specific skills as measured by training

32
expenditures per worker (“Training Investments”) are associated with less use of nonstandard
work. The relationships with teamwork (“Teamwork”) are surprisingly positive with the overall
use of non-standard arrangements, suggesting that nonstandard work is more common where
teamwork is more common.
6. Summary and conclusions
Overall, the descriptive results suggest that nonstandard work accounts for a sizeable
component of the actual work done inside U.S. establishments every day, that while growing, the
increase has not been inexorable over time, and that the variation of use across establishments is
quite remarkable. Perhaps the most surprising results are those suggesting that few
establishments actually use these alternative work arrangements but that many of those that do
use them very intensively. Attributes unique to individual establishments appear to be
powerfully related to the extent such arrangements are used.
Our regression results examine the most prominent arguments concerning the factors
associated with the use of alternative arrangements across operations. Some of them do not
support prior views, such as the lack of evidence for the idea that employers use alternative
arrangements to economize on wage and benefit costs, with the exception of increased use where
overtime is greater. We find some support for the currently popular notion that establishments
use alternative work arrangements to gain flexibility, as use is greater where industry
employment has been more variable, but the only significant relationship with the proxies for
restructuring is with contingent work, agency temps in particular.
Some of the results help settle arguments where hypotheses ran in opposite directions,
such as whether unions increase or decrease the use of these practices (we find on average that
they decrease them). Perhaps our most novel results concern the idea that these arrangements are

33
used more where jobs are easier to monitor. Nonstandard work is used more where jobs appear
easier to monitor and less firm-specific, although we find unexpected associations with the
teamwork proxy.
It is important to recognize that the measures used here are imperfect and certainly
incomplete proxies for many of the hypotheses being tested. For example, the common-sense
idea that establishments will make greater use of nonstandard arrangements when they are
cheaper than regular employment requires knowing much more than we do here about all aspects
of the costs of standard employment and the nonstandard alternatives. Measures of average
practices, such as teamwork, may not be capturing the most relevant aspects of whether jobs can
be monitored. Perhaps the non-team jobs in such establishments are especially suited to
nonstandard arrangements that support the teams. These concerns suggest the continuing need
for more detailed, fine-grained studies, perhaps at the expense of generalizability, that can
examine more of the relevant factors.
Going forward, arguably the most important of the persistent questions concerning
alternatives to standard work is to pin down causation. Can we find contexts where we can see
clearly what factors may be driving their use and specifically the change in use over time both
within and across establishments? Other, more novel questions concern how these arrangements
affect other aspects of business operations. For example, what else changes when employers
expand the use of these practices? These and related questions will no doubt benefit from more
context-specific data within operations and organizations.

34
Table 1: Sampling Frame for the NES III
Completed surveys in 1997
(NES II)

Completed surveys in 1994 & 1997
(NES I & NES II)

Establishments surveyed

3,463

915

Usable responses

2,825

814

Table 2: Use of Nonstandard Arrangements in 2000 from the NES III
Type of Arrangement

% of
establishments

n

n/a
22.58%

Part-time
Direct hire temporary

Percentage of average establishment's workforce
% of all employeesa

% of all on-site workersb

2,943

15.76%

15.48%

2,967

2.77%

2.59%

18.53%

18.07%

Total "on-roll" arrangements:
Agency temporary

42.73%

2,949

n/a

2.14%

Independent contractor

35.05%

2,816

n/a

1.49%

PEO

21.35%

2,871

n/a

0.87%

Vendor on premise

39.57%

2,949

n/a

0.86%
5.36%

Total "off-roll" arrangements:
Total nonstandard arrangements

23.43%

a

Includes all workers on the establishment’s payroll – i.e. “on-roll” workers

b

Includes “on-roll workers” plus agency temps, independent contractors, PEO workers and VOP workers

Table 3: Detailed Data on Use of Agency Temps from the NES III
% of all on-site workersa
n

Use in peak week

Converted agency temps

All establishments

2,910

3.67%

1.73%

Establishments using agency temps only

1,221

8.75%

4.46%

Type of job
Production jobs

n
1,252

% of all agency temps
43.69%

Office jobs

1,250

41.22%

Technical jobs

1,251

10.24%

Managerial and professional jobs

1,254

3.99%

Supervisor jobs

1,253

0.79%

a

Includes “on-roll workers” plus agency temps, independent contractors, PEO workers and VOP workers

35
Table 4: Distribution of Use of Alternative Arrangements as a Percentage of On-site
Workers from the NES IIIa
Median

25th
percentile

75th
percentile

90th
percentile

95th
percentile

99th
percentile

Part time

3.7%

0.0%

23.6%

50.1%

65.7%

89.5%

Direct-hire temporary

0.0%

0.0%

0.7%

10.9%

29.1%

96.6%

Agency temporary

0.0%

0.0%

1.3%

5.5%

10.0%

21.9%

Independent contractor

0.0%

0.0%

0.6%

2.9%

6.8%

30.2%

PEO

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

1.7%

4.9%

15.9%

Vendor on premise

0.0%

0.0%

0.6%

3.2%

7.3%

27.2%

Table 5: Trends in Use of Alternative Arrangements Across NES Samples
Use as % of on-roll/employees

1994

1996

1997

2000

Part time

Mean
Median

17.92%
5.20%

16.24%
3.60%

16.66%
4.00%

15.76%
4.04%

Direct-hire temporary

Mean
Median

2.66%
0.00%

4.28%
0.00%

5.73%
0.00%

2.77%
0.00%

Off-roll workers

Mean
Median

0.51%
0.00%

4.15%
0.11%

5.35%
0.83%

5.36%
0.00%

% of establishments reporting use

1994

1996

1997

2000

Off-roll workers

9.00%

50.00%

54.00%

n/a

Off-roll + Temp workers

25.00%

65.00%

66.00%

n/a

36
Table 6: Trends in Use of Alternative Arrangements Among Surviving Firms
Use as % of on-roll workers

1994

2000

Mean

20.4%

15.6%

Median

5.9%

3.1%

75th percentile

31.0%

24.0%

90th percentile

70.0%

53.0%

Mean

2.5%

4.5%

Median

0.0%

0.0%

75th percentile

0.0%

1.1%

90th percentile

3.2%

13.0%

Mean

3.2%

3.5%

Median

0.0%

0.9%

75th percentile

0.0%

3.9%

90th percentile

5.4%

11.0%

% of firms reporting use

1994

2000

Off-roll workers

10.0%

56.0%

Off-roll + Temp workers

25.0%

66.0%

Part time

Direct-hire
temporary

Off-roll workers

37
Table 7: CPS Estimates of Workers in Alternative Arrangements
Percent of total workers employed
Alternative Work
Arrangement

Definition

Feb
1995

Feb
1997

Feb
1999

Feb
2001

Feb
2005

Independent contractors

Workers who were identified as independent contractors, independent
consultants, or freelance workers, whether they were self-employed or
wage and salary workers.

6.7

6.7

6.3

6.4

7.4

On-call workers

Workers who are called to work only as needed, although they can be
scheduled to work for several days or weeks in a row.

1.7

1.6

1.5

1.6

1.8

Temporary help agency
workers

Workers who were paid by a temporary help agency, whether or not their
job was temporary.

1.0

1.0

0.9

0.9

0.9

Workers provided by
contract firms

Workers who are employed by a company that provides them or their
services to others under contract and who are usually assigned to only one
customer and usually work at the customer’s worksite.

0.5

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.6

9.9

9.9

9.3

9.4

10.7

Total:
Source: Current Population Survey, Bureau of Labor Statistics

Figure 1: Percentage of Firms Using Temporary Agency or Leased Workers by Firm Size
25-99 employees

12%

Average 25+ employees

15%

100+ employees

24%
0%

5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
Percent of firms using temporary agency or leased workers

Source: American Staffing Association, Client Survey (ASA, 2011)

30%

38
Figure 2: Temporary Staffing Agency Average Daily Employment (Millions)
3.5
2.87

3

2.58

3.21

3.02
2.74

2.56

2.75

2.34

2.5

2.12

2

1.5

2.99 3.09

3.21 3.19 3.12
2.81

2.58 2.62
2.18

1.69
1.16 1.15

1.35

1
0.5
0
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
(Q1)

Source: American Staffing Association, Employment and Sales Survey (ASA, 2011)

39
Table 8: Description of Independent and Control Variables
Independent Variables

Description

Average pay (all jobs)

Average annual income for all workers (000s)

Worker pay (non-managerial)

Average hourly pay for non-managerial workers

Benefits

Count of the number of benefits offered, excluding severance

Seasonality

Industry standard deviation of employment during the year 2000

Reengineered (dummy)

Establishment experienced a major restructuring in the previous 3 years

Downsized (dummy)

Establishment experienced downsizing in the previous 12 months

Outsourced (dummy)

Establishment has outsourced one or more function in the previous 12 months

Overtime Hours

Average overtime hours for non-managerial workers (as a ratio of regular
hours)

Average hours (all jobs)

Average hours/week for all workers

Worker hours (non-managerial)

Average hours/week for non-managerial workers

Recruiting costs

Average recruiting costs per worker

Severance (dummy)

Organization offers severance pay as a benefit

Union (dummy)

Indicates the presence of one or more unions

Training investments

Average annual training expenditure per worker

Worker to supervisor ratio

Ratio of workers to supervisors

Teamwork (% of jobs)

Percentage of jobs reported as being organized in teams

Control Variables
Establishment size

Total number of employees (omitted category is > 1000 employees)

Multi-establishment (dummy)

Establishment is part of a firm with multiple establishments

Temp services industry (736)

Establishment is part of the temp-services industry

Female (% of workers)

Percentage of female workers

Minority (% of workers)

Percentage of non-white workers

Average years of education

Average years of education for all workers

Located in South (dummy)

Located in AL, AR, DE, KY, FL, GA, LA, MD, MS, NC, OK, SC, TN, TX, VA

Other controls included but not reported in the results are: industry; area population, are employment, area
income, urban employment, telecommuting policies, and establishment annual income

40
Table 9: Tobit Regression Models Predicting the Use of Nonstandard Work Arrangementsa
All Nonstandard
Arrangements
b
s.e.
-8.03**
1.8

Contingent
Arrangements
b
s.e.
-9.92**
1.7

Agency Temp
Workers
b
s.e.
-14.69**
2.1

Direct-hire Temp
Workers
b
s.e.
-21.73**
3.5

50-99 employees

-3.88*

1.6

-3.78*

1.6

-10.30**

1.9

-14.66**

3.1

1.23

2.5

-5.63*

2.2

100 to 249 employees

-3.85**

1.5

-3.54*

1.4

-5.51**

1.6

-9.03**

2.7

-4.05†

2.4

-6.29**

2.0

250 to 1000 employees

Less than 50 employees

PEO (Leased)
Workers
b
s.e.
-6.23*
2.8

Independent
Contractors
b
s.e.
-8.32**
2.4

-2.67*

1.3

-1.37

1.2

-2.36†

1.4

-4.60*

2.3

-1.4

2.0

-3.75*

1.7

Multi-establishment (dummy)

0.68

0.9

0.84

0.9

2.57*

1.1

-0.29

1.8

-4.44**

1.5

4.28**

1.3

Temp Services Industry (736)

57.55**

5.6

62.83**

5.2

71.82

8.9

Female (% of workers)

6.50**

2.2

0.44

2.1

1.03

2.6

4.41

4.2

3.96

3.5

-0.51

3.2

Minority (% of workers)

-0.83

1.7

2.58

1.6

4.67*

2.0

-7.93*

3.3

5.14†

2.6

4.33†

2.3

Average Years of Education

0.81†

0.5

0.96*

0.5

1.03†

0.6

1.06

0.9

2.22**

0.8

0

0.7

Located in South (dummy)

-1.69†

1.0

0.78

1.0

1.57

1.2

-2.75

2.0

0.39

1.6

0.22

1.4

2.92

3.1

3.82

3.0

11.17**

3.7

5.05

5.7

2.51

5.0

2

4.4

Worker Pay (non-managerial)

-8.19**

3.0

-4.04

3.0

-9.99**

3.6

-8.80

5.6

-3.03

4.9

4.56

4.4

Benefits

-0.88**

0.3

-0.64*

0.3

0.09

0.4

-1.84**

0.5

1.15*

0.5

-0.24

0.4

Seasonality

-1.04

1.1

Average Pay (all jobs)

52.57*

25.6

10.18**

2.6

-1.43

32.5

21.47**

4.4

Reengineered (dummy)

0.69

0.8

0.07

0.8

0.2

0.9

-1.05

1.5

3.72**

1.2

Downsized (dummy)

-0.22

0.9

-0.67

0.8

-0.35

1.0

-2.02

1.7

2.89*

1.3

-0.86

1.2

Outsourced (dummy)

0.8

0.8

2.01**

0.8

1.96*

0.9

1.97

1.5

1.17

1.3

1.79~

1.1

51.54**

7.4

6.44

7.3

2.16

11.0

-2.94

14.3

2.98

11.8

-4.39

12.3

-9.75

8.5

-17.98*

8.1

0.27

11.0

22.57

19.1

-59.72**

11.9

-8.87

11.5

-27.34**

8.4

15.38†

8.2

0.58

12.0

-23.88

17.7

54.43**

12.9

16.11

12.0

0.57**

0.2

0.75**

0.2

0.47*

0.2

0.43

0.3

0.97**

0.3

0.47*

0.2

Overtime Hours
Average Hours (all jobs)
Worker Hours (non-managerial)
Recruiting Costs

0.09

0.8

0.55

0.8

-0.39

1.0

3.16†

1.6

-3.06*

1.4

-0.53

1.2

Union (dummy)

-2.90*

1.2

-3.29**

1.2

-7.57**

1.4

2.95

2.3

-1.32

2.0

-1.21

1.7

Worker to Supervisor ratio

-0.45*

0.2

-0.37*

0.2

-0.42†

0.2

-0.03

0.0

-0.01

0.0

-0.69*

0.3

Training Investments

-0.42*

0.2

-0.35†

0.2

-0.05

0.2

-1.53**

0.4

-0.28

0.3

0.68*

0.3

2.64*

1.3

1.63

1.3

1.48

1.5

2.17

2.6

1.21

2.1

0.9

1.8

17.86**

3.9

-42.42

37.8

-55.49

51.3

-11.72

7.3

-33.14

61.2

-5.55

59.2

Severance (dummy)

Teamwork (% of jobs)
Constant
Observations
Log Likelihood
a

2,073
-7763.25

2,005
-6228.22

2,095
-4261.53

2,082
-2595.9

2,062
-2501.16

2,034
-3679.45

Industry variables not reported. Other controls not reported are area population, employment, and income, urban employment, telecommuting policies & establishment annual income.
* p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, † p < 0.10

41
References
Abraham, Katharine G. 1990. Restructuring the employment Relationship: The growth of
market-mediated work arrangements. New developments in the labor market: Toward a new
institutional paradigm, edited by Katharine G. Abraham and R. B. McKersie. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Abraham, Katharine G., and Susan K. Taylor. 1996. Firms’ use of outside contractors: Theory
and evidence. Journal of Labor Economics 14(3):394-424.
Autor, David H. 2003. Outsourcing at will: The contribution of unjust dismissal doctrine to the
growth of employment outsourcing. Journal of Labor Economics 21(1):1-42.
Autor, David H., and Susan N. Houseman. 2006. Temporary agency employment as a way out of
poverty? Working and poor: How economic and policy changes are affecting low-wage
workers, edited by Rebecca M. Blank, Sheldon Danziger, and Robert F. Schoeni. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Belman, Dale L., and Lonnie Golden. 2000. Nonstandard and contingent employment: Contrasts
by job type, industry, and occupation. Nonstandard work: The nature and challenges of
changing employment arrangements, edited by F. Carre, M. A. Ferber, L. Golden, and S. A.
Herzenberg. Champaign, IL: Industrial Relations Research Association.
Berchem, Steven P. 2011. Leading U.S. Job Growth.
Cappelli, Peter. 2000. Market-mediated employment: The historical context. The new
relationship: Human capital and the American corporation, edited by Margaret Blair and
Thomas A. Kochan. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Cappelli, Peter. 1999. The new deal at work: Managing the market-driven workforce. Boston,
MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Cappelli, Peter, and JR Keller. 2013. Classifying work in the new economy. Academy of
Management Review (forthcoming)
Coens, Thomas A., and Alvin L. Storres. 2006. No safe harbor: A review of significant laws
affecting contingent workers. The shadow workforce: Perspectives on contingent work in
the United States, Europe, and Japan, edited by Sandra E. Gleason. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E.
Upjohn Institute.
Davis-Blake, Alison, and Joseph P. Broschak. 2000. Speed bumps or stepping stones: The effect
of labor market intermediaries on relational wealth. Relational wealth: A new model for
employment in the 21st century, edited by Denise Rousseau and C Leana. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Davis-Blake, Alison, Joseph P. Broschak, and Elizabeth George. 2003. Happy together? How
using nonstandard workers affects exit, voice, and loyalty among standard employees.
Academy of Management Journal 46(4):475-485.
Davis-Blake, Alison, and Brian Uzzi. 1993. Determinants of employment externalization: A
study of temporary workers and independent contractors. Administrative Science Quarterly
38(2):195-223.

42
Dey, Matthew, Susan N Houseman, and Anne E Polivka. 2006. Manufacturers’ outsourcing to
employment services. Upjohn Institute Working Paper 07-123. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E.
Upjohn Institute.
Feinman, Jay M. 1976. “The development of the employment at will rule.” The American
Journal of Legal History 20(2):118-135.
Gleason, Sandra E. 2006. The shadow workforce. The shadow workforce: Perspectives on
contingent work in the United States, Europe, and Japan, edited by Sandra E. Gleason.
Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute.
Gramm, Cynthia L., and John F Schnell. 2001. The use of flexible staffing arrangements in core
production jobs. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 54(2):245-258.
von Hippel, Courtney et al. 2006. Operationalizing the shadow workforce: Toward an
understanding of the participants in nonstandard employment relationships. The shadow
workforce: Perspectives on contingent work in the United States, Europe, and Japan, edited
by Sandra E. Gleason. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute.
Hipple, Steven. 2001. Contingent work in the late-1990s. Monthly Labor Review (March):3-27.
Houseman, Susan N. 2001. Why employers use flexible staffing arrangements: Evidence from an
establishment survey. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55(1):149-170.
Houseman, Susan N, Arne L. Kalleberg, and George A Erickcek. 2003. The role of temporary
agency employment in tight labour markets. Industrial and Labor Relations Review
57(1):105-127.
Kalleberg, Arne L., Jeremy Reynolds, and Peter V. Marsden. 2003. Externalizing employment:
Flexible staffing arrangements in US organizations.” Social Science Research 32(4):525552.
Kalleberg, Arne L. 2000. Nonstandard employment relations: Part-time, temporary and contract
work. Annual Review of Sociology 26(1):341-365.
Kalleberg, Arne L., David Knoke, and Peter V. Marsden. 1995. Interorganizational networks and
the changing employment contract. Connections 18(2):32-49.
Kalleberg, Arne L., Peter V. Marsden, Howard E. Aldrich, and James W. Cassell. 1990.
Comparing organizational sampling frames. Administrative Science Quarterly 35(4):658688.
Kilcoyne, Patrick. 2005. Occupations in the temporary help services industry. Occupational
Employment and Wages. Washington, D.C.: US Department of Labor.
Lautsch, Brenda A. 2003. The influence of regular work systems on compensation for contingent
workers. Industrial Relations 42(4):565-588.
Lautsch, Brenda A. 2002. Uncovering and explaining variance in the features and outcomes of
contingent work. Industrial & Labor Relations Review 56(1):23-43.
Lombardi, Britton, and Yukako Ono. 2008. Professional employer organizations: What are they,
who uses them, and why should we care? Economic Perspectives 32(4):2-14.
Luo, Tian, Amar Mann, and Richard Holden. 2010. The expanding role of temporary help
services from 1990 to 2008. Monthly Labor Review 3-16.

43
Mach, Traci L., and John A. Holmes. 2008. The use of alternative employment arrangements by
small businesses: Evidence from the 2003 Survey of Small Business Finances.
Manpower. 2009. Manpower employment outlook survey.
Manyika, James et al. 2011. An economy that works: Job creation and America’s future.
Masters, John K., and Grant Miles. 2002. Predicting the use of external labor arrangements: A
test of the transaction costs perspective. Academy of Management Journal 45(2):431-442.
Mayer, Kyle J, and Jack A. Nickerson. 2005. Antecedents and performance implications of
contracting for knowledge workers: Evidence from information technology services.
Organization Science 16(3):225-242.
McLaughlin, Diane K., and Alisha J. Coleman-Jensen. 2008. Nonstandard employment in the
nonmetropolitan United States. Rural Sociology 73(4):631-659.
Miles, Thomas J. 2000. Common law exceptions to employment at will and U.S. labor markets.
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 16(1):74-101.
Mitlacher, Lars W. 2007. The role of temporary agency work in different industrial relations
systems — A comparison between Germany and the USA. British Journal of Industrial
Relations 45(3):581-606.
Muhl, Charles J. 2002. What is an employee? The answer depends on the Federal law. Monthly
Labor Review (January):3-11.
Peck, Jamie, and Nikolas Theodore. 2007. Flexible recession: The temporary staffing industry
and mediated work in the United States. Cambridge Journal of Economics 31(2):171-192.
Peck, Jamie, Nikolas Theodore, and Kevin Ward. 2005. Constructing markets for temporary
labour: Employment liberalization and the internationalization of the staffing industry.
Global Networks 5(1):3-26.
Peck, Jamie, and Nikolas Theodore. 1998. The business of contingent work: Growth and
restructuring in Chicago’s temporary employment industry. Work, Employment & Society
12(4):655-674.
Polivka, Anne E. 1996. Contingent and alternative work arrangements, defined. Monthly Labor
Review 3-9.
Schreft, Stacey L., and Aarti Singh. 2003. A closer look at jobless recoveries. Federal Reserve of
Kansas City Economic Review (Second Quarter):45-72.
Smith, Vicki. 1997. New forms of work organization. Annual Review of Sociology 23(1):315339.
Smith, Vicki. 2001. Teamwork vs. tempwork: Managers and the dualisms of workplace
restructuring. Working in restructured workplaces: New directions for the sociology of
work, edited by Daniel Cornfield, Karen Campbell, and Holly McCammon. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.
Smith, Vicki, and Esther B. Neuwirth. 2008. The good temp. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.

44
Stone, K. 2006. Legal protections for atypical employees: Employment law for workers without
workplaces and employees with employers. Berkeley Journal of Employment and Labor
Law 27(2):251-286.
Theodore, Nik, and Jamie Peck. 2002. The temporary staffing industry: Growth imperatives and
limits to contingency. Economic Geography 78(4):463-493.

