                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 EARLY-LIFE HEALTH AND ADULT CIRCUMSTANCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                                             Janet Currie
                                              Tom Vogl

                                        Working Paper 18371
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18371


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




We would like to thank Anne Case for helpful conversations and Diane Alexander for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Janet Currie and Tom Vogl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in Developing Countries
Janet Currie and Tom Vogl
NBER Working Paper No. 18371
September 2012
JEL No. I12,I15,J24,O15

                                              ABSTRACT

A growing literature documents the links between long-term outcomes and health in the fetal period,
infancy, and early childhood. Much of this literature focuses on rich countries, but researchers are
increasingly taking advantage of new sources of data and identification to study the long reach of childhood
health in developing countries. Health in early life may be a more significant determinant of adult
outcomes in these countries because health insults are more frequent, the capacity to remediate is more
limited, and multiple shocks may interact. However, the underlying relationships may also be more
difficult to measure, given significant mortality selection. We survey recent evidence on the adult
correlates of early-life health and the long-term effects of shocks due to disease, famine, malnutrition,
pollution, and war.


Janet Currie
Princeton University
316 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu

Tom Vogl
Department of Economics
Princeton University
363 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
tvogl@princeton.edu
1. Introduction

A growing body of evidence documents that healthy children tend to become healthy and

wealthy adults (Almond and Currie 2010, 2011; Currie 2011). For example, anthropometric

markers such as birth weight and child height are related to future schooling, employment,

earnings, family formation, and health. Findings from natural experiments suggest that these

relationships in large part reflect a pathway running from childhood health to adult outcomes. To

the extent that inequalities and shortfalls in adult outcomes are predicted by early-life health,

these results may offer additional justification for policies aimed at improving child health.

       Much of the existing literature focuses on rich countries, but researchers are increasingly

taking advantage of new sources of data and identification to study the long reach of childhood

health in developing countries. Far beyond simply extending the work on rich countries, this

research on poorer countries has much policy relevance; health shocks in early life are wide-

spread in the developing world. The survey papers by Strauss and Thomas (2008) and Bleakley

(2010) review some of this work but do not focus on it. In this paper, we review recent research

on the long-term effects of health shocks before age 10 in developing countries. To distinguish

ourselves from previous authors, we limit our attention to findings since 2004, many of which

are not discussed in previous surveys.

       We argue that the long-term effects of such shocks are likely to be larger in developing

countries for several reasons. First, such shocks are simply more frequent in many developing

countries than in the industrialized world, suggesting that the lingering effects of early-life health

problems may well be more important in developing countries. Second, child health shocks are

likely to interact. For example, a child who is malnourished may be less able to ward off, or to

recover from, disease. Similarly, a mother who was malnourished may bear a child who is




                                                  1
compromised in her ability to cope with health insults. Moreover, if there are non-linearities in

the production function for child health, then the same shock may have quite different effects

depending on starting levels of health.

       Third, the long-run consequences of early-life health shocks depend on the availability

and effectiveness of mitigation strategies. To the extent that parents in rich countries are better

able to compensate for shocks, the long-term effects of poor health in childhood may be greater

in developing countries. For example, a relatively common congenital anomaly such as cleft

palate is easily corrected in rich countries but may lead to a great deal of suffering in poorer

settings. On the other hand, if mitigation were universally ineffective across countries, then

outcomes might be similar across countries, reflecting a purely biological response.

       Early-life health may not only be a more important determinant of adult outcomes in de-

veloping countries; its importance may have also increased as childhood mortality rates have

declined. Bozzoli et al. (2009) highlight the potential importance of mortality selection: When

children die, their long-term outcomes are not measured. Consequently, as infant and child

mortality decrease, population average outcomes such as employment and earnings could

actually fall, or at least rise more slowly than they would have otherwise, as more unhealthy

children live to adulthood. The selection biases introduced by changes in the distribution of

survivors are cause for concern in nearly all of the papers we review, and we will revisit them

often in our discussion.

       Our review is divided in two broad parts. The first deals with associations between

measures of early-life health and adult outcomes, while the second describes attempts to disen-

tangle the causal path running from childhood to adulthood. The literature on associations of

child health measures with adult outcomes goes back several decades, and in our discussion of it,




                                                2
we concentrate on the retrospective measure that the development literature commonly uses:

height. We argue that height captures aspects of the early-life experience similar to those cap-

tured by measures more common in the literature on wealthy countries, such as birth weight. Yet

height, unlike birth weight, does not require longitudinal data for linkage with other adult out-

comes. Nonetheless, despite its broad informational content and ease of data collection, height

does not allow researchers to identify which specific aspects of the childhood environment have

long-lasting effects.

       As a result, we devote the second section of our review to research that traces out the ef-

fects of specific changes in the child health environment. To structure the discussion, we separate

this work into five thematic categories, each for a separate source of ill health: (chronic) malnu-

trition, famine, disease, pollution, and war. These health insults affect their childhood victims in

diverse ways, and they cause differing degrees of mortality selection. Additionally, as we show

below, the long-term effects of the same health condition often vary considerably by setting, by

gender, or even by socioeconomic status.

       Given that different afflictions may have different effects in the same population, and a

single affliction may have varied effects across populations, much remains to be learned about

the long-term effects of child health in poorer countries. Similarly, while the concepts of “critical

periods” and “catch up growth” have been in the literature for a long time, we still know relative-

ly little either about which periods of childhood are critical for particular types of development,

or about how much recovery from health insults is possible. We conclude with some thoughts on

fruitful directions for future research. Richer data are becoming available, and the subjects of a

recent spate of child health related randomized trials (e.g., Baird et al. 2011) are starting to come

of age. These developments are sure to give rise to many useful new insights.




                                                 3
2. Height as a Proxy for the Early-Life Environment

        The size and shape of the human body provide a window into the cumulative shocks it

has experienced over its lifetime. Researchers have thus used various measures of the body and

its growth rate to gauge health.1 Of the various anthropometric measures studied, the most

common are weight, typically a proxy for short-term nutritional status, and height, a marker of

health and nutrition during the critical periods of growth in early life (especially from conception

to age 3). Absent more direct measures of early-life health, investigations into the effects of

early-life conditions have often relied instead on height and birth weight. A large literature

explores the later-life correlates of birth weight in industrialized countries, but the literature on

poorer countries has focused on height, given the paucity of good longitudinal data following

individuals in those settings from birth into adulthood.

        In the cases of both height and birth weight, bigger is better. On average, adults who

stand taller or were born heavier fare better on a range of social, economic, and cognitive out-

comes (see, e.g., Currie 2009; Steckel 2008). Interpretations of these patterns are fairly uniform

for birth weight but more variable for height. Perhaps because of the proximity of birth weight to

the intra-uterine environment, few have questioned that its relationship with adult outcomes

reflects the effects of early-life health, at least after appropriately controlling for family back-

ground characteristics.

        In contrast, a surfeit of theories aims to explain the link between height and various

measures of wellbeing and success. One class of theories, especially popular in the development

economics literature, attributes the height premium to the greater strength and health of taller

individuals, which increases their productivity (Haddad and Bouis 1991, Thomas and Strauss

1
 The study of the economic, social, and psychological correlates of body size dates at least as far back as the work
of eugenicists and biological anthropologists in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (Porter 1892; Macdonell
1902, Pearson 1906, Gowin 1915).


                                                         4
1997). A closely related hypothesis stems from the observation that physical growth and cogni-

tive development share inputs in early life. These common inputs induce a correlation between

height and cognitive ability, so in addition to being stronger and healthier, taller individuals are

smarter (Case and Paxson 2008). But several competing psychosocial theories offer explanations

for the height premium that do not rely on the biology of skill formation. Some researchers posit

that height affects individual achievement through self-esteem (Wilson 1968; Lechelt 1975;

Freedman 1979; Young and French 1996), social dominance (Klein et al. 1972; Hensley 1993),

or discrimination (Loh 1993; Magnusson, Rasmussen, and Gyllensten 2006). These theories have

attracted far more attention in rich countries than poor, but even in rich countries, nationally

representative data strongly support explanations rooted in the biology of skill formation (Case

and Paxson 2008, Lundborg et al. 2009). On the other hand, biological mechanisms and psycho-

social mechanisms are not necessarily mutually exclusive.

A Statistical Framework

         A simple statistical framework illustrates the theories that propose child development as

the link between body size and achievement. Let                be an adult outcome (like the log wage), let

be an anthropometric measure (like birth weight or adult height), and let                      be an (unobserved)

index of the joint determinants           and . We think of            primarily as an index of the childhood

environment. In reality,           may partly reflect genetics, although twin studies suggest that a

substantial share of the relationship between anthropometric measures and adult achievement is

attributable to non-genetic factors.2 Moreover, many adult outcomes are likely the product of




2
  Silventoinen et al. (2000) and Sundet et al. (2005), both studying thousands of twin pairs, find that over half of the
relationship between height and cognition can be attributed to non-genetic rather than genetic factors. Notably, the
studies use data from wealthy, egalitarian, Scandinavian countries, where the variability of childhood conditions is
likely much smaller than in developing countries, making genes relatively more important.


                                                           5
epigenetic interactions between genes and the environment, suggesting that the quest to separate

nature and nurture is misguided.3

        Suppose that        and   have the following reduced-form production functions:

                                                                                                                (1)

                                                                                                                (2)

Adult outcomes and body size both increase linearly in . In the absence of a good measure of ,

however, one might run a regression of              on       to learn (imperfectly) about the parameters in

equations (1) and (2):

                                                                                                                (3)

The slope coefficient in equation (3) has the following probability limit:

                                            plim                                                                (4)


where                 and               .

        Expression (4) has several intuitive implications. The slope coefficient increases in the

effect of the early-life environment on          and decreases in the effect of the early-life environment

on . If the residual in equation (2) has zero variance (as assumed, for example, by Weil 2007),

then the slope coefficient is equivalent to an instrumental variables estimator in which                   is used

as an instrument for        to estimate equation (3). But as         increases relative to           (the compo-

nent of the variance of        explained by ),        becomes a noisier signal of , which attenuates the

slope coefficient. This result provides two reasons to expect                 to be higher in poor countries.4

First, early-life conditions are more variable in poor countries, so that                   ⁄           is smaller

holding      constant. Second, early-life conditions are worse on average in poor countries, which
3
 See Jablonka and Lamb (2005) for an accessible discussion of genetics and epigenetics.
4
 Spears (2012) discusses similar reasons for U.S.-India differences in the association between children’s height and
cognitive test scores.


                                                         6
may increase        due to decreasing marginal returns. If a decrease in ̅ raises                 and      by the

same proportion, the ratio           ⁄     remains unchanged while             ⁄           falls, leading to an

increase in       . These two reasons for a higher                in poor countries rely on cross-national

differences in the ratio       ⁄          . But poor countries may also have higher                because they

may have higher          . For instance, if poor countries had a higher return to skill, then taller

workers would receive a higher wage premium, holding other parameters constant.

The Association Between Height and Birth Weight

        The framework posits that adult height and birth weight reflect similar underlying varia-

bles. Indeed, height and birth weight are highly correlated in settings rich and poor, both across

and within families.5 To give a sense of this empirical regularity, Table 1 examines the associa-

tion between birth weight and young adult height in two cohorts, one born in 1958 in Great

Britain, the other born in 1983-4 in the Philippine ‘metro’ area of Cebu (which encompasses both

urban and rural communities). Towards the bottom of the table, we present the means and

standard deviations of birth weight and height in the two samples.6 As might be expected given

the nutritional disparities between the two settings, both measures of body size have significantly

lower means in the Philippines than in Britain. Surprisingly, the variances of both variables are

higher in Britain than in the Philippines. Based on this result alone, however, one cannot quantify

differences in the variances of early-life conditions (          ) and the variances of the residuals (       ).

        The forward and reverse regressions of the two variables shed some light on this issue. In

the first two lines of Table 1, we present the slope coefficients from the regression of height on


5
  For evidence on the relationship between birth weight and height in developing countries, see Haeffner et al.
(2002) and Adair (2007). For evidence on developed countries, see the cross-sectional studies by Kuh and
Wadsworth (1989), Sørensen et al. (1999), and Pietiläinen et al. (2001), as well as the twin studies by Behrman and
Rosenzweig (2005) and Black et al. (2007).
6
  To deal with slight differences in the sex composition of the two samples, we standardize these descriptive
statistics to reflect a sex ratio of one.


                                                        7
birth weight and the reverse, in both cases controlling for gender. All of the slope coefficients are

highly statistically significant, indicating a strong relationship between height and birth weight.

A 1 kilogram increase in birth weight is associated with a 3-4 centimeter increase in height.7

Consistent with the prediction that            ⁄             is smaller in developing countries, both slope

coefficients are higher in the Philippines than in Britain. However, the difference in coefficients

approaches statistical significance only in the regressions of birth weight on height. For a sum-

mary statistic that more clearly describes the combined signal that height and birth weight have

for the early-life environment, consider the inverse of the product of the slope coefficients:

                              plim              1                                                                (5)

where      refers to height and          refers to birth weight. As Equation (5) shows, this statistic

summarizes the importance of residual variation relative to joint input variation in producing

height and birth weight. In the third line of Table 1, we report this inverse product for each of our

samples. As expected, the relative importance of residual variation is significantly higher in

Britain than in the Philippines. This result implies that the higher overall variances of height and

birth weight in Britain derive from the residual variance, rather than the variance of joint inputs.

Perhaps contemporary Britain has greater genetic diversity than the Philippines. Whatever the

case, its greater variance in body size does not reflect a greater variance in childhood conditions.

        Apart from the Cebu Longitudinal Study, precisely measured birth weight data are rare in

large sample surveys from developing countries, as are longitudinal data following babies into

adulthood. In consequence, the development literature—as well as the economic history litera-

ture, for similar reasons—has largely relied on height. An important exception to this generaliza-

tion is a recent paper by Bharadwaj et al. (2010) that links Chilean birth data for all children born

7
  After one controls for gender, the conditional correlation between the two variables is 0.26 in Britain and 0.30 in
the Philippines.


                                                         8
between 1992 and 2000 to data on educational attainment up to the 8th grade, and to data on

parental time use. Twin fixed effects models show a persistent positive impact of birth weight on

educational attainment. Aside from this recent paper, however, most work on developing coun-

tries focuses on height.

Changes in Average Height

        The literature on height is in part motivated by the remarkable increasing secular trend in

heights over the past two centuries. The trend began in Europe, which economic historians

attribute to rising living standards (Floud, Wachter, and Gregory 1990; Fogel 2004; Steckel

1995, 2008).8 Japan followed somewhat later (Shay 1994), as the Japanese economy entered a

period of rapid growth in the late nineteenth century. Many countries still classified today as

“developing” also saw rising average heights across cohorts born in the twentieth century

(Strauss and Thomas 1998). These transformations in the average size of the human body

occurred too quickly to be driven by evolution.

        Indeed, researchers have now amassed considerable evidence that these secular increases

in height have antecedents in early-life health. Many studies show that child and adult height are

associated with parental socioeconomic status, nutrition, and access to clean water and sanitation

during childhood.9 Additionally, a number of the quasi-experimental studies reviewed below

suggest that these associations represent causal effects of childhood conditions.

        Selective mortality presents an obstacle to detecting a relationship between early child-

hood conditions and future outcomes. This issue arises in the quasi-experimental studies re-



8
  The United States is a notable exception to the increasing trend in height in Western countries during the 1800s
and 1900s. Average heights only began to meaningfully increase around the turn of the twentieth century, after a
short period of declining heights during the initial phases of industrialization (Costa and Steckel 1997). However,
mean height was already far higher in the United States than in Europe in the early days of the republic. European
heights caught up with American heights in the twentieth century (Steckel 1995).
9
  See, e.g., Thomas (1994), Adair and Guilkey (1997), and Checkley et al. (2004).


                                                        9
viewed below but is also apparent in the distribution of average heights across countries and

birth cohorts. Studying a country-birth cohort panel from the Demographic and Health Surveys,

Deaton (2007) demonstrates that higher national income and lower child mortality in the year of

birth are associated with increased height outside Africa. But within Africa, where mortality

rates are high, declines in child mortality are associated with decreased height, and national

income bears no relation to height after controlling for mortality. These findings suggest that

selective mortality may be an important force in determining the distribution of heights among

African adults. In this sense, they offer one explanation for why Africans are much taller than

one would expect in light of their incomes.

Height and Other Adult Outcomes

        In settings with limited selective mortality, height correlates with skill; the inputs that

promote healthy growth in childhood also promote the development of both physical and cogni-

tive skills. Studies in a variety of countries, rich and poor, confirm this correlation. Table 2

provides an overview of three recent studies on developing countries. It shows that height is

associated with adult cognitive test scores in China (Huang et al. 2012); in Mexico (Vogl 2012);

and in urban areas in Barbados, Mexico, Cuba, Uruguay, Chile, and Brazil (Maurer 2010).10

Research assessing the relationship between adult height and physical skill is rarer, but Swedish

data suggest a robust relationship between height and grip strength, muscular strength, maximum

working capacity, and maximum power expended on a stationary bicycle (Lundborg et al. 2011).

Height is also associated with non-cognitive skills (Lundborg et al. 2011; Schick and Steckel

2010), but the importance of this correlation in developing countries remains unstudied.


10
   For similar results in industrialized countries see Britain (Richards et al. 2002); Sweden (Tuvemo et al. 1999;
Magnusson et al. 2006); and the United States (Case and Paxson 2008). See also Tanner (1979). Abbott et al. (1998)
find a similar result in a sample of Japanese-Americans in Hawaii, many of whom were born in Japan in the early
twentieth century.


                                                       10
           Possibly as a byproduct of the correlation between height and various skills, height is as-

sociated with wage gains many developing economies. In the rural Philippines, an extra centime-

ter of height is associated with 2 percent higher wages (Haddad and Bouis 1991); in Mexico, this

semi-elasticity is 2.5 (Vogl 2012). Height and wages are also strongly correlated in Ghana and

Brazil (Strauss and Thomas 1998; Schultz 2002), although the estimation strategies used for

these settings are not directly comparable with other studies. Consistent with the implications of

the statistical framework earlier in this section, the relationship between height and earnings is

positive but smaller in wealthy countries (Persico et al. 2004; Case and Paxson 2008; Lundborg

et al. 2009). Cognitive and physical skills explain a large share of the earnings premium paid to

taller workers in these richer settings.

           Evidence on the role of skills in explaining the height premium in developing countries is

scarcer. Many authors (e.g., Thomas and Strauss 1997; Schultz 2002) note that height is associ-

ated with educational attainment, although they generally reason that this result reflects correlat-

ed parental investments in health and education, rather than shared inputs in the production

functions for height and skill. In more recent data from Mexico, Vogl (2012) finds mixed evi-

dence on the role of cognitive skill in explaining the relationship between height and earnings.

On the one hand, an adult cognitive test score only explains a small share of the height premi-

um.11 On the other hand, taller workers sort into occupations with higher cognitive skill require-

ments, consistent with a Roy model in which the return to cognitive (rather than physical) skill

drives the height premium, and similar to the occupational sorting observed in industrialized

countries (Case and Paxson 2008). In Mexico, the sorting of taller workers into higher-skill

occupations almost entirely reflects their greater educational attainment. Collectively, these

results suggest either that cognitive ability (and therefore height) increases the productivity of
11
     The cognitive test in Vogl’s (2012) data has only 12 questions, making it a noisy measure of intelligence.


                                                            11
schooling, or that parents who invest more in health and nutrition also tend to invest more in

other forms of human capital.

        Additional evidence on the relative importance of brains and brawn can be found in the

literature relating short-term nutritional status to wages. One body of work uses local food prices

as instruments for the body mass index (BMI) and nutrient consumption, finding effects of these

variables on wages for men but less so for women (Thomas and Strauss 1997; Rosenzweig et al.

2011).12 These estimated effects suggest that physical strength and robustness remain important

in developing economy labor markets, especially for men. Note that instrumental variables

methods are more appropriate for estimating the effect of body weight than for estimating the

“effect” of height. Several studies, including Schultz (2002) and Behrman et al. (2009), use

early-life conditions as instruments in estimating the “effect” of height on wages. However, if

height is primarily a proxy for early-life conditions, then we see more justification for studying

the reduced-form effects of the “instruments” directly. Height becomes useful as an independent

variable precisely when we cannot observe all relevant determinants of childhood development.

For much the same reason, we cannot use adult height to distinguish the effects of in utero

shocks from those of postnatal shocks. Nonetheless, given the ease of measurement, height

provides a useful retrospective proxy for health and nutrition in the early years of life.



3. Evidence Regarding the Longer Term Effects of Early-Life Shocks

        In the preceding section, we elaborated on the argument that early-life shocks might have

larger effects in developing countries; provided a justification for viewing adult height as an

outcome; and emphasized the potential importance of mortality selection. In this section, we


12
  Rosenzweig et al.’s (2011) results also indicate that, among men but not women, increased body weight decreases
schooling attainment and increases selection into strength-intensive occupations.


                                                       12
review the recent literature regarding specific types of early-life shocks: malnutrition, famine,

disease, pollution, and war.

Nutrition

        Table 3 provides an overview of some recent studies examining the longer-term impacts

of poor nutrition in childhood. Here we focus on moderate and chronic malnutrition; we discuss

famine in the next section. Recent studies have focused on the roles of specific nutrients, and on

the question of whether children recover from nutritional shocks during critical periods, such as

while they are in utero or in the first year of life.

        In one recent study, Malluccio et al. (2009) report on a long-running randomized INCAP

(Institute of Nutrition of Central America and Panama) experiment that involved giving Guate-

malan children zero to seven years old a high-protein energy drink (the treatment) or a placebo

with a similar number of calories. The findings suggest that the treatment increased schooling

attainment among women by 1.2 grades, and cognitive ability by .24 standard deviations for both

men and women. Hoddinott et al. (2008) study the same intervention and find that nutritional

supplements in the first two years of life increased male wages by 46 percent.13 These large

effects suggest that an early diet that is sufficient in calories but not in protein can have severe

long-term consequences.

        Quasi-experimental studies also provide evidence on the importance of specific nutrients.

In one prominent example, Field et al. (2009) examine the effect of fetal exposure to iodine

supplementation as part of a large but episodically implemented government program in Tanza-




13
   In absolute terms, Hoddinott et al. (2008) find an effect of US $0.67 per hour, with a 95 percent confidence
interval of 0.16-1.17. The point estimate is 46 percent of the average wage, and the confidence interval runs from 11
percent to 80 percent.


                                                        13
nia.14 Iodine deficiency in pregnant women has been linked to mental retardation in affected

fetuses but has been virtually eliminated in developed countries. Field et al. find that children

who benefited from the supplements in utero experienced large gains in educational attainment.

The effects were larger for girls than for boys, which is consistent with scientific evidence that

female fetuses are more vulnerable to damage from iodine deficiency.

        A number of recent studies examine the long-term effects of general nutritional depriva-

tion at particular critical periods. Almond and Mazumder (2011) provide evidence on this front

in their analysis of the effect of maternal fasting during Ramadan on children in utero. Their

study relies on the fact that the timing of Ramadan moves throughout the year, so that the effects

can be distinguished from seasonal variation. Using Census data from Uganda and Iraq, they

show cohorts affected by maternal fasting are 22 to 23 percent more likely to be disabled in

adulthood. In comparison, the estimated effect on disability rates among Arab-named adults in

the U.S. is only slightly lower, at 19 percent.

        Variation in adult outcomes by season of birth may also shed light on the effects of early-

childhood health. In their examination of the age of heart disease onset in Puerto Rico, McEniry

and Palloni (2010) focus on whether subjects were in utero during the “hungry season.” They

find a monotonic relationship between length of exposure and the probability of heart disease.

Among those exposed to poor conditions throughout pregnancy, 23 percent had heart disease,

compared to 15 to 18 percent among individuals who were partially exposed and 11 percent

among those who were not exposed. They note, however, that it is difficult to separate the effects



14
  Another recent analysis of a natural experiment involving nutrient supplementation can be found in the work of
Linnemayr and Alderman (2011), who evaluate a nutrition enhancement program in Senegal that was phased in at
the village level. The program had multiple components, including Vitamin A and iron supplements for pregnant
women. While the results vary somewhat with the estimation method, they find consistent evidence that maternal
participation during pregnancy was associated with improvements in child weight-for-age. We do not report this
paper in Table 3 because the weight measurements are from childhood as well.


                                                      14
of poor nutrition from the effects of exposure to disease or other seasonal factors in this type of

research design. Additionally, the socioeconomic and demographic composition of mothers

varies over the year, which presents additional challenges to interpreting this work (Lam and

Miron 1994; Buckles and Hungerman 2013).

         Research on rainfall shocks provides more convincing evidence on the effects of experi-

encing hunger in early life. In one such study, Maccini and Yang (2009) link adults in the

Indonesia Family Life Survey to data on rainfall in their birth districts during their birth years.

They hypothesize that higher rainfall is linked to better nutrition in the first year through its

effects on harvests. Indeed, higher early-life rainfall affects height and a range of other adult

outcomes for women but not men. For women, a ten percent increase in local rainfall in the year

of birth leads to a 0.3-centimeter increase in height, a 0.1-year increase in education attainment,

and a 0.12-standard deviation increase in an index of household durable goods ownership. The

results for men are statistically insignificant and less consistent, although the (imprecise) esti-

mates of the effect of rainfall on height remain positive. One could interpret the weaker results

for men as reflecting mortality selection, since boys are more vulnerable than girls to dying in

childhood (Waldron 1983).15

         Further evidence on the importance of mortality selection can be found in Indian women,

among whom early-life rainfall increases average adult height for upper castes but lowers

average adult height for lower castes (Pathania 2009). The child mortality rates of the lower

castes may be more environmentally sensitive, increasing the likelihood of selective mortality.

This reasoning implies that higher early-life rainfall does not diminish the health of children

from lower castes but rather keeps unhealthy ones alive. These patterns have diminished in more

15
   As a test for mortality selection, Maccini and Yang (2009) estimate the effect of early-life rainfall on cohort size,
finding no effect. However, they run this test either for women only or for both men and women. (The paper is
unclear on this issue.) Theory might predict an effect on male cohort size only.


                                                          15
recent cohorts, which have experienced lower rates of child mortality. According to new research

by Shah and Millett-Steinberg (2012), exposure to drought in utero reduces test scores among

Indian children of school age regardless of parental socioeconomic status.16 Rocha and Soares

(2011) find that exposure to drought reduces both infant health and the subsequent primary

schooling performance of cohorts who were exposed in utero.

Famine

        Several attributes distinguish famines from the localized rainfall shocks that Maccini and

Yang (2009) and Pathania (2009) study. First, in general equilibrium, famines affect both food

prices and farmers’ incomes, while localized rainfall shortfalls affect only incomes. Second,

perhaps due in part to price adjustments, famines are typically more severe than localized shocks,

with massive effects on mortality. As a result, concerns about selective mortality are likely to be

more relevant in studies of famine. Third, unlike localized weather shocks, famines arguably

have as much to do with politics as with food output (Drèze and Sen 1991). Thus, research

strategies designed to measure the effects of localized rainfall shocks may fail to generate

plausible estimates of the effects of famine.

        Table 4 summarizes a growing literature aimed at detecting the long-term health effects

of famine in developing countries. As Table 4 makes clear, most of this literature has focused on

the effect of exposure in utero, with relatively little information available about the effect of

exposure in early childhood. This focus on the in utero period is inspired by the literature on the

“Barker hypothesis” (Barker, 2001) which suggests that events during pregnancy can have long-

term effects by “programming” the development of the fetus. See Almond and Currie (2011) for

a review of this fetal effects literature.

16
  Interestingly, Shah and Millett-Steinberg (2012) also find that current exposure to drought improves test scores in
school-aged children, which they interpret as a substitution effect due to drought-related reductions in parents’ and
children’s opportunity costs of time.


                                                        16
       Most studies of the in utero effects of famine identify cohorts of affected children and

follow them over time. One potential difficulty is that children who were already born at the time

of the famine are also subject to nutritional deprivation, though at a later stage. This partial

exposure of pre-famine cohorts suggests that the in utero cohort must be compared to cohorts in

utero after the famine only. However, individuals in utero after the famine were conceived

during or after the famine, which raises concerns about fertility responses to the famine, which

may change the composition of parents having children. Post-famine cohorts may thus have

different background characteristics from the in utero cohort.

       The cohort-based approaches provide some evidence of the effects of famine on long-

term outcomes. Meng and Qian (2009) and Umana-Aponte (2011) evaluate the effect of famine

exposure in utero on years of schooling in China (1959) and Uganda (1980), respectively.

Relative to pre- and post-famine cohorts, cohorts exposed to famine in utero attained approxi-

mately 0.58 fewer years of schooling in China and 0.364 fewer years of schooling in Uganda. In

results from Ethiopia, Dercon and Porter (2010) estimate that a 1984 famine reduced the proba-

bility of completing primary school by 2 percent for cohort exposed at two to three years of age,

but had no effect on education for the cohort exposed in utero. They do, however, find effects on

height in both cohorts.

       The Chinese famine has received particular attention, and several papers provide evi-

dence complementary to Meng and Qian’s. As with the studies described in the previous para-

graph, analyses of the Chinese famine use both pre- and post-famine cohorts as control groups.

Chen and Zhou (2007) examine the effects of the Chinese famine on height, finding a decrease

of 3 cm for those born or conceived during the famine. Gørgens et al. (2012) report a similar

stunting effect of the famine on the rural Chinese population for whom the famine was most




                                                17
severe. In further analyses of socioeconomic outcomes, Almond et al. (2010) estimate that

women (men) exposed to the Chinese famine in utero were 3 percent (5.9 percent) less likely to

work and 13 percent (12 percent) more likely to be disabled, and that men were 6.5 percent less

likely to be married. Finally, building on earlier research examining the effects of the Dutch

“hunger winter” of 1944 on a wide range of outcomes (see for example, Lumey et al. 2011), two

papers investigate the effects of the 1959 Chinese famine on other health outcomes. Fung (2009)

demonstrates that in utero exposure to famine predicts obesity for women, but not for men, while

St. Clair et al. (2005) find that prenatal and infant exposure to famine doubles the likelihood of

developing schizophrenia.

       Since famine often involves substantial mortality, it can be difficult to interpret the

magnitudes of the effects. Indeed, the data suggest that mortality selection may severely dampen

the estimated effects of early-life shocks on the average height of adult survivors. For example,

data on Chinese adults show little sign of a decline in average heights among cohorts exposed to

the Great Famine in early life unless one accounts for selection (Gørgens et al. 2012). In Meng

and Qian’s study (2009) stunting effects are most noticeable at the upper quantiles of the height

distribution, as would be expected if mortality culled individuals from the bottom tail of the

height distribution.

Disease

       Historical studies in developed countries suggest that the introduction of effective treat-

ments for childhood disease had profound effects on future outcomes and population health. For

example, Bhalotra and Venkataramani (2011) examine the introduction of sulfa drugs in the U.S.

in the 1930s, which were highly efficacious for pneumonia. Pneumonia was a leading killer of

children in the U.S., much as it is in the developing world today. They compare areas with




                                               18
initially high death rates due to pneumonia to areas with initially lower rates, arguing that sulfa

drugs ought to have had a greater impact in the former than in the latter. They find that sulfa drug

availability in utero and in early childhood increased years of schooling by 0.09 years, increased

income by 2.3 percent, and increased employment by 1.2 percent for men. The results for women

are small and insignificant, which they interpret as evidence that the gains to men arose primarily

because better health led to increased returns in the labor market. Using a somewhat similar

research design, Bleakley (2007) compares school enrollment, attendance, literacy, and years of

schooling of individuals born in areas with high and low hookworm endemicity, before and after

the eradication of hookworm in the United States. He finds that a one-standard deviation reduc-

tion in the hookworm rate increased school enrollment by 0.25-standard deviations, increased

literacy, and fulltime attendance, but had no effect on years of schooling.

       Table 5 summarizes several recent papers examining the effect of early-life disease expo-

sure on future outcomes in developing countries. The papers deal with both endemic and epi-

demic diseases, taking advantage of both increases and decreases in incidence. In particular,

several studies exploit variation in the incidence of endemic disease—such as helminth infection

and malaria—that was induced by large-scale eradication campaigns.

       One set of papers (Nelson (2010) on Brazil and Lin and Liu (2011) on Taiwan) investi-

gates the long-term effects of in utero exposure to influenza using a cohort comparison method-

ology similar to that in Almond (2006). They examine the impact of exposure to the 1919

influenza epidemic by focusing on the affected cohort’s break from trend relative to cohorts born

just before and after the outbreak. Following Almond (2006), Lin (2011) also incorporates

geographic variation in mortality as an indicator for the intensity of prenatal influenza exposure.

The 1919 Brazilian cohort that was exposed to the pandemic in utero finished 0.2 fewer years of




                                                19
schooling, had 20 percent lower wages, and members were 20 percent less likely to be employed.

In Taiwan, each 1 percent increase in the birth year maternal mortality rate (a proxy for influenza

incidence) led to a reduction of 0.343 years of schooling. Those affected were also 3.6 percent,

2.1 percent, 1.6 percent, and 0.06 percent less likely to complete elementary school, junior high

school, high school, and college, respectively relative to cohorts born just before or just after.

       It is somewhat difficult to compare effect sizes when baseline levels of outcomes like ed-

ucation were so different across countries. Almond (2006) reports that the U.S. cohort affected

by the 1919 epidemic had 0.125 fewer years of schooling, earned 5 percent lower wages, and

were 20 percent more likely to be disabled. This comparison suggests that perhaps flu exposure

had a larger effect on future wages in Brazil than in the U.S. Kelly (2009) finds small effects of

the 1957 Asian flu pandemic on British children’s test scores at ages 7 and 11. Just as we have

speculated that the effects of early health shocks might be smaller in developed countries than in

developing ones, it is possible that the effects of the 1957 flu were smaller than those of the 1919

flu pandemic because of improvements in medical care or in the underlying health of those

affected. Note that if the extent of mortality selection had fallen between 1919 and 1957, then we

would expect the estimated effect of the later epidemic to be larger than that of the earlier

epidemic.

       Several studies estimate the effect of specific diseases by examining eradication cam-

paigns in a difference-in-differences framework, much as in the papers by Bhalotra and Venkata-

ramani (2011) and Bleakley (2007) described above. This research strategy compares cross-

cohort changes in areas with high initial disease prevalence to cross-cohort changes in areas that

have lower initial disease prevalence because the former are more likely to be affected by the

eradication campaigns.




                                                 20
       Three papers apply this method in asking whether early-life malaria exposure affects

socioeconomic outcomes in adulthood. Using data from the U.S. South and Latin America,

Bleakley (2010) estimates that 100 percent eradication of malarial infections increased subse-

quent adult income by 47 percent in the US, 45 percent in Brazil, 45 percent in Colombia, and 41

percent in Mexico. Bleakley also finds positive effects on literacy, but mixed results for years of

schooling. Cutler et al. (2010), studying India’s malaria eradication campaign of the 1950s, also

detect no effect on educational attainment. However, consistent with Bleakley (2010), they find

that malaria eradication increased household consumption, perhaps implying that the eradication

of malaria increases incomes by allowing people to work more, or at higher productivity jobs.

These results highlight the fact that reductions in disease can work through multiple channels and

can well have effects on income through improved health or labor force participation even if they

have no effects on schooling or cognition. Indeed, in some circumstances, improvements in

health may have positive effects on earnings even if they decrease educational attainment. Even

so, not all studies of malaria eradication fail to find effects on educational attainment. In her

study of eradication in Paraguay and Sri Lanka, Lucas (2010) estimates that a 10-percentage

point reduction in malaria incidence increases female schooling by 0.1 years and female literacy

by 1 percentage point.

       Complementing Bleakley’s (2007) work on the historical United States, several studies

examine the effect of deworming on medium and long-term outcomes in developing countries. In

a well-known paper, Miguel and Kremer (2004) analyze the experimental introduction of de-

worming treatments in Kenyan schools. The deworming intervention increased school attend-

ance by 7 percent but had no effect on test scores. In a follow-up study, however, Baird et al.

(2011) find that self-reported health, years of schooling, and test scores all increased for the




                                                21
treated group. Hours worked rose 12 percent in the full sample and 20 percent among those who

were working for wages. Moreover, Ozier (2011) shows that deworming school-aged children

had positive externalities on very young children in the same community, fitting for a communi-

cable disease like helminth infection. Children less than one year old during the treatment

experienced IQ gains on the order of 0.2-standard deviations, which translated into an additional

0.5-0.8 years of schooling.

Pollution

The literature on determinants of child health in developing countries has traditionally focused

on disease and nutrition.17 However, children are more vulnerable than adults to the effects of

many types of pollutants, both because they are still developing and because their small size

means that they may end up with relatively high doses per unit body mass. For example, children

are more susceptible to lead poisoning because the blood-brain barrier that protects adults is not

fully formed. These considerations suggest that the alarmingly high levels of contamination of

air, water, and soil in many developing countries could have extremely harmful long-term

consequences for child development.

        In many cases, the pollution levels in developing countries are outside the range that has

been studied in the developed world, and may be outside the range of pollution levels that

existed historically. For example, in Chay and Greenstone’s (2003a,b) path-breaking work

examining reductions in Total Suspended Particles (TSPs) in the 1970s and early 1980s U.S.,

“low” TSP implies concentrations of 44 ug/m3 and “high” TSP concentrations were 92 ug/m3.

Wang et al. (1997) study pollution in residential areas of Beijing from 1988-1991 and consider

TSP levels ranging from 150 to 700 ug/m3. Similarly, roughly 70 percent of the river water in

17
   In many settings these killers remain the greatest threats. For example, Field et al. (2011) show that when
households in Bangladesh abandoned tube wells that were contaminated with arsenic, mortality from diarrheal
disease doubled.


                                                     22
China is unsafe for human consumption, although many people in rural areas rely on these

sources for drinking water (World Bank, 2006). Brainerd and Menon (2011) find that a 10

percent increase in chemical runoff from fertilizers in the water increases infant mortality by

11.26 percent and decreases height for age by 0.14 standard deviations.

       There is now considerable evidence from developed countries that air pollution has harm-

ful effects on birth weight and infant mortality (see Currie, 2011 for a recent summary of this

literature) and a growing literature showing that this is also true in the developed world. Foster et

al. (2009) study air pollution in Mexico using satellite measures of aerosol optical depth. Varia-

tion in pollution comes from a voluntary certification program, and regional variation in the

supply of auditors available to implement the program. They find that a 3.6 percent improvement

in aerosol optical depth resulted in a 16 percent decline in infant mortality due to respiratory

illness, but no decline from deaths due to external causes (a control cause). Jayachandran (2009)

estimates OLS models where an average aerosol index (TOMS) captures the variation in pollu-

tion levels that resulted from the 1997 Indonesian wildfires. Her results indicate that areas

affected by the smoke suffered a 1.2 percent reduction in birth cohort size with the largest effects

among the poor, a result that highlights the importance of selection once again. Despite these

concerns about selection bias, the Wang et al. study mentioned above found that each 100-ug/m3

increase in SO2 (TSP) exposure in the third trimester reduces birth weight by 7.3 (6.9) grams and

increased the probability of low birth weight by 11 percent (10 percent).

       The question of precisely which pollutants are most harmful is important for policy and is

difficult to address, given that many pollutants come from the same sources and are highly

correlated. Moreover, mechanisms are not well understood. For example, particulates do not

cross the placenta (as carbon monoxide does) but may cause an inflammatory response in the




                                                 23
mother. Additionally, while a good deal of information has accumulated about the “criterion air

pollutants” that are routinely tracked in the United States because of the Clean Air Acts, much

less information is available about thousands of other toxic chemicals that are in use.

        Very little research in any country has tracked the long-term impacts of pollution in any

setting, rich or poor. A few notable exceptions are Nilsson (2009), who finds that in Sweden,

reductions in ambient lead concentrations have positive long-term effects on children’s eventual

educational and labor market outcomes;18 Ferrie et al. (2011), who show that higher exposure in

childhood to water-borne lead reduced test scores for male World War II enlistees; and Almond

et al. (2009), who study the effects of radiation exposure in utero on educational outcomes for

children affected by the Chernobyl nuclear disaster in Sweden. In the Chernobyl study, children

exposed to radiation at 8-25 weeks gestation in the most affected municipalities were 4 percent

less likely to qualify for high school.

        A final caveat is that even in cases where there is a clearly defined pollution problem,

such as smoke from primitive cooking stoves, the most obvious solutions are not always the most

effective. Hanna et al. (2012) evaluate a large-scale randomized trial in which clean cooking

stoves were introduced to Indian villages. The stoves apparently had little effect on health mainly

because households did not use them. Clearly, much work remains to be done on this topic.

War

        Like malnutrition, disease, and pollution, war and exposure to violence threaten health in

the short term. Several studies examine effects on birth and early childhood outcomes. For

example, Mansour and Rees (2012) study the 2000-2005 al-Aqsa Intifada in Palestine using

mother fixed effects models and find that each additional conflict fatality in the first trimester


18
  The lead levels Nilsson studies were already less than the U.S. “thresholds for concern” at the beginning of his
sample period, suggesting that even declines from already low levels had positive effects.


                                                       24
increases low birth weight by 0.003 percentage points. Camacho (2008) examines data from

Columbia between 1998 and 2003, and also uses mother fixed effects. She finds that exposure to

land mine explosions during the first trimester reduces birth weight by 2.8 grams.

Bundervoet et al. (2009), Akresh et al. (2007), and Akresh et al. (2013) estimate the effect of

early childhood exposure to violence on children’s height-for-age z-scores using a difference-in-

difference methodology. For example, Bundervoet et al. (2009) exploit variation in civil war

timing across cohorts and provinces in Burundi. They estimate that among children 6 to 60

months, the height-for-age z-score decreased by .047 for each month of exposure to civil war.

       A growing literature, reviewed in Table 6, suggests that exposure in early childhood may

also have significant long-term scarring effects. Aguero and Deolalikar (2012) estimate the effect

of childhood exposure to the Rwandan genocide on women’s height-for-age z-scores. Using

difference-in-differences for exposed cohorts with Zimbabwean women as the control group,

they find that Rwandan women exposed to the conflict have 0.2-standard deviations lower

height-for-age z-scores. Taking Akresh and Verwimp (2006) and Aguero and Deolalikar (2012)

together, it appears that the Rwandan civil war greatly affected the height of girls in Rwanda, and

that even exposure late in adolescence affected adult female height.

       Several papers evaluate the effects of conflict on years of schooling. Alderman et al.

(2006) combine maternal fixed effects and IV estimation to show that exposure to civil war and

drought shocks in early childhood in Zimbabwe reduced children’s height-for-age z-scores,

which subsequently had negative effects on years of schooling and adult height. Akresh and de

Walque (2008) estimate a difference-in-difference model and find that children exposed to the

Rwandan genocide earned 0.4 fewer years of schooling. In Peru, León (2010) estimates that for

each additional year of civil war exposure in early childhood, children acquired 0.07 fewer years




                                                25
of schooling. Therefore, a child exposed for the first three years of life attains, on average, 0.21

fewer years of schooling. Some of this effect on education may work through the destruction of

school buildings.

       Since the exposure occurred in childhood, rather than in utero, the authors posit that the

channel through which the violent event affects height is economic or nutritional. Some authors

also emphasize the possible effects of extreme stress or of being physically unable to attend

school. These types of explanations may also apply to other papers about the effects of exposure

to disaster, such as Sotomayor (2012), who compares Puerto Rican cohorts in utero during the

hurricane years of 1929 and 1933 to surrounding cohorts, finding them more likely to have been

diagnosed with high blood pressure, high cholesterol, or diabetes as adults.

        War has long been regarded as one of the “four horseman of the apocalypse” suggesting

that people are well aware of its unique capacity for destruction. This new literature does not

help us to distinguish the mechanisms underlying the long-term effects on children, though it

does confirm the long reach of such disastrous events.



4. Discussion and Conclusions

       A growing literature shows that events in early life have long-term consequences for

adult health, cognition and labor market success, both in developed and in developing countries.

Still, many basic questions remain unanswered. We still know relatively little about mechanisms.

And it is difficult to say much about the relative magnitudes of the effects of different types of

shocks, nor about possible interactions between them, given data limitations and differences in

methodology across studies.




                                                26
       Moreover, while many suggest that critical periods—times in the life of the child when

negative health insults are most harmful—exist, it is generally unclear when these periods are

and to what extent they differ across insults. Much of the recent literature has focused on shocks

sustained in utero. This focus is partly because of the belief that gestation is a critical period, but

also because it is a well-defined period with a distinct beginning and end—unlike, for example,

“early childhood.” The sharp definition facilitates measurement of exposure.

       Similarly little evidence is available about possible intergenerational effects, though these

effects represent one of the most intriguing explanations for how the consequences of health

shocks can persist over long periods. Along these lines, Bhalotra and Rawlings (2011) link

mothers in 38 developing countries to infant health and height-for-age z-scores in early child-

hood. They show that a one-standard deviation decrease in mother’s height is associated with a

7.4 percent increase in the probability that her child is low birth weight and a 9.3 percent higher

neonatal mortality rate. The effects were largest for mothers at the bottom of the income distribu-

tion. In a companion paper, (Bhalotra and Rawlings, 2013) they argue that improvements in the

health and educational environment were associated with reductions in these inter-generational

correlations. Although these associations are compelling, they are not obviously causal. Even so,

a follow-up of the INCAP nutritional intervention discussed above provides additional evidence

on intergenerational links. Behrman et al. (2009) show that children born to mothers who re-

ceived the protein supplement in childhood had babies who were 116 grams heavier and 0.26 z-

scores taller on average. Furthermore, Fung and Ha (2010) find evidence that the Chinese Great

Famine reduced the heights and weights of survivors’ children.

       The fact that events in early childhood have long-term consequences says little about the

extent to which the actions of parents, schools, or other institutions can ameliorate these conse-




                                                  27
quences. The extent to which parents reinforce or compensate for early-life shocks is an active

area of research: Rosenzweig and Zhang (2009) find evidence of reinforcement in China, while

Liu et al. (2009) and Bharadwaj et al. (2010) find evidence of compensation in the Philippines

and Chile, respectively. Parents’ decision to compensate or reinforce may depend not only on

beliefs and values but also on the practical supports available to them.

       Finally, to our own surprise and chagrin, we find that little research on the impact of

HIV/AIDS on children falls under the scope of our review. Perhaps this omission is due to the

fact that the epidemic so obviously appears to be a catastrophe with long-term impacts for many

children’s lives. It is estimated that more than a quarter-million children under age 15 die of

AIDS-related causes each year, while more than 3 million are currently living with HIV/AIDS,

90 percent of them in sub-Saharan Africa (WHO 2011). Beyond the direct health impacts,

HIV/AIDS may also have indirect effects through the devastation of families. As of 2003, an

estimated 15 million children had lost at least one parent to AIDS, 80 percent of them in sub-

Saharan Africa (UNAIDS 2004), where research suggests that parental death reduces school

enrollment (Case et al. 2002; Case and Ardington 2006; Evans and Miguel 2007). Many others

have sick caretakers as a result of the virus.

       Case and Paxson (2011) make the further important point that the societal response to

disease can impact long-term child outcomes through its effects on health infrastructure. Using

data from fourteen sub-Saharan African countries, they find that in countries heavily impacted by

HIV, skilled birth attendance, antenatal care, and immunization rates declined between 1988 and

2005. Countries with a minimal burden from HIV experienced no such declines. This deteriora-

tion, which presumably occurred because of a diversion of health resources to fight the AIDS




                                                 28
epidemic, may have lasting effects on children even if neither they nor their parents are HIV-

positive.

       In sum, research in the past decade has shown that health shocks in early-life have long-

term effects on adults in both the developed and developing world. But the literature still has

little understanding of heterogeneity in these effects. Future research should focus on identifying

pathways and mechanisms; measuring the relative magnitudes of the effects of different health

shocks; examining interactions between shocks; and revisiting the question of critical periods.

Beyond these issues, policy-makers have much to learn from new findings on the efficacy of

interventions designed to help children reach their full potential.



Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Anne Case for helpful conversations and Diane Alexander for excellent

research assistance.




                                                 29
References


1.   Abbott RD, White LR, Webster RG, Petrovitch H, Masaki KH, Snowdon DA, Curb JD.

     1998. Height as a Marker of Childhood Development and Late-Life Cognitive Function:

     The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. Pediatrics 102(3):602-9



2.   Adair LS, Guilkey DK. 1997. Age-specific determinants of stunting in Filipino children. J.

     Nutr. 127(2):314-20



3.   Adair LS. 2007. Size at birth and growth trajectories to young adulthood. Am. J. Hum. Biol.

     19:327–37



4.   Aguero JM, Deolalikar A. 2012. Late Bloomers? Identifying Critical Periods in Human

     Capital Accumulation. Evidence from the Rwanda Genocide. Presented at 9th Midwest Int.

     Econ. Devel. Conf., Univ. of Minn.



5.   Akresh R, de Walque D. 2008. Armed Conflict and Schooling: Evidence from the 1994

     Rwandan Genocide. World Bank Policy Research Work Pap. #4606.



6.   Akresh R, Bhalotra S, Marinella L, Osili U. 2011. War and Stature: Growing Up During

     the Nigerian Civil War. IZA Discussion Paper No. 6194.



7.   Akresh R, Lucchetti L, Thirumurthy H. 2013. Wars and Child Health: Evidence from the

     Eritrean-Ethiopian Conflict. J. Dev. Econ., in press.



                                               30
8.   Akresh R, Verwimp P, Bundervoet T. 2007. Civil War, Crop Failure, and Child Stunting in

     Rwanda. Tech. Rep. World Bank Policy Research WP 4208.



9.   Alderman H, Hoddinott J, Kinsey B. 2006. Long-Term Consequences of Early Childhood

     Malnutrition. Oxf. Econ. Pap. 58(3):450-74



10. Almond D. 2006. Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of in Utero

     Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population. J. Polit. Econ. 114:672-712



11. Almond D, Currie J. 2011. Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. J. Econ.

     Perspect. 25(3): 153-72



12. Almond D, Currie J. 2010. Human Capital Development before Age Five. In The Hand-

     book of Labor Economics, 4b. ed. O Ashenfelter, D Card, 15:1315-486. Amsterdam: Else-

     vier Science B.V.



13. Almond D, Edlund L, Li H, Zhang J. 2010. Long-term Effects of the 1959-1961 China

     Famine: Mainland China and Hong Kong. In The Economic Consequences of Demographic

     Change in East Asia, University of Chicago Press. pp. 321-50.



14. Almond D, Mazumder B. 2011. Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The Effect

     of Ramadan Observance during Pregnancy. Am. Econ. J.:Appl. Econ. 3(4):56-85




                                             31
15. Barker DJP. 2001. Fetal Origins of Cardiovascular and Lung Disease. New York: Marcel

    Dekker, Inc.



16. Baird S, Hicks JH, Kremer M, Miguel E. 2011. Worms at Work: Long-run Impacts of Child

    Health Gains. http://www.cgdev.org/doc/events/KLPS-Labor_2011-05-16-Circulate.pdf



17. Behrman JR, Hoddinott J, Maluccio JA, Martorell R. 2009. Brains versus Brawn: Labor

    Market Returns to Intellectual and Health Human Capital in a Poor Developing Country.

    Tech. Rep. Middlebury WP 0907.



18. Behrman JR, Calderon MC, Preston SH, Hoddinott J, Martorell R, Stein AD. 2009. Nutri-

    tional supplementation in girls influences the growth of their children: prospective study in

    Guatemala. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 90(5):1372-79



19. Behrman JR, Rosenzweig MR. 2005. The returns to birth weight. Rev. Econ. Stat. 86:586-

    601



20. Bhalotra S, Rawlings S. 2011. Intergenerational Persistence in Health in Developing Coun-

    tries: The Penalty of Gender Inequality. J. Pub. Econ. 95(4):286-99



21. Bhalotra S, Rawlings S. 2013. Gradients of Intergenerational Transmission of Health in

    Developing Countries. Rev. Econ. Stat., in press.




                                              32
22. Bhalotra S, Venkataramani A. 2011. Is the Captain of the Men of Death Still At Play?

    Long-Run Impacts of Early Life Pneumonia Exposure and the Sulfa Drug Revolution.

    Work. Pap. Presented at NBER Children’s Meet. May 6, 2011.



23. Bharadwaj P, Eberhard J, Neilson C. 2010. Do Initial Endowments Matter Only Initially?

    Birth Weight, Parental Investments and Academic Achievement in School. Tech. Rep.,

    UCSD WP 9-16-2010.



24. Black SE, Devereux PJ, Salvanes KG. 2007. From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The

    Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes. Q. J. Econ. 122(1):409-39



25. Blattman C, Annan J. 2010. The Consequences of Child Soldiering. Rev. Econ. Stats.

    92(4):882-98



26. Bleakley H. 2010. Malaria Eradication in the Americas: A Retrospective Analysis of

    Childhood Exposure. Am. Econ. J.: Appl. Econ. 2:1-45



27. Bozzoli C, Deaton A, Quintana-Domeque C. 2009. Adult Height and Childhood Disease.

    Demography. 46(4):647-69




                                           33
28. Brainerd E, Menon N. 2011. Seasonal Effects of Water Quality on Infant and Child Health

    in India. Presented at the 2nd IGC-ISI India Devel. Pol. Conf., Indian Statistical Institute,

    Delhi Centre.


29. Buckles K, Hungerman D. 2013. Season of Birth and Later Outcomes: Old Questions, New

    Answers.” Re. Stat. In press.



30. Bundervoet T, Verwimp P, Akresh R. 2009. Health and Civil War in Rural Burundi. J.

    Hum. Resour. 44(2):536-63



31. Camacho A. 2008. Stress and Birth Weight: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks. Am. Econ.

    Rev.: Pap. Proc. 98(2):511-15


32. Case A, Ardington C. 2006. The Impact of Parental Death on School Outcomes: Longitu-

    dinal Evidence from South Africa,” Demog. 43(3):401-420.



33. Case A, Paxson C. 2008. Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market Outcomes.

    J. Polit. Econ. 116(3):499-532.


34. Case A, Paxson C, Ableidinger J. 2004. Orphans in Africa: Parental Death, Poverty and

    School Enrollment,” Demog. 41(3):483-508.



35. Chay KY, Greenstone M. 2003. The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence

    from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession. Q. J. Econ.

    118(3):1121-67


                                              34
36. Chay KY, Greenstone M. 2003. Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean Air Act of

    1970. NBER Work. Pap. No. 10053.



37. Checkley W, Gilman RH, Black RE, Epstein LD, Cabrera L, Sterling CR, Moulton LH.

    2004. Effect of water and sanitation on childhood health in a poor Peruvian peri-urban

    community. Lancet 363(9403):112-18



38. Chen Y, Zhou L. 2007. The Long-Term Health and Economic Consequences of the 1959-

    1961 Famine in China. J Health Econ. 26:659-81



39. Costa D, Steckel R. 1997. Long-term trends in health, welfare, and economic growth in the

    United States. In Health and Welfare during Industrialization, ed. R Floud, R Steckel, 2.

    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



40. Currie J. 2009. Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Child-

    hood, and Human Capital Development. J. Econ. Lit., Am. Econ. Assoc., 47(1):87-122.




41. Currie J. 2011. Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences. Am. Econ. Rev.,

    Presented at the Annu. Richard T. Ely Lecture at the AEA meet. in Denver, CO.




                                            35
42. Cutler D, Fung W, Kremer M, Singhal M, Vogl T. 2010. Early-life Malaria Exposure and

    Adult Outcomes: Evidence from Malaria Eradication in India. Am. Econ. J.: Appl. Econ.

    2:72-94



43. Deaton A. 2007. Height, Health and Development. P. Natl. Acad. of Sci. USA,

    104(33):13232-37



44. Dercon S, Porter C. 2010. Live aid revisited: long-term impacts of the 1984 Ethiopian

    famine on children. Tech. Rep., CSAE WPS 2010-39.


45. Evans D, Miguel E. 2007 Orphans and Schooling in Africa: Parental Death, Poverty and

    School Enrollment. Demog. 44(1):35-57.



46. Ferrie J, Rolf K, Troesken W. 2011. Cognitive Disparities, Lead Plumbing, and Water

    Chemistry: Intelligence Test Scores and Exposure to Water-Borne Lead among World War

    Two U.S. Army Enlistees. NBER Work. Pap. No. 17161.



47. Field E, Glennerster R, Hussam R. 2011. Throwing the Baby out with the Drinking Water:

    Unintended Consequences of Arsenic Mitigation Efforts in Bangladesh. Wok. Pap. Dep.

    Econ., Harvard Univ.



48. Field E, Robles O, Torero M. 2009. Iodine Deficiency and Schooling Attainment in Tanza-

    nia. Am. Econ. J.:Appl. Econ. 1(4):140-69




                                             36
49. Floud R, Wachter KW, Gregory AS. 1990. Height, health, and history: Nutritional status

    in the United Kingdom, 1750-1980. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.



50. Fogel RW. 2004. The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700–2100. Cambridge:

    Cambridge University Press.



51. Foster A, Gutierrez E, Kumar N. 2009. Voluntary Compliance, Pollution Levels, and Infant

    Mortality in Mexico. Am. Econ. Rev.:Pap. & Proc. 99(2):191-97



52. Fung, Winnie. 2009. Early Childhood Malnutrition and Adult Obesity: Evidence from the

    1959-61 China Famine.


53. Fung, W. and Ha, W. 2010. "Intergenerational Effects of the 1959-61 China Famine." In

    Fuentes-Nieva and Seck (eds.), Risks, Shocks, and Human Development: On the Brink,

    Palgrave Macmillan, p.222-254.



54. Gorgens T, Xin M, Vaithianathan R. 2012. Stunting and selection effects of famine: A case

    study of the Great Chinese Famine. J. Dev. Econ. 97(1):99-111



55. Gowin EB. 1915. The Executive and His Control of Men. New York: Macmillan.



56. Haeffner LS, Barbieri MA, Rona RJ, Bettiol H, Silva AA. 2002. The relative strength of

    weight and length at birth in contrast to social factors as determinants of height at 18 years

    in Brazil. Ann. Hum. Biol. 29:627-40


                                              37
57. Haddad LJ, Bouis HE. 1991. The Impact of Nutritional Status on Agricultural Productivity:

    Wage Evidence from the Philippines. Oxford B. Econ. Stat. 53:45-68



58. Hanna R, Duflo E, Greenstone M. 2012. Up in Smoke: The Influence of Household Behav-

    ior on the Long-Run Impact of Improved Cooking Stoves. Tech. Rep., MIT Dept. Econ.

    Work. Pap. No. 12-10.



59. Hensley WE. 1993. Height as a Measure of Success in Academe. Psychol.: J. Hum. Behav.

    30: 40-46



60. Hoddinott J, Maluccio JA, Behrman JR, Flores R, Martorell R. 2008. Effect of a nutrition

    intervention during early childhood on economic productivity in Guatemalan adults. Lan-

    cet 371(9610):411-16



61. Huang W, Lei X, Ridder G, Strauss J, Zhao Y. 2012. Health, Height, Height Shrinkage and

    SES at Older Ages: Evidence from China. Tech. Rep., IZA DP No. 6489.



62. Jablonka E, Lamb MJ. 2005. Evolution in Four Dimensions: Genetic, Epigenetic, Behav-

    ioral, and Symbolic Variation in the History of Life. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.



63. Jayachandran S. 2009. Air Quality and Early-Life Mortality Evidence from Indonesia's

    Wildfires. J. Hum. Resour. 44(4):916-54




                                              38
64. Kelly E. 2009. The Scourge of Asian Flu: In utero Exposure to Pandemic Influenza and the

    Development of a Cohort of British Children. Institute for Fiscal Studies Work. Pap. No.

    W09/17.



65. Klein RE, HE Freeman, Kagan J, Yarbrough C, Habicht JP. 1972. Is big smart? The rela-

    tion of growth to cognition. J. Health Soc. Behav.13:219-25.



66. Kuh D, Wadsworth MEJ. 1989. Parental height, childhood environment, and subsequent

    height in a national birth cohort. Int. J. Epidemiol. 18:663-68.



67. Lam DA, Miron JA. 1994. Global Patterns of Seasonal Variation in Human Fertility. Ann.

    NY Ac. Sci. 209(1):9-28.



68. Lin MJ, Liu E. 2011. Does In utero Exposure to Illness Matter? The 1918 Influenza Epi-

    demic in Taiwan as a Natural Experiment. Work. Pap., Dept. Econ., Univ. Houston.



69. Linnemayr S, Alderman H. 2011. Almost Random: Evaluating a Large-Scale Randomized

    Nutrition Program in the Presence of Crossover. J. Dev. Econ. 96(1):106-14.



70. León G. 2010. Civil Conflict and Human Capital Accumulation: The Long Term Effects of

    Political Violence in Peru. BREAD Work. Pap. No. 256.




                                               39
71. Liu H, Mroz T, Adair L. 2009. Parental Compensatory Behaviors and Early Child Health

    Outcomes in Cebu, Philippines. J. Dev. Econ. 90(2):209-30.



72. Loh ES. 1993. The Economic Effects of Physical Appearance. Soc. Sci. Quart. 74:420-38.



73. Lucas A. 2010. Malaria Eradication and Educational Attainment: Evidence from Paraguay

    and Sri Lanka. Am. Econ. J.:Appl. Econ. 2:46-71.



74. Lumey LH, Stein AD, Susser E. 2011. Prenatal Famine and Adult Health. Annu Rev Publ

    Health, 32:237-62.



75. Lundborg P, Nystedt P, Rooth DO. 2009. The Height Premium in Earnings: The Role of

    Cognitive Ability and Physical Strength. IZA Work. Pap. 4266.



76. Maccini S, Yang D. 2009. Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic Conse-

    quences of Early-Life Rainfall. Am. Econ. Rev. 99(3):1006-26.



77. MacDonell WR. 1902. On criminal anthropometry and the identification of criminals.

    Biometrika 1(2):177–227.



78. Magnusson PKE, Rasmussen F, Gyllensten UB. 2006. Height at Age 18 Years is a Strong

    Predictor of Attained Education Later in Life: Cohort Study of Over 950 000 Swedish Men.

    Int. J. Epidemiol 35:658-63.




                                            40
79. Maluccio J, Hoddinott J, Behrman J, Martorell R, Quisumbing A, Stein A. 2009. The

    Impact of Nutrition during Early Childhood on Education among Guatemalan Adults.

    Econ. J. 119:734-63.



80. Mansour H, Rees DI. 2012. Armed conflict and birthweight: Evidence from the al-Aqsa

    Intifada. J. Dev. Econ. 99(1):190-99.



81. Maurer J. 2010. Height, Education and Cognitive Function at Older Ages: International

    Evidence from Latin America and the Caribbean. Econ. Hum. Biol. 8(2):168-76.



82. McEniry M, Palloni A. 2010. Early Life Exposures and the Occurrence and Timing of

    Heart Disease among the Older Adult Puerto Rican Population. Demography 47(1):23-43.



83. Meng X, Qian N. 2009. The Long Term Consequences of Famine on Survivors: Evidence

    from China's Great Famine. NBER Work Pap 14917.



84. Miguel E, Kremer M. 2004. Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the

    Presence of Treatment Externalities. Econometrica 72(1):159-217.



85. Nelson RE. 2010. Testing the Fetal Origins Hypothesis in a Developing Country: Evidence

    from the 1918 Influenza Pandemic. Health Econ. 19(10):1181-92.




                                            41
86. Nilsson JP. 2009. The Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood Lead Exposure: Evidence

    from the Phase-out of Leaded Gasoline. Institute for Labour Market Policy Evaluation

    (IFAU) Work. Pap.




87. Ozier O. 2011. Exploiting Externalities to Estimate the Long-Term Effects of Early Child-

    hood Deworming. Tech. Rep., The World Bank.



88. Pathania V. 2007. The Long Run Impact of Drought at Birth on Height of Women in Rural

    India. Work. Pap., UC Berkeley.



89. Pearson K. 1906. On the Relationship of Intelligence to Size and Shape of Head, and to

    other Physical and Mental Characters. Biometrika 5:105-46.



90. Persico N, Postlewaite A, Silverman D. 2004. The Effect of Adolescent Experience on

    Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height. J. Polit. Econ. 112:1019-53.



91. Pietiläinen KH, Kaprio J, Räsänen M, Winter T, Rissanen A, Rose RJ. 2001. Tracking of

    Body Size from Birth to Late Adolescence: Contributions of Birth Length, Birth Weight,

    Duration of Gestation, Parents' Body Size, and Twinship. Am. J. Epidemiol. 154(1):21-9.



92. Pitt MM, Rosenzweig MR, Hassan N. 2013. Human Capital Investment and the Gender

    Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy. Am. Econ. Rev., in press.




                                            42
93. Porter WT. 1892. The physical basis of precocity and dullness. Transactions of the Acade-

    my of Sciences of St. Louis, 6(7):161–81. St Louis: s.n. 1893.


94. Rocha, Rudi and Rodrigo Soares. 2011. Early Life Health and Educational Performance:

    Evidence from Rainfall Fluctuations in the Brazilian Northeast. Presented at Health and

    Human Capital workshop, ZEW Mannheim, 21/22 July.



95. Rosenzweig M, Zhang J. 2009. Do Population Control Policies Induce More Human Capi-

    tal Investment? Twins, Birth Weight and China's "One-Child" Policy. The Rev. Econ. Stud.

    76:1149-74.



96. Richards M, Hardy R, Kuh D, Wadsworth MEJ. 2002. Birthweight, Postnatal Growth and

    Cognitive Function in a National U.K. Birth Cohort. Int. J. Epidemiol. 31:342-48.



97. Schick A, Steckel RH. 2010. Height as a Proxy for Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Ability.

    NBER Work. Pap. No. 16570.



98. Schultz TP. 2002. Wage Gains Associated with Height as a Form of Health Human Capital.

    AEA Pap. Proc. 92 (2):349-53.



99. Shay T. 1994. The Level of Living in Japan 1885-1938. In Stature, Living Standards, and

    Economic Development, ed. J. Komlos. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                             43
100. Silventoinen K, Kaprio J, Lahelma E. 2000. Genetic and Environmental Contributions to

    the Association between Body Height and Educational Attainment: A Study of Adult Finn-

    ish Twins. Behavior Genetics 30(6):477-85.



101. Sørensen HT, Sabroe S, Rothman KJ, Gillman M, Steffensen FH, Fischer P, Serensen TIA.

    1999. Birth Weight and Length as Predictors for Adult Height. Am. J. Epidemiol.

    149(8):726-29.



102. Sotomayor O. 2012. Fetal and infant origins of diabetes and ill health: Evidence from

    Puerto Rico's 1928 and 1932 hurricanes. Econ. Hum. Biol.



103. St. Clair D, Xu M, Wang P, Yu Y, Fang Y, Zhang F, Zheng X, Gu N, Feng G, Sham P, He

    L. 2005. Rates of Adult Schizophrenia Following Prenatal Exposure to the Chinese Famine

    of 1959-1961. J. Am. Medical Association 294(5):557-62.



104. Spears, D. 2012. Height and Cognitive Achievement among Indian children. Econ. Hum.

    Biol. 10(2):210-219.



105. Steckel RH. 1995. Stature and standard of living. J. Econ. Lit. 33:1903–40.



106. Steckel RH. 2008. Biological Measures of the Standard of Living. J. Econ. Perspect.

    22(1): 129–52.




                                              44
107. Strauss J, Thomas D. 1998. Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development. J. Econ. Lit.

    36(2): 766-817.



108. Sundet JM, Tambs K, Harris JR, Magnus P, Torjussen TM. 2005. Resolving the Genetic

    and Environmental Sources of the Correlation between Height and Intelligence: A Study of

    Nearly 2600 Norwegian Male Twin Pairs. Twin Res. Hum. Genet. 7:1–5.



109. Tanner JM. 1979. A Concise History of Growth Studies from Buffon to Boas. In Human

    Growth, Volume 3: Neurobiology and Nutrition, ed. F Falkner, JM. Tanner, pp. 515-93.

    New York: Springer.


110. Thomas D. 1994. Like Father, Like Son; Like Mother, Like Daughter. J. Hum. Resour.

    29:950-89.



111. Thomas D, Strauss J. 1997. Health and Wages: Evidence on Men and Women in Urban

    Brazil. J. Econometrics. 77(1):159-85.



112. TuvemoT, Jonsson B, Persson I. 1999. Intellectual and Physical Performance and Morbidi-

    ty in Relation to Height in a Cohort of 18-Year-Old Swedish Conscripts. Horm. Res.

    52:186-91.



113. Umana-Aponte M. 2011. Long-term effects of a nutritional shock: the 1980 famine of

    Karamoja, Uganda. Tech. Rep., CMPO WP 11/258.




                                             45
114. UNAIDS, UNICEF, USAID. 2004. Children on the Brink 2004: A Joint Report of New

    Orphan Estimates. New York: United Nations Press.



115. Vogl T. 2012. Height, Skills, and Labor Market Outcomes in Mexico. Dept. Econ., Prince-

    ton University.



116. Wang X, Ding H, Ryan L, Xu X. 1997. Association between Air Pollution and Low Birth

    Weight: A Community-Based Study. Environ. Health Perspect. 105(5):514-20



117. Weil DN. 2007. Accounting for the effect of health on economic growth. Q. J. Econ.

    122(3): 1265-306



118. Wilson PR. 1968. Perceptual Distortion of Height as a Function of Ascribed Academic

    Status. J. Soc. Psychol. 74:97-102



119. World Bank. 2006. Water Quality Management Policy and Institutional Considerations.

    World Bank discussion paper.



120. World Health Organization. 2011. Global HIV/AIDS Response: Epidemic Update and

    Health Sector Progress Towards Universal Access: Progress Report 2011. Geneva: WHO

    Press.




                                            46
121. Young TJ, French LA. 1996. Height and Perceived Competence of U.S. Presidents. Per-

    cept. Motor Skill. 82:1002




                                          47
Table 1: Young Adult Height and Birth Weight in Britain and the Philippines
                                          Britain            Philippines           p-value of diff.
                                            (1)                 (2)                      (3)

Coef. (S.E.) from regression of...
Height on birth weight                  3.47 (0.12)         3.93 (0.29)                0.143
Birth weight on height                 0.020 (0.0007)     0.023 (0.0018)               0.051


Inverse of the product of the coefs.    14.53 (0.98)       10.84 (1.48)                0.038


Mean [S.D.] of…
Birth weight (kg)                       3.33 [0.52]         3.00 [0.44]               < 0.001
Height (cm)                            169.82 [6.83]       157.11 [5.64]              < 0.001


Age at height measurement                   23                 20-22


Sample size                               11,423               1,904
 Note: All regressions control for gender; the means and standard deviations are standardized for
a sex ratio of one. All standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity; the standard error for the
inverse of the product of the coefficients is computed using the delta method. The British data
are from the National Child Development Study, which followed all British children born in a
single week of 1958. The Philippine data are from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition
Survey, which followed a representative sample of children born in Metropolitan Cebu in 1983-
4. In the Filipino data, birth weight was actually measured at the age of three days; 88 percent
of height measurements occurred at age 21.




                                                    47
                   Table 2: Associations of Height and Other Adult Outcomes
Study                                 Methods               Data/Size                            Outcomes
                               Look at relationship                               In OLS, find a stat. sig. effect of adult
Author: Behrman                                                INCAP
                             between cognitive and                               height and fat-free body mass on wages,
et al. (2009)                                             longitudinal data
                              health human capital                             but this disappears in the IV specifications.
Country: Guatemala                                        on children born
                                 and labor market                               Similar results for annual hours and total
Shock: Randomly                                           from 1962- 1977
                            outcomes. OLS and IV:                                 income. Only adult cognitive skills are
assigned high                                            from a nutritional
                            instrument adult human                              stat. sig. when both health and cognitive
protein-energy drink and                                  supplementation
                              capital with variables                               human capital measures are treated as
placebo, two small and                                  trial. Children were
                              reflecting prices and                             endogenous; years of schooling and adult
two large villages, 1969-                                  followed up in
                             policies, and individual                           reading comprehension z-scores are stat.
1977. Earthquake, 1976.                                  2002-04. 962 obs.
                            and family endowments.                                       sig. in both OLS and IV.
                               Use upper arm and
                                 lower leg length                               Shrinkage and socio-economic variables
                                                         China Health and
Author: Huang et al.             measurements to                                  such as schooling and household per
                                                            Retirement
(2012)                      estimate a pre-shrinkage                                capita expenditure are negatively
                                                        Longitudinal Study.
Country: China                 height function and                              correlated. Measured height is positively
                                                          Sample is 2,609
Shock: No shock;              predict pre-shrinkage                            and significantly associated with all of the
                                                         people 45-49 (the
associations between           heights for an older                             cognition measures. Height shrinkage is
                                                         “young” sample)
height shrinkage and             population. Use                                strongly negatively correlated with these
                                                         and 5,868 people
SES variables are           estimated pre-shrinkage                               measures, suggesting that part of the
                                                           60+ (the “old”
explored.                   height and shrinkage as                             association between measured height and
                                                         sample) in 2011.
                                covariates in OLS                              cognition occurs through height shrinkage.
                                    regressions.
Author: Maurer               Sex specific OLS/Tobit
                                                                                   Find a stat. sig. positive association
(2010)                          or 2SLS/IV-Tobit,       Survey on Health,
                                                                                 between height and later-life cognitive
Country: Barbados,           depending on whether         Well-being and
                                                                                  function; larger for women than men.
Mexico, Cuba, Uruguay,       height is instrumented       Aging in Latin
Chile and Brazil                                                               Significance is lost for men when height is
                             with knee height. Tobit     America and the
Shock: No shock;                                                               instrumented, suggesting that for men this
                               for potential ceiling    Caribbean in 2000,
relationship between                                                               association is partly due to mid- and
                               effects (scores only       representative
cognitive function in                                                           later-life circumstances. Adding controls
                                measure cognitive        urban samples of
later life and height,                                                         for childhood conditions doesn’t affect the
                              function if below the     persons aged 60+,
early-life conditions and                                                            height coefﬁcients, but including
                            maximum, otherwise are          7894 obs.
education.                                                                       education does weaken the association.
                                  a lower bound).
                                                                                An 1 cm increase in height leads to wage
                              OLS/logit of hourly        Mexican Family
                                                                                 gains of 2.1% (2.9%) for men (women).
Author: Vogl (2012)         earnings and occupation       Life Survey, a
                                                                                  Adding cognitive test scores leads to a
Country: Mexico                on height, look at           nationally
                                                                                17% decrease in the earnings premium to
Shock: No shock; looks       mechanisms by adding         representative
                                                                                   taller workers, but about half of the
at the skill returns          health and childhood       household survey
                                                                               premium can be attributed to these workers
underlying the labor         covariates, education      with waves in 2002
                                                                                  being more educated or having higher
market height premium.         and cognitive test         and 2005. Use
                                                                                paying jobs (with greater intelligence and
                                     scores.            individuals 25-65.
                                                                                       lower strength requirements).


                                                           48
                  Table 3: Effects of Childhood Nutrition on Adult Outcomes
Study                           Methods                   Data/Size                         Outcomes
                                                     Michigan Natality
                                                       Files 1989-06,          In Uganda, Muslims in utero during
Author: Almond and           OLS: percent of
                                                        Uganda 2002            Ramadan are 22% more likely to be
Mazumder (2011)          pregnancy overlapping
                                                       census (80,000         disabled and 2.6% less likely to own a
Country: US, Iraq,       with Ramadan on future
                                                     obs., aged 20-80),     home. There is no effect on schooling. In
Uganda                    disability status, home
                                                      Iraq 1997 census       Iraq, Muslims in utero during Ramadan
Shock: Days of             ownership, years of
                                                      (250,000 people       are 23% more likely to be disabled, 1.4%
Ramadan exposure in      schooling, employment
                                                     born from 1958-77     less likely to own their own home, and less
utero                         and earnings.
                                                     who were 20-39 in                likely to be employed.
                                                            1997)
                                                                           Distribution of iodine supplements results
                            Examine impact of                                   in large and stat. sig. increase in
Author: Field et al.         prenatal iodine                                  progression through school; children
                                                      2000 Tanzanian
(2009)                     supplementation on                              treated in utero attain 0.35-0.56 years of
                                                     Household Budget
Country: Tanzania        schooling. District-level                          additional schooling relative to siblings
                                                      Survey, children
Shock: Iodized oil       fixed effects regression,                             and older and younger peers. Girls
                                                     aged 10-13; 1395
capsule distribution      exploiting variation in                             consistently benefit more than boys;
                                                           obs.
program, 1986-95.         program activity (gaps                              consistent with the greater cognitive
                               and delays).                                 sensitivity of female fetuses to maternal
                                                                                       thyroid deprivation.
Author: Hoddinott                                    Data from 60% of
et al. (2008)                                         the children (0-7    Exposure to atole before, but not after, age
Country: Guatemala           OLS; look at the           years) in the         3 was associated with higher hourly
Shock: Randomly            relationship between       original nutrition    wages, but only for men. If exposed to
assigned high              exposure to atole or          intervention       atole from 0-2 years, wages went up by
protein-energy drink      fresco at specific ages    program, followed     US$0.67 per hour (a 46% increase). Hours
(atole) and placebo       between 0-7 years and       up between 2002        worked were less and annual incomes
(fresco), two small        economic variables.         and 2004. 1424       were greater for those exposed to atole
villages and two large                                  people, aged               from 0-2, but not stat. sig.
villages, 1969-1977.                                        25–42.
Author: Linnemayr and
                          Estimate the effect of
Alderman (2011)
                         the package of services                            The impact of planned treatment status on
Country: Senegal
                            on weight-for-age          Data from the       z-scores is insignificant, as is the impact of
Shock: Nutrition
                         z-scores by OLS, 2SLS        program’s two        the instrumented intervention; both show a
Enhancement Program;
                            (instrument actual        survey rounds,               positive, stat. sig. impact on
vitamin A and
                           receipt with planned       2004 and 2006;        weight-for-age z-scores for children who
deworming for children
                         treatment status), and a    children under 5       benefited from the program in utero. The
6-59 months, iron for
                              combination of         years old. 10,127     TOT estimates show z-scores improved by
pregnant women,
                              diff-in-diff and              obs.            0.1, while the propensity score matching
bednets, breastfeeding
                             propensity score                                estimate shows a larger impact of 0.27.
promotion, cooking
                                 matching.
workshops; 2004-2006.



                                                        49
                              Impact of early life                               Higher early life rainfall has a positive
                                                         Global Historical
Author: Maccini and            rainfall on health,                                effect on girls, but not boys. For adult
                                                           Climatology
Yang (2009)                 schooling and SES. IV                                 women, 20% higher rainfall in year of
                                                             Network;
Country: Indonesia         regression: instrument is                             birth leads to 0.57 cm of greater height,
                                                        Indonesian Family
Shock: Rainfall during      rainfall measured at the                           3.8 pct points less likely to self report poor
                                                         Life Survey from
year of birth, 1953-74      2nd-5th closest rainfall                             health, 0.22 more yrs of schooling and
                                                         2000, 8883 obs.
                                     stations.                                      0.12 sds higher on an asset index.
                                                         Longitudinal data;
                               Diff-in-diff: study
Author: Maluccio et al.                                   children of 0-7      Find impact of exposure to the nutritional
                             impact on educational
(2009)                                                   years at any point     intervention from 0-36 months 25 years
                           outcomes of nutrition by
Country: Guatemala                                      during intervention.    after it ended. Atole intervention at 0-36
                            contrasting individuals
Shock: Randomly                                          Follow up rounds      months increases schooling for women by
                              exposed at different
assigned high                                              in 1988-9 and                1.2 grades (.33 sd), reading
                            periods of their lives in
protein-energy drink                                      2002-4, end up         comprehension by 0.28 sd for men and
                               atole versus fresco
(atole) and placebo                                       with 1,471 obs.      women (with a stronger effect for women),
                                villages. 2SLS;
(fresco), two small                                          Institute of       cognitive ability by 0.24 sd for men and
                            instrument supplement
villages and two large                                  Nutrition of Central     women. The 2SLS point estimates are
                            intake with exposure to
villages, 1969-1977.                                        America and                 approximately 2x the OLS.
                                  intervention.
                                                              Panama.
                                                                                 Those fully exposed (born in 4th quarter)
Author: McEniry and                                                              to poor nutrition and infectious diseases
                             Kaplan-Meier hazard
Palloni (2010)                                             Puerto Rican             during late gestation had the highest
                            estimates, age of onset
Country: Puerto Rico                                      Elderly: Health       prevalence of heart disease (23%). Those
                           of heart disease by level
Shock: Rural                                            Conditions; survey           with partial exposure had a lower
                           of exposure during late
population’s exposure to                                of rural population       prevalence (18%, 15%), and unexposed
                            gestation; Cox and log
poor nutrition / disease                                   60+ and their           individuals (2nd quarter birth) had the
                              logistic regression
during pregnancy from                                    spouses, in 2003      lowest (11%). The risk of developing heart
                            models to estimate the
seasonality in sugar                                    and 2006-7, 1438        disease if fully exposed was twice as high
                             effect of exposure on
cane harvests; late                                             obs.               as for the unexposed at later ages. No
                             heart disease timing.
1920s to early 1940s                                                            impact on timing of onset or for the urban
                                                                                                 population.
                                                                                Drought at birth associated with a 0.3 cm
Author: Pathania                                        Historical rainfall      drop in the height of upper caste women
(2007)                     OLS of effect of various     data and height of          but a 0.4 cm gain in the height of the
Country: India              drought measures on           ever-married          Scheduled Tribes, a low caste group. The
Shock: Effects of            height, with various         women 15-49               effects are mostly driven by in utero
drought shocks at birth    fixed effects and linear     (National Fertility      drought exposure and are consistent with
on height of rural         time trends, depending          and Health            with stronger selection effects for lower
women in India,              on the specification.       Survey-2, 1998-            castes. Don’t find a caste gradient in
1950-1999                                               2000). 60,641 obs.         height outcomes for more recent birth
                                                                                                   cohorts.




                                                           50
           Table 4: Effects of Childhood Famine Exposure on Adult Outcomes
Study                           Methods                 Data/Size                            Outcomes
                           Impact of famine in                               Women (men) in most exposed famine
                           utero on outcomes.                                  cohorts 7.5% (9%) more likely to be
                          Aggregate weighted         1% sample of the        illiterate, 3% (5.9%) more likely not to
Author: Almond et al.
                        death rate in year/month       2000 Chinese         work, and 13% (12%) more likely to be
(2010)
                             proxy for famine        Census and Hong       disabled. Men were 6.5% less likely to be
Country: China
                        intensity. Also compare        Kong natality          married and 8.2% more likely to have
Shock: 1959–1961
                        mainland born (exposed        micro data from      never married. Comparison group is three
famine
                          to famine) and Hong           1984-2004.           years pre- and post-famine (1956-1978
                          Kong born (control)                               and 1962-1964); also between mainland
                                 mothers.                                      China and Hong Kong born women.
                        Diff-in-Diff of famine’s
                                                                            Statistically significant decrease in height
                        impact on height, labor      China Health and
                                                                             of 3.03 cm for those born/conceived in
Author: Chen and           supply and income.        Nutrition Survey,
                                                                            famine. Some evidence for decr. in hours
Zhou (2007)               Interact year of birth     1991. Sample is
                                                                              worked and income. The comparison
Country: China          with excess death rate in     rural population
                                                                            group is made up of people born after the
Shock: 1959-61 famine      region (as proxy for     born 1954-67, 1953
                                                                           famine (1963-1969), and those born before
                            severity), quantile              obs.
                                                                                            (1954-1958).
                               regressions.
                                                                              Compare four cohorts: “born before”
                                                                           (oldest cohort, aged 37-72 mo. in famine),
                                                     479 young adults      “just before” (aged 12-36 mo. in famine),
                         Exposure to famine in       (17–25) from the       “born during” (born and in-utero during
Author: Dercon and         utero and in early       sixth round of the         famine), and “born after” (youngest
Porter (2010)           childhood on height and       Ethiopian Rural        cohort; born Sept. 1985 to Sept. 1987).
Country: Ethiopia            primary school         Household Survey          People exposed to famine in utero or
Shock: 1984 famine         completion. OLS:         in 2004, with data      within the first 36 months of life are 3.9
                             Household FE.             from previous       cm shorter. Children exposed at 2-3 years
                                                          rounds.          of age are 2% less likely to finish primary
                                                                           school. No effects on schooling for cohort
                                                                                        exposed in utero.
                                                     China Health and
                        Effect of being exposed                             Early childhood famine exposure leads
                                                     Nutrition Survey
                         to the famine as infants                            women to be 14.6% more likely to be
Author: Fung (2009)                                  (in 1989, 91, 93,
                             on adult BMI and                               overweight and 5.3% more likely to be
Country: China                                      97, 00, 04, and 06),
                         obesity. GLS with RE;                              obese. No effects for men. Comparison
Shock: 1959–1961                                     rural households
                            excess mortality in                               group is pre-famine (those born in
famine                                              with births within 5
                        province/year as a proxy                           1954-58) and post-famine (born 1962-66)
                                                      years of 1959,
                           for famine intensity.                                           cohorts.
                                                        11,098 obs.




                                                       51
                                                                                In the rural population, for those that were
                            If famine survivors have                             under age 5 during the famine, find large
                            greater average potential                                and stat. sig. stunting. For mothers
                              height, their children                                  (fathers), the estimated effects are
Author: Gorgens et al.
                                 will be taller than    First four waves of     1.49-2.22 cm (1.47-1.80 cm). Estimates of
(2012)
                               non-famine cohorts.       the China Health          selection (the famine coefﬁcient in the
Country: China
                             Create an econometric         and Nutrition            OLS regression minus the estimated
Shock: 1959–1961
                                   model of the            Survey, 2115               stunting) for mothers (fathers) are
famine; use the fact that
                            relationship between the    families in the rural    1.92-2.64 cm (0.85-1.18 cm). Results for
children inherit their
                              height of parents and      sample and 1080        the older famine cohort (born 1948-1956)
parents’ genotype
                            children; use children of     families in the       and the urban sample are weaker, but also
(selection) but not
                                famine and control         urban sample.              show stunting and positive height
phenotype (stunting)
                                cohorts to sort out                              selection. The control group is deﬁned as
                            stunting from selection.                               those born up to 10 years immediately
                                 OLS/family FE.                                   before (1938 to 1947) and after (1962 to
                                                                                           1971) the famine cohorts.
                             Quantile analysis using
                               cross sectional and                                Exposure to famine had a larger adverse
                               cohort variation in        1990 Population            impact at higher percentiles; when
                                famine exposure,            Census, 1989          comparing individuals exposed and not
                            measured as the average       China Health and          exposed to famine, those in the 90th
                            county-level cohort size    Nutritional Survey,        percentile are relatively worse off than
Author: Meng and            of survivors born during         1997 China          those in the 10th percentile. For the early
Qian (2006)                 the famine. Estimate the         Agricultural         childhood cohort, exposure on average
Country: China              effect of exposure on the    Census, the FAO’s      decreased height by 1.6% (2.7 cm), weight
Shock: 1959-61 famine         90th percentile of the    GAEZ data on crop          by 5% (3.03 kg), weight for height by
                             outcome distributions.      suitability. Sample     1.2%, (0.004 kg/cm), and labor supply by
                                2SLS: instrument        is county-birth year      13.9% (12.7 hours per week). Compare
                                exposure with the         cells for cohorts     those born during or just before the famine
                               interaction of non-        born 1943-1966.        with those born after or who were too old
                            famine grain production                                             to be affected.
                                  and birth year.
                                                        All psychiatric case      Prenatal and infant exposure to famine
                                                              records           leads to a 2-fold increase in the likelihood
Author: St.Clair et al.     Effect of famine in utero
                                                         (1971-2001) from           of developing adult schizophrenia.
(2005)                       and in early childhood
                                                        the Wuhu region of       Compare rates among those born before,
Country: China                  on schizophrenia.
                                                           Anhui. From           during, and after the famine; 1956-1958
Shock: 1959–1961             Adjusted relative risk
                                                         191-779 cases per      and 1963-1965 were defined as unexposed
famine                        ratios across cohorts.
                                                          year for people        years. Findings replicate the results from
                                                        born from 1956-65.                      Dutch data.




                                                           52
                                                                        Cohort exposed to famine in utero earned
                       OLS/probit of effect of      1991 and 2002       0.364 fewer years of schooling, was 4.2%
                      famine in utero, in early   Uganda Population    less likely to complete primary school, and
Author:                childhood and famine          and Housing         was 3.1% less likely to be literate. With
Umana-Aponte (2011)     intensity on years of       Censuses from        family FE children exposed to famine in
Country: Uganda        schooling and literacy.    IPUMS-I, 702,233     utero were 7-10% less likely to ever attend
Shock: 1980 famine     Different combinations      and 302,833 obs.,    school. The control group are the cohorts
                            of FE across            Ugandan 2006           surrounding the those exposed to the
                           specifications.        DHS, 10,743 obs.         famine, or who were born outside the
                                                                                      a�ected region.




                                                     53
            Table 5: Effects of Childhood Disease Exposure on Adult Outcomes
Study                             Methods                 Data/Size                          Outcomes
                           Calibrate a version of                             Deworming increased schooling by 0.3
Author: Baird et al.
                           the Grossman (1972)        Data from Miguel       years and test scores by 0.112 sd, but had
(2011)
                                model, where          and Kremer 2004,          no effect on grade completion; those
Country: Kenya
                           investments in health       follow up with        treated also report being in better health.
Shock: Primary
                               increase future          participants a      In the full sample, hours worked increased
Schooling Deworming
                          endowments of healthy         decade later.          by 12%; for those working for wages,
Project; 1998-2009
                                     time.                                        hours worked increased by 20%
                          Compare labor market                              The effect on adult income per probability
                                                        For US, Mexico
                           outcomes of children                              of childhood infection (the reduced-form
Author: Bleakley                                           and Brazil
                           born well before and                              difference divided by the pre-eradication
(2010)                                                    (Colombia),
                            just after eradication                            malaria infection rate): for the US, 0.47
Country: US, Brazil,                                   IPUMS censuses,
                           campaigns in regions                              and 0.60 (occupational income score and
Colombia, and Mexico                                  1960-00 (1973-93),
                                with different                                Ducan Index); for Brazil, 0.59 and 0.45
Shock: DDT spraying                                    males 25-55, born
                           pre-treatment malaria                            (log total income and log earned income);
in the 1950s (1920s for                               1905-75 (1918-68);
                           rates. OLS and 2SLS                                 for Colombia, 0.45 (industrial income
the US)                                               various sources for
                           with temperature and                              score); and for Mexico, 0.41 (log earned
                                                         malaria data.
                          altitude as instruments.                                            income).
                                                       National Sample
                          Compare log household                             No robust evidence of an effect of malaria
                                                       Survey in 1987,
                             monthly per capita                              eradication on human capital attainment.
Author: Cutler et al.                                 men (111,218 obs.)
                            expenditure for those                            Assuming malaria levels were reduced to
(2010)                                                    and women
                          born before and after the                          zero after the campaign, a 40 percentage
Country: India                                          (107,551 obs.)
                          eradication campaign, in                          point reduction in the spleen rate (as in the
Shock: DDT spraying                                      aged 20- 60;
                          areas with different pre-                         most malarious states) is associated with a
campaigns, 1950s and                                      government
                              treatment malaria                             2 percent increase in per capita household
60s                                                     information on
                          prevalence. District and                          expenditure for treated men. No impact on
                                                         1948 malaria
                                  cohort FE.                                                  women.
                                                          endemicity.
                                                         International
                              Look at effect of
                                                           Christelijk        School participation increased by 7 pct.
                           program on health and
Author: Miguel and                                    Steunfonds Africa      pts. in treatment schools. The proportion
                            education outcomes.
Kremer (2004)                                         gave pupil / school   of pupils with moderate/heavy infection is
                           Estimate cross-school
Country: Kenya                                         questionnaires in        25 pct. pts. lower in treated schools,
                           treatment externalities
Shock: Primary                                          1998 and 1999.      strongly stat. sig. This is decomposed into
                          by including the number
Schooling Deworming                                     Parasitological     a 12 pct. pt. reduction from within-school
                             of pupils in primary
Project; school-based                                    survey by the        externalities and a 14 pct. pt. reduction
                            schools within 3 km
mass treatment with                                   Kenya Ministry of      from direct effects of deworming. Cross
                           from each school each
deworming drugs that                                  Health. 75 schools    school externalities: each additional 1000
                          year, how many of them
were randomly phased                                       with total        attending a treated school within 3 (3-6)
                          were treated. Also try to
into schools, 1998-99                                    enrollment of         km is associated with 26 (14) pct. pts.
                           back out within-school
                                                       30,000 children,                   fewer infections.
                                 externalities.
                                                           ages 6-18.




                                                         54
                                                                                 A one pct. pt. increase in the maternal
                                                                                    mortality rate is associated with: a
                           Impact of influenza in     Dynamic Census of
                                                                                   decrease in the probability of being
                             utero on later life        the Taiwanese
                                                                                  literate, finishing elementary school,
                          outcomes. Use maternal       Population; 1980
                                                                              junior high school, senior high school, and
Author: Lin and Liu       mortality rate as a proxy     Population and
                                                                              college by respectively 2.9%, 3.6%, 2.1%,
(2011)                        for the degree of        Housing Census;
                                                                               1.6% and 0.6%; a decrease in cohort size
Country: Taiwan              exposure; regress          1989 Survey of
                                                                                of 1%; an increase in the probability of
Shock: 1918 influenza      outcomes on maternal       Health and Living
                                                                                having kidney disease, vertigo, tennitus,
pandemic                    mortality rate, infant       Status of the
                                                                               circulatory disease, thyroid problems, and
                            mortality rate, region       Elderly; 1927
                                                                                respiratory disease by 29%, 45%, 23%,
                            dummies, and linear       Health Statistics for
                                                                              27%, 53%, and 23%; a decrease in average
                                    trend.             School Students
                                                                                weight and height of students by 0.5 kg
                                                                                                 and 0.5 cm.
                             Compare education
                                                                               Large and stat. sig. increase in schooling
Author: Lucas (2010)        outcomes of women          Sri Lanka: 1987
                                                                              from malaria eradication, of 2-3 years for
Country: Paraguay and          born before/after      DHS, ever married
                                                                               worst off regions. A 10 percentage point
Sri Lanka                  eradication campaigns        women 18-49,
                                                                              decrease in the incidence rate in Sri Lanka
Shock: DDT interior       in regions with different       5,822 obs.;
                                                                              (Paraguay) leads to a stat. sig. increase in
residual spraying          pre-eradication malaria     Paraguay: 1990
                                                                                 schooling by 0.114 (0.118) years, in
malaria eradication           intensity; also use     DHS, ever married
                                                                              primary schooling by 0.051 (0.056) years,
campaigns, initiated in   percentage of years less    women 18-49, born
                                                                              in high literacy by 0.924 (2.083) pct. pts.,
1945 in Sri Lanka, 1967         than 18 before        1958 or later, 2,931
                                                                               and in minimal literacy by 0.846 (0.631)
in Paraguay               eradication. Region and            obs.
                                                                                                pct. pts.
                                  cohort FE.
                                                                               Those born in 1919 were 13% less likely
                                                      Pesquisa Mensal de
                            Regress education and                             to graduate from college, 5% less likely to
                                                        Emprego, 1986-
                           labor market outcomes                                 be employed, 8.6% less likely to have
                                                       1998; people born
Author: Nelson (2010)     on an indicator for being                             formal employment, and had 0.046 less
                                                      from 1912-1922 in
Country: Brazil            born in 1919 (or quarter                           years of schooling than those born in other
                                                         the six largest
Shock: 1918 Inﬂuenza       of birth), year of birth                           years from 1912-1922. For each outcome,
                                                          metro areas.
Pandemic                     and year of birth2 ;                               the coefﬁcient on the 1st or 2nd quarter
                                                         379,930 obs.,
                          logit for binary and OLS                             birth dummy (or both) is stat. sig. and in
                                                       41,315 with wage
                          for continuous variables.                            the direction that would support the Fetal
                                                              data
                                                                                          Origins Hypothesis.




                                                          55
                                                                         The deworming had large cognitive effects
                          Look for long-term
                                                      Height, weight,     on children who were less than one when
                        effects of deworming;
                                                       migration and           their communities received mass
Author: Ozier (2011)    estimate the impact on
                                                     cognitive data on        deworming treatment; equivalent to
Country: Kenya           younger children who
                                                     20,000+ children      0.5-0.8 years of schooling. Effects were
Shock: Primary         did not receive treatment
                                                   (from 8-14 in 2009     also estimated among children who were
Schooling Deworming        directly. Regress
                                                   or 9-15 in 2010) at    likely to have older siblings in school to
Project; 1998- 2010        various cognitive
                                                    the 73 deworming         receive the treatment directly; in this
                        outcomes on indicators
                                                      project schools.      subpopulation, effects are nearly 2x as
                        for age at deworming.
                                                                                             large.




                                                      56
              Table 6: Effects of Childhood War Exposure on Adult Outcomes
Study                           Methods                  Data/Size                          Outcomes
                          Diff-in-diff; look at                                 Children exposed to the Rwandan
                         whether children aged                                genocide earned 0.421 fewer years of
                         6-15 in 2000 (exposed        DHS for Rwanda,       schooling, and the effect was stronger for
Author: Akresh and                                                               males and those from non-poor
                         to the genocide) have         1992 and 2000;
de Walque (2008)                                                              households. The authors interpret the
                           lower educational          27,114 and 18,528
Country: Rwanda                                                             genocide as a negative shock that brought
                        attainment than similar          individuals
Shock: Rwandan                                                               all children to low levels of schooling,
                            children in 1992,        respectively, aged 6     disproportionately affecting boys and
genocide, 1994
                        relative to older cohorts           to 35           non-poor children, who previously had an
                        (16-35) with completed                                              advantage.
                               schooling.
                         Diff-in-diff across war                            The effect of war on height is stat. sig. for
                               exposure and                                 each age band; war-exposed girls aged 0-3
                          ethnicities; impact of                                 during the conflict had an average
                          “war” (months of war                                exposure of 17.5 mo. and, for average
Author: Akresh et al.                                  Nigerian DHS,
                        exposure interacted with                            exposure, experienced a decrease in adult
(2011)                                                 2003 and 2008;
                          exposed ethnicity) on                              height of 0.75 cm relative to unexposed
Country: Nigeria                                       13,407 women
                         height; control for war                             girls in the same cohort. Girls aged 4-12
Shock: Nigerian civil                                     born from
                        exposure and ethnicity-                               during the war showed similar effects.
war of 1967-1970                                         1954-1974.
                          specific linear trends,                            Effects were larger for girls aged 13-16,
                        and ethnicity, birth year,                          who suffered a height deficit of 4.53 cm ( 23
                          state and survey year                              the sample sd) from a mean exposure of
                                    FE.                                                       20.6 mo.
                            Diff-in-diff across       DHS of Rwanda
                         cohorts and country of      (2001 and 2005),       The genocide is associated with a decrease
                         birth; compare heights       all women aged        in height-for-age z-scores of 0.16-0.2, and
Author: Aguero and
                           in the treated group        6-40 in 1994.           an increase in the probability of being
Deolalikar (2012)
                            (Rwandan women,          Zimbabwe (1999          stunted by 6.9-7.3 pct. pts. The effect of
Country: Rwanda
                           under 21 in 1994) to        and 2005-06);          the shock decreases with age but is not
Shock: Rwandan
                        various controls (mainly     Kenya, Tanzania,          zero for older ages; stat. sig. impacts
genocide, 1994
                         older Rwandan women         Mozambique, and          found even for those aged 13-18 at the
                              and women in           Zambia DHS data.                  time of the genocide.
                                Zimbabwe)               27,910 obs.




                                                        57
                                                             Longitudinal
                             Look at impact of child
                                                             surveys in 3
                                  height on grade
                                                         resettlement areas.
Author: Alderman                attainment and age                             Exposure to civil war (drought) decreases
                                                            Surveyed 400
et al. (2006)                     starting school.                             child height-for-age z-score by -0.035 to
                                                            households in
Country: Zimbabwe               IV-Maternal fixed                                -0.049 (-0.576 to -0.729), statistically
                                                           1983-4, again in
Shock: Civil war (log        effects regression using                          significant. Maternal FE-IV regressions:
                                                         1987 and annually
of the number of days a       civil war and drought                             larger pre-school height associated with
                                                          from 1992-2001.
child was alive before              shocks as an                                 greater attained height in adolescence,
                                                             Data on 680
8/18/1980), two year        instrumental variable for                            number of grades attained, and (more
                                                          children 6 mo - 6
drought (1982-84).                early childhood                                   weakly) starting school younger.
                                                           yrs. at baseline,
                             nutritional status across
                                                            with 19 yrs. of
                                      siblings.
                                                              follow-up.
Author: Blattman and                                        Survey of War        Abduction leads to a substantial loss of
                               Look at impact of
Annan (2010)                                               Affected Youth,      education (0.78 years, an 11% decrease)
                            abduction on education,
Country: Uganda                                             741 boys born      and literacy (17% less likely to be literate).
                            labor market and health
Shock: Indiscriminate                                     between 1975 and      No impact on probability of employment,
                                outcomes. OLS,
abduction of children                                     1991 in Northern       but abductees are half as likely to be in
                            weighted least squares,
(as young as 5, mostly                                    Uganda, 462 were       skilled work. Wages are 22-36% lower.
                                treatment effect
10-15) to be soldiers for                                once with the LRA.        Psychological distress in those that
                             bounding for selective
the Lord’s Resistance                                       Conducted in        experienced the most violence (abducted
                              attrition (Lee 2005)
Army, late 1990s                                             2005-2006.                          or not).
                              Look at effect of the
                                                                                The average person exposed to violence
                               number of years of
                                                           2007 and 1993            attained 0.12-0.19 fewer years of
                             exposure to violence in
Author: Leon (2009)                                      censuses, and data    education; for each additional year of civil
                            each period of life (-2-3,
Country: Peru                                             on human rights      war exposure in early childhood, children
                              4-6, 7-12, 13-17) on
Shock: Peruvian civil                                    violations from the    acquired 0.07 fewer years of schooling.
                             educational attainment.
conflict, 1980s and                                      Peruvian Truth and    The results showed that children can catch
                            District and year of birth
1990s                                                      Reconciliation          up if they experience violence after
                               FE, and a province
                                                            Commission           starting their schooling, but if they are
                               specific cubic time
                                                                                   exposed earlier, the effect persists.
                                      trend.




                                                            58
