NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PREDATION, TAXATION, INVESTMENT, AND VIOLENCE:
EVIDENCE FROM THE PHILIPPINES
Eli Berman
Joseph Felter
Ethan Kapstein
Erin Troland
Working Paper 18375
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18375
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012
Previously circulated as "Predation, Economic Activity and Violence: Evidence from the Philippines."
We acknowledge the assistance of the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) and
the AFP National Development Support Command (NADESCOM), in the Philippines, of Katherine
Levy and Mitchell Downey at UC San Diego, and the comments of seminar participants at the Einaudi
Institute of Economic and Finance, the University of Warwick, the Department for International Development
(DFID), London, LUISS Guido Carli University, Rome, the International Food Policy Research Institute
(IFPRI), Addis Ababa, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), University
of Washington, Georgia Institute of Technology, and the International Agricultural Trade Research
Consortium, and those of our colleagues at UCSD, Stanford, and the Empirical Studies of Conflict
(ESOC) collaborative. This research was supported by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) through
Award N000141110735 at the National Bureau of Economic Research. It builds on research supported
by U.S. Department of Defense Minerva research initiative through the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research (AFOSR) under Award FA9550-09-1-0314. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations
in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect views of ONR or AFOSR.
All mistakes are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Eli Berman, Joseph Felter, Ethan Kapstein, and Erin Troland. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Predation, Taxation, Investment, and Violence: Evidence from the Philippines
Eli Berman, Joseph Felter, Ethan Kapstein, and Erin Troland
NBER Working Paper No. 18375
September 2012, Revised March 2015
JEL No. F52,F54,H41,H56,K42,N47,O1
ABSTRACT
The literature relating economic activity to political violence posits greedy rebels (Collier, 2000) but
not greedy governments. Could capturing tax revenue motivate governments to step up their counter
insurgency operations, just as extortion motivates rebel violence? Panel data on political violence in
the Philippines distinguish government from rebel attacks, which we link to private investment across
70 provinces. To formally explore these data we expand an established theory of asymmetric substate
conflict –the “information-centric” model, adding firms, investment, taxation and predation (i.e., extortionary
violence by rebels in response to investment) to the interplay of government, rebels and civilians, generating
testable implications. The data show that increases in investment predict increases in both government-initiated
attacks and rebel-initiated attacks. In the year following increased investment government attacks decrease.
In the context of our expanded model, these empirical results suggest that both rebels and governments
contest economic rents.
Eli Berman
Department of Economics, 508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
elib@ucsd.edu

Ethan Kapstein
McCain Institute for International Leadership
Arizona State University
1777 F St. NW
Washington, DC 20006
and NBER
Ethan.Kapstein@asu.edu

Joseph Felter
CISAC and Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Encina Hall, C222
Stanford CA 94305-6165
felter@hoover.stanford.edu

Erin Troland
University of California
San Diego Department of Economics
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
etroland@ucsd.edu

Introduction
In textbook models of economic growth and development, a powerful underlying assumption is that
market exchange takes place in the context of secure property rights and human rights.2 That
premise is at odds both with the actual experience of many developing countries and with recent
research. The 2011 World Development Report (WDR) counts a billion and a half people living in
countries affected by fragility, conflict or violence, and identifies organized violence as an
impediment to long-run economic growth.
The recent literature points out that violent conflict can influence a nation’s development
through many different channels, including the loss of human and physical capital, the shift in public
spending toward the military (away from social goods like education and health care), and the
weakening or destruction of political, social, and economic institutions, including property rights
(Blattman and Miguel 2010).3 Scholars and policy-makers have also argued that economic growth
and development can contribute to peace through a variety of mechanisms. 4 However, economic
activity could conversely invite rebel rent-seeking and predation (Grossman 1999; Collier 2000,
Nunn and Qian 2012). The question of whether economic development fuels or reduces rebellion is
of central importance to both the body of social science theory aimed at understanding the
development process and to public policies aimed at shoring up fragile states (Blattman and Miguel
2010; World Development Report 2011, Berman and Matanock, forthcoming).
2

Terms like “civil war” and “rebellion” generally do not appear in the leading textbooks on economic growth
(see, for example, Jones 2002). One of the best-selling texts on development economics devotes just one
paragraph to forms of political instability including inter-state and civil wars, coups d’etat, and rebellions
(Perkins et.al. 2013, 76).
3 The link between such institutions as property rights and long-run growth has been of particular concern to
economists since at least the pioneering work of Douglass North (1981). Svensson (1998), for example,
extended North’s research by modeling the effects of political instability on property rights and, in turn, on
investment rates. Gradstein (2004) argues that the enforcement of property rights and economic growth are
self-reinforcing. Building on this and related research, the WDR emphasizes the crucial role of improved
governance in securing people and property if growth is to be achieved (WDR 2011, 1).
4 Hanson, Iyengar, and Monten (2011), for example, suggest that job creation programs can suppress
insurgencies by raising the opportunity costs of fighting, while counterinsurgency expert David Kilcullen has
recently asserted that it is “development…by civilian agencies” which “will ultimately win the war” (Kilcullen
2010, 32). While most development agencies do not have an explicit mandate to combat violence,
governments often rely on the tools of economic development to support an objective of “winning the hearts
and minds” of local populations, as has recently been the case in both Afghanistan and Iraq. Since the end of
the Second World War, the United States has assisted allies in major insurgency campaigns in Vietnam, Iraq,
and Afghanistan, and less intensive conflicts in Central America, Somalia, and parts of the Middle East. Other
countries have also fought these types of wars, including Britain (in Aden, Cyprus, Kenya and Malaya), France
(in Algeria and Indochina), and the Philippines (throughout its island chain).

1

This article explores the relationship between economic investment and violent civil conflict
by developing a model of insurgency with investment and predation, and testing its predictions using
data from the Philippines which distinguish rebel from government initiated violence.
The Philippines has suffered from “perpetual wars” since the arrival of the Spaniards in 1565
(Morales 2003) and continues to face domestic insurgency despite a recently negotiated peace treaty
with some rebel groups. Building on the three-sided strategic model of a counterinsurgency
campaign developed by Berman, Shapiro and Felter (2011, henceforth BSF), we incorporate
additional mechanisms through which investment may affect violence. In BSF, civilians choose
whether or not to provide intelligence regarding rebel activity to a government which both provides
public goods and pursues rebels. We add a new strategic actor, firms, who choose a level of
investment, which is both taxed by government and extorted by rebels.
Earlier research has identified at least three mechanisms which would predict a negative
correlation between violence and investment, and two which would predict a positive correlation.
The opportunity costs mechanism posits that providing better outside opportunities (i.e.
employment) to rebels increases the cost of participation in the insurgency (Hanson, Iyengar, and
Monten 2011; Dube and Vargas 2013). Grievance or gratitude mechanisms suggest that civilians will
reward government for increased economic activity, and withdraw support for the insurgency (Gurr
1970, Kilcullen 2010). The investment mechanism hypothesizes that since violence deters
investment, high investment today predicts low future violence (Kapstein and Converse 2008).
These three mechanisms share the prediction that increased investment correlates with decreased
violence.
Rent capture, or predation, has the opposite prediction: business investment presents
extortion opportunities for rebels. As a result, rebels may use violence to secure their ability to extort
such activity (Grossman 1999; Collier 2000). A tax capture mechanism implies that a government
which taxes investment will increase its use of coercive force to in order to enable taxation in
regions with increased investment (Fearon 2008). Predation and tax capture both predict that
investment will be positively correlated with violence. Critically, we can observe both, using data that
distinguish rebel initiated violence from violence initiated by government.
Our omnibus model exposes some subtleties. First, whether rebel violence increases or
decreases optimal investment levels depends in part on how governments respond. Second,
investment might induce either an increase or a decrease in rebel violence; violence raises the rate at
which rebels can extort but may reduce the effective incidence of their extortion by antagonizing
2

investors who in turn deliver territorial control and taxation to government. At the same time, if
government is viewed as even more predatory than rebels, investors may prefer rebel control, as
Grossman (1999) suggested.
We apply that expanded model to a new dataset on investment activity in the Philippines,
combined with detailed data on violence. Philippine rebel groups include Communist revolutionaries
operating throughout the country, Muslim separatists in the southwestern provinces of Mindanao
island seeking independence, and extremist groups with ties to international terrorist organizations
who engage in kidnapping for ransom and other illicit activities in the southern Philippine islands of
Basilan and the Sulu Sea (on the Communist insurgency see International Crisis Group 2011; on the
Islamic insurgency see International Crisis Group 2008; and for an historical overview see Morales
2003). The Philippines is among the few countries that have integrated economic development
programs into military operations via the Armed Forces of the Philippines’ “National Development
Support Command” (NADESCOM), whose mission during the period of this study included the
deployment of economic programs to counter rebel violence and activity.
Data on investment are very difficult to come by at a subnational level in most developing
countries. In the Philippines we are fortunate to have found a proxy: detailed information on the
value of industrial building permits, which are available at the province level for the entire country,
including poorly controlled regions. New construction requires permitting, as does renovation of
existing structures.
To get a sense of these data it is helpful to see the spatial distribution of investment and
political violence. The top left panel of Figure 1 displays the population distribution of Philippine
provinces (averaged between 2000 and 2007). About a quarter of Filipinos live in the eight provinces
surrounding Manila bay, on the west side of the northernmost island of Luzon. The long island of
Cebu, in the central Philippines (which points northeast) also has high population density, with
about 4m inhabitants. Provinces in northern Luzon, the eastern shore of the southern island of
Mindanao, and the southwest archipelago of Sulu are relatively sparsely populated.
The top right panel illustrates the spatial distribution of investment, as measured by the value
of industrial building permits (measured in 1000s of PHP per capita). Investment is generally
concentrated in highly populated areas. Investment is especially high around Manila and in Cebu,
and is very light in northern Luzon, along the eastern edge of the country and western Mindanao,
including the Sulu Archipelago in the southwest.

3

The bottom two panels illustrate casualties per capita caused by rebel initiated events (on
the left) and government initiated events (on the right). Two clear patterns emerge. First, rebel and
government initiated casualties tend to occur in the same provinces. Second, political violence and
investment are negatively correlated across space: Investment per capita is high where violence is
low, around Manila and in Cebu, while violence is high in low investment (and sparsely populated)
provinces of northern Luzon, Samar (on the central east coast), and Mindanao, especially in the
Muslim majority provinces of Mindanao which make up the Autonomous Region of Muslim
Mindanao: the Sulu Archipelago in the southwest (Basilan, Sulu and Tawi-Tawi) and the two
provinces on the west-central coast of Mindanao (Lanao del Sur and Maguindanao). Anecdotally,
these high violence, low investment areas tend to have norms favoring rebels (as opposed to
government), relative to the rest of the country. Informed by the negative spatial correlation
between rebel violence and investment, we will build a model in which rebel predation can
discourage investment.
Once we apply our analysis to data, the results are consistent with both predation and tax
capture. The empirics are straightforward: though levels of investment and violence are negatively
correlated, as the maps illustrate, we will see that changes in investment are positively correlated with
changes in violence, both rebel and government-initiated. The finding of tax capture is sensitive to
how we treat one massive investment episode.
These findings challenge the idea that economic activity reduces violence. Moreover, since
the measure of investment is private rather than public, and mostly domestic, predatory violence is
not a symptom of economic development projects launched by foreign donors or distant
governments, which might be poorly informed. The results instead provide empirical support for the
idea that new investment motivates the use of coercive force both by rebels and by government.
The paper proceeds as follows. After a brief literature review we develop an omnibus theory
of investment, taxation and political violence which encompasses all the mechanisms mentioned
above. Section three describes the data and section four reports empirical analysis. Section five
interprets the empirical results in the context of theory, the argument for identification relying on
the interplay of inferences from the model and those from estimates. Section six concludes.

4

I.

Investment and Violence: What’s the Connection?

Understanding the origins of communal violence has been the aim of considerable academic
research. Not surprisingly, economists have emphasized the self-interested nature of such conflicts,
with much of the relevant literature conceptualizing such conflict as a contest for available resources
(Hirshleifer 2001; Kapstein 2002).5 This insight is consistent with a view that poverty is a powerful
contributor to violence (see Fearon (2008) for a review of the relevant literature and a counterargument). If the returns to production are low and the gains from rebellion are high, then fighting
may be preferable to peaceful resignation.6 Note that Mindanao region of the Philippines, the site of
persistent, violent pro-Muslim rebellion, is also the poorest region of that country, with per capita
income half the national average and low investment (see Figure 1).7 Rebel predation has also been
commonplace; Morales (2003), for example, notes that Mindanao rebels engaged in widespread
extortion along the highways.
A commonly held view in both the academic and policy literatures on insurgency is that
economic development (broadly defined here to include economic activity by both the public and
private sectors) can help promote a “stable” political environment in which government authority is
generally recognized and respected.8 The academic literature attempts to be more specific,
developing several distinct channels which relate economic activity to rebel violence. First, a primary
objective of the counterinsurgents may be to encourage the civilian population to divulge useful
As Jack Hirshleifer puts it in The Dark Side of the Force, “There are two main methods of making a living . . .
the way of production and exchange versus the way of predation and conflict” (Hirshleifer 2001, 1).
6 In a related vein, Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004) launched an influential literature that uses variation
in rainfall as an instrument for changes to (agricultural) incomes in predicting outbreaks of violence (for a
literature review see Sarsons 2011). They posit that droughts lead to lower crop production and thus lower
incomes, leading to greater levels of rioting, conflict, and even civil war. This research has been extended to
examine the effects of rainfall on democratic stability in Africa (Brückner and Ciccone 2011) and political
stability in Egypt (Chaney 2010). Sarsons (2011), however, finds that in India even in regions protected from
rainfall fluctuations by dams rioting still occurs in the presence of droughts, suggesting that the channel may
not in fact be through incomes, or at least not through incomes alone.
7 Government of the Philippines, National Statistics Coordination Board, n.d..
8 In the context of Afghanistan, for example, a U.S. Army War College study argues that “development is a
means of turning Afghans away from the insurgency and thereby creating a stable environment in which the
Afghan government can exert its authority” (Malkasian and Meyerle 2009, 6). Similarly, a report to the U.S.
Senate Committee on Foreign Relations states that “foreign assistance can be a vital tool for promoting
stability in Afghanistan” (U.S. Senate, 2011, 1). Similar assertions have been made by policy-makers with
reference to every postwar conflict involving rebel violence, from the Malayan uprising of the 1950s to the
Iraq and Afghan wars (Marston and Malkasian 2008). The concept of “winning hearts and minds” (WHAM)
has featured prominently in many counterinsurgency campaigns since it originated with British General Sir
Gerald Templer in the Malaya campaign of 1948-1960 (Stubbs 2008).Yet these sources are typically vague
about the mechanism by which economic activity reduces rebel violence.
5

5

information and intelligence about the insurgency. To achieve this objective, counterinsurgents may
use economic instruments targeted at a tactical level to motivate or reward such behavior.
Closely related is another “hearts and minds” theory of counterinsurgency, which posits that
the civilian population can be “won over” to the government’s side by the general provision of
public goods and the promise of future economic growth, and that they stop providing recruits and
resources to rebels out of gratitude or reduced grievance. 9 A variant is the “opportunity cost”
approach to insurgency, suggesting that the greater the economic growth and the better the job
prospects, the more costly it becomes for rebels to engage in insurgency. In contrast, some scholars
have argued on theoretical and empirical grounds that economic activity encourages rebel violence
by inducing rebels to engage in rent-seeking behavior or predation (Hirshleifer 1989; Collier 2000,
Collier and Hoeffler 2004).10
Empirical research provides mixed evidence: For instance, Hanson, Iyengar, and Monten
(2011), for example, find that increased spending on labor-intensive development programs is
associated with decreases in violence, while Crost et al. (2014) show that development projects can
be violence-inducing, and Berman, Shapiro, Felter and Callen (2011) find the opposite relationship
between unemployment levels and rebel attacks, in Afghanistan, Iraq and the Philippines. Berman
and Matanock (forthcoming) survey the recent evidence, arguing that development programs are
typically violence-reducing in asymmetric conflicts (i.e., when government has greater capacity than
rebels) if those programs are designed to augment information sharing by civilians. Kalyvas and
Balcells (2010) find that about half of modern civil wars are asymmetric (or irregular), including that
in the Philippines.
Turning specifically to investment, Kapstein and Converse (2008) find that domestic
investment in newly established democracies is lower in those democracies that are overturned
within their first five years of existence than in those which endure for the longer-run; in other

Kilcullen (2010) explains from a skeptical perspective: “There is also a belief, unfounded in reality, that
development assistance generates gratitude, or “hope,” in the population and thereby of itself encourages
them to support the government. Field experience in both Afghanistan and Iraq, however, has shown that
insurgent intimidation easily overcomes any residual gratitude effect, while historical studies have shown that
in civil wars and insurgencies, popular support tends to accrue to locally powerful actors rather than to those
actors the population sees as more congenial...” (p. 67). In what follows, gratitude and opportunity cost
mechanisms will have similar testable implications.
10 Following Fearon (2004), predation in the face of renewed economic activity could reflect the insurgents’
skepticism about the government’s commitment to a peaceful solution. As Fearon notes, once the balance-ofpower reverts to the government side it could renege on the agreement it had reached during the struggle.
9

6

words, domestic investors appear to predict investment-dampening political instability.11 In a related
paper, Besley and Mueller (2012) link housing prices to the frequency of killings in Northern Ireland.
They find that once British forces brought some stability to Northern Ireland, housing prices began
to increase. These price increases continued as British forces maintained a presence in the region,
thus making a credible commitment to investors. This interaction between military forces and
investors promoted a reduction in violence, which further drove prices upward. These studies share
the view that investment decisions made today provide an accurate reflection of political stability in
the future, which we term the “predictive investment” mechanism.
Predation is the polar opposite of investment theory. It builds on the work of Grossman
(1999), Collier (2000), and Hirshleifer (2001). Simply stated, the predation mechanism asserts that in
an environment with weak property rights, rebels may increase the use of violence in order to extort
resources. Collier argued that efforts at predation would be strongest in societies where wealth was
the most concentrated, especially in the form of natural resources, though the same argument could
apply to the rebels in Mindanao, who taxed highway traffic, and to the Communist rebels in the
Philippines who imposed “revolutionary taxes” on agriculture (Morales 2003).
Building on this work, and on the more recent research of Collier and Hoeffler (2004),
Sambanis (2003), and Ross (2004), Crost, Felter and Johnston (2014) argue that in the case of the
Philippines that “if insurgents expect that [economic] development projects will weaken their
position, they have an incentive to prevent their successful implementation, which may exacerbate
conflict.” Observing economic activity in their midst, the rebels will seek to disrupt it before the
government can earn the associated political rents. Alternatively, rebels may “shake down” the
investment projects as a way of gaining income. In either case, more violent episodes may be
expected to occur alongside economic development programs. As Crost, Felter and Johnston (2014)
note, there seems to be substantial anecdotal support for this theory, in the form of frequent attacks
on both aid workers and infrastructure projects.12
Fielding (2003) examines investment levels in Israel and Palestine over time and finds that investment in
construction and capital goods falls during those periods of the greatest “intifada” (or Palestinian uprising)
violence. He further argues that a credible commitment to peace would significantly increase investment
levels in those sectors. Looking at the case of Iraq, Chaney (2008) examines the price of sovereign bonds and
finds that prices reflect the views of investors about the country’s future political stability. Similarly, Coyne
et.al. (2010) test the relationship between equity market prices and violence in Sri Lanka, and they find that
the stock market provides a robust predictor of future peace and violence in that country.
12 In 2010 alone, for example, over 100 relief workers were killed in Afghanistan (Nordland, New York Times,
December 13, 2010). Further, major infrastructure projects have been targeted by rebels, who have also
successfully targeted the government and foreign assistance community for protection money as the price of
11

7

Fortunately, in distinguishing between hypotheses we have the further benefit of being able
to observe government use of violence, which we call enforcement. We will expand our omnibus
model to include the mutual response of enforcement and investment as well. The next section
develops all of those causal mechanisms in a unified framework, allowing us to interpret the
Philippine data in a broadly theorized context.

II. Theoretical Framework: Investment, Predation and Taxation
To understand how investment might be related to insurgent violence we first examine the
motivations and constraints of rebels, counterinsurgents, communities of noncombatants, and firms.
In this section we expand the information-centric model of BSF to explicitly include four additional
mechanisms by which investment could affect violence: opportunity costs, gratitude, predation by
rebels, and tax capture by government.13 Violence by rebels and enforcement activity by government
–both observable in the Philippine data, will be equilibrium outcomes of a four-way strategic
interaction between rebels, community, government and firms, building on a model of street gangs
(Akerlof and Yellen 1994). That framework is illustrated schematically in Figure 2. We start with an
informal description and state a minimal model, referring the reader to the Appendix for proofs.
Consider an environment in which rebels ambush police and military patrols, or set
improvised explosive devices (IEDs) to attack them. They finance their operations by extorting local
businesses with threats of violence; their attacks on government forces make these threats credible
and undermine the ability of government to protect extortion targets. Preparations for rebel attacks
are likely to be observed by noncombatant community members who could report the rebels to
government forces. Those reports enable government forces to use their superior technology and
equipment to disrupt rebel activity, improving government’s chances of controlling the territory.
In that dangerous environment decisions must be made about five types of actions, each of
which is consequential for all participants. Community members decide whether to share what they
know with authorities, possibly delivering control to government if they do. That decision is
influenced by how violence and consumption will affect their welfare, as well as by persistent
predispositions to favor one side over another, which we model as norms of cooperation with
allowing those projects to move forward (Rubin and Risen, New York Times, May 1, 2011). In essence, these
projects have been “taxed” by the Taliban.
13 For clarity we simplify the BSF model by omitting government service provision, rebel service provision,
and reprisals by rebels against civilians, none of which are observable in our Philippine data. All the analytical
results below are robust to allowing service provision by government, since it is a strategic complement to m
and, like m, a strategic substitute to v.

8

rebels. Rebels choose levels of violence, balancing their benefits to violence in extracting
concessions from government and in extorting rents from firms against the chances that violence
antagonizes community members. Government decides how much to attack rebels --mindful of the
costs, the cost of violence, and the tax revenue accrued when territory is controlled. Firms choose
investment levels, anticipating possible taxation or predation.
[Insert Figure 2 about here.]
More formally, that environment can be modeled as follows.

A. Assumptions
1. Players and Actions
The government, G, seeks to reduce violence through counterinsurgency effort at minimal cost (net
of revenue). A rebel group, R, seeks to impose costs on government by attacking it,14 and to extort
rents. A utility maximizing community, C, can help deliver control of territory to government by
anonymously sharing information about rebels. Firms, F, invest to maximize profits.
2. Sequence of Play
Information sharing by the community requires no preparation, while counterinsurgency efforts and
rebel violence are less flexible, requiring pre-deployment of people and resources, so we assume that
C can move last. Play proceeds in four stages:
(#1) Nature draws community norms favoring rebel (over government) control of their territory, n,
from a uniform distribution U[nL, nU]; n is private to C and can be negative.15
(#2) G chooses a level of enforcement (counterinsurgency) effort, m. R simultaneously chooses a
level of violence, v , to attempt against G, while F chooses a level of investment, I.
(#3) C decides how much information, i, to share with G, having observed m, v, and I.
(#4) Uncertainty regarding control of territory, a, is resolved, and payoffs occur. Under rebel
control, they extort investments at rate 0 < θR < 1. Government taxes at rate 0 < θG < 1 under its
control.
Attacks that target civilians are considered in BSF, Appendix A. Violence has to occur in equilibrium, rather
than just the threat of it, since we observe violence in the data. Violence is inefficient in a Coasian sense; for it
to occur conditions must preclude complete contracting between rebels and government (Fearon 2004;
Powell 2006). This is not a very restrictive assumption in the Philippine setting.
15 Assume that nL and nU span enough of the real line to allow nL≤ v + g + (θR – θG)I ≤ nU .That ensures a
support of n broad enough to allow neither side to fully determine information sharing through its actions.
14

9

3. Technology of control
Control of territory is represented by a binary variable, a, which is equal to one if the government
controls the territory, and zero if it is controlled by rebels. The probability of government control is
P(a=1) = h(m) i,
where m is enforcement (counterinsurgency) effort by G, (m ≥ 0), h(m ): R+ →[0,1] is a
monotonically increasing, concave contest success function, with h(0)= 0 and h → 1 as m → ∞.
Here i is the level of information that C chooses to share with G, (1≥i ≥ 0). (All variables are real
numbers unless otherwise specified.) Consistent with current doctrine, this makes some minimal
information sharing a necessary condition for government control (U.S. Army, 2007, 1-23). Rebel
control does not altogether exclude government forces. It implies that attempted rebel violence
against those forces will cause them damage, that rebels can successfully extort and that government
cannot tax. In contrast, attempted rebel violence in government controlled areas fails to do harm. 16

4. Payoffs
Community: The community is a representative agent with utility affected by who controls territory.
Utility is given by
UC( a,n,v ) = u[ c – n ] a + u[ c – v ](1-a ).
If a=1 (government control) then the community consumes c ≥0, so it attains utility UC = u[ c – n ],
where u[.] is continuously differentiable and monotonically increasing. Community norms favoring
rebel control, n, generate disutility when the government is in control.
Alternatively, if a=0, rebels may successfully carry out violence, v ≥ 0, against government
targets. Under rebel control, community members will attain utility UC = u[ c – v ]. Rebel violence, v,
is not directed against community members per se, but they suffer from it nonetheless, either
because they are accidentally affected by crossfire (so-called “collateral damage”), or because they
empathize with government employees or value government targets.17
Incorporating the uncertainty that C faces about a, C’s payoff is the expected utility function
(1)

EUC( v, n, m )│n = u[ c – n ] h(m ) i + u[ c – v ](1-h(m ) i ) .

That stark assumption is relaxed in BSF, Appendix A.
BSF generalize to allow rebel violence to affect the community when a=1, in two ways (in an appendix):
they introduce violence directed at the community; and allow the community to suffer disutility from
government suppression of that violence.
16
17

10

Rebels: Rebels use violence to impose costs on government, either in an attempt to extract
concessions, or in an effort to overthrow the government altogether (Tilly, 1978). These attacks
would typically involve targeting a patrol with an IED, ambushing a patrol with direct fire, or
attacking a checkpoint. Let G’s cost of rebel violence be A(v )(1-a), which accounts for the damage
caused by an attack. R’s benefit from violence is then UR = A(v ) (1-a). We assume that A(0) = 0 and
that A is an increasing, concave function. R also gains extortion income from firms’ investment,
θR(v)I, where the extortion rate θR is an increasing, concave function of rebel violence, v. Rebels’ cost
of violence is B(v,I), which is increasing and convex in v.
We integrate the possibility of an opportunity cost mechanism of violence into the model by
including investment, I, in rebels’ cost of violence, B(v,I). Assuming that investments are in capital
which complements labor, those investments increase wages, which in turn raise the marginal cost
of violence as rebels must pay more for recruits with an increased value of time, i.e., a positive cross18

partial,

Gratitude, the idea that C will resist recruitment by rebels if the government

behaves in a way that encourages investment, also implies a positive cross-partial,

.19

Rebels then face an expected payoff function,
(2)

EUR( m, v, a, I ) = E[A(v )(1-a)+ θR(v)I(1-a) – B(v,I)] = [A(v )+ θR(v)I ](1-p) – B(v,I),
where p ≡ h(m) E(i).

Note that p = P(a=1) for rebels, for whom i is a random variable.
Government: The government bears the costs of violence as well as the costs of enforcement, m, while
collecting revenue θGI if it achieves control.20 It has expected net costs
(3)

ECG( v, m, a, I ) = E[A(v )(1-a) + D(m) – θGI a ]
= A(v )(1-p ) + D(m ) – θG I p.

We assume that D(0) = 0. We further assume that the cost function D(.) is monotonically
increasing. Convexity is a reasonable assumption for D(.) for a government facing increasing
We assume that all functions are twice continuously differentiable in all terms from here on in.
Gratitude could alternatively be modeled as reciprocation for provision of a specific service by government.
Our empirical tests will not be able to reject that broader notion.
20 We remove welfare considerations from the government’s objectives in order to focus on the optimal
behavior of a government whose first priority is repressing violence. This assumption may fit a government
more concerned about externalities of violence than it is about the welfare of residents – especially non coethnics or those in the periphery, or it may describe a dictatorship or dysfunctional democracy.
18
19

11

marginal costs in revenue generation on the one hand and diminishing returns in counterinsurgency
technologies, on the other. We also assume no fixed costs to enforcement so that D'(0) =0.21
Firms: A novel feature of the Philippine data is the availability of building permits, which measure
private sector investment, inviting an extension of existing models of insurgency to include
investment by private firms. These investments may be taxed by government or extorted by rebel
predation, both of whom take account of the effects of their choices on revenue.
Firms’ profit is x(I) – (1+ θG ) I under government control, and x(I) - (1+ θR ) I under rebel
control. Successful violence increases the rate at which rebels predate, θR(v ), which is an increasing
and concave function. For instance, θR =1 would be equivalent to full rebel expropriation of
investment. Government revenue is θG I if a=1; rebel revenue is θR I if a=0.
We assume that is θG < θR(0) for reasons that we explain below.
Firms face expected profits
(4) E ( v,m,I ) = x(I) – I – [θG p +θR (1-p)] I,
where x(I) is increasing and concave in I, with x'(0) > 1 + max(θG , θR ), so that the first unit of
investment is profitable. Firms invest to maximize expected profits, anticipating either taxation or
rebel predation, our formalization of the predictive investment mechanism.

B. Equilibrium
We turn now to analytical results revealing how actors play, solving for subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium in pure strategies, starting with the community (step #3), and proceeding by backwards
induction to government, rebels and firms (step #2). The impatient reader might consider skipping
to the discussion of Table 1 in Section B. below, which summarizes optimal responses.
Proposition #1: The community will share information with government if and only if the costs of
violence exceed norms of noncooperation, when G expends positive effort on enforcement.
Proof: See Appendix.
[Insert Figure 3 about here.]
21

A weaker assumption A(nU) > D'(0) is sufficient to imply a unique equilibrium in proposition #2
below. It implies that the fixed costs of m are not so high that communities maximally predisposed
to not share information are never cost effective to not engage at all. See BSF for proof.
12

Figure 3 illustrates this logic, graphing the expected utility of community members against
information revelation, i, on the horizontal axis ( when m > 0 ). The expected utility of the
representative community member is a linear function of i. The upper line illustrates the case in
which that slope is positive, while the lower line shows the case where the slope is negative. C’s best
response, i*, is to fully share information when UC is increasing in i, (the positive slope in the Figure)
and not to share any information otherwise. A slope of zero defines the noncooperation (“no
snitching”) constraint, the conditions under which the community is indifferent between sharing
information with the government or staying quiet. High levels of violence and low norms favoring
noncooperation both reduce that incentive.
Proposition #2: A unique Nash equilibrium in pure strategies exists for this game.
Proof: See Appendix.
With a unique equilibrium solution for optimal choices of violence, enforcement, investment
and information sharing, we can examine how investors, rebels and government interact, with an eye
to observed patterns in the Philippines.

C. Persistent norms and the spatial pattern of investment and political violence
Consider the maps of Figure 1, which illustrated the negative spatial correlation of investment and
political violence. That correlation is quite persistent, so we begin by examining how violence and
investment respond to persistent predisposition of communities to favor rebels over government –
including longstanding grievances, ethnic differences, religious attitudes, a history of
disenfranchisement, topography that lends itself to easy rebellion or difficult enforcement, and other
persistent factors, all of which we bundle into norms, n.
How would differences in norms across regions affect political violence?22
Proposition #3: In regions where norms favor rebels, communities have a lower probability of sharing
information with government, rebels choose to use more violence, and government chooses to
provide less enforcement, all ceteris paribus.
Proof: See Appendix.

We model norms as a random variable drawn from a uniform distribution, so what we mean by differences
in norms across regions is that the endpoints of that distribution are shifted equally and in the same direction
(i.e., ∆nL = ∆nU). Endpoints are common knowledge (though the realized n, in stage #4, is a random variable).

22

13

The intuition for information sharing is illustrated in Figure 3. Norms of noncooperation
with government increase the chance of disutility from information sharing (n > v ). Rebels, in turn,
face a higher probability of controlling territory, which increases their return to violence –both in
damage inflicted on government and in predatory rents. Since information sharing complements
enforcement, government chooses to enforce less when information flow is expected to be lower.
As an aid to keeping track of these results, analytical results are summarized in Table 1.
Key to our analysis is how investors respond to norms, which will depend on their expected
returns to investment under government or rebel control. As we saw in the last proposition, norms
favoring rebels reduce the probability of information sharing and with it the probability of
government control.
We assumed above that the government taxes at a lower rate than rebels extort , (θG < θR ).
We can now motivate that assumption by combining an analytical result with a look back at the map.
If government taxes less than rebels extort, then government control favors investment, which in
turn implies that norms favoring rebels reduce investment.
Proposition #4: Investment is higher where norms favor government if and only if the government
tax rate is less than the rebel extortion rate, ceteris paribus.
Proof: See Appendix.
Those two results (propositions #3 and #4) provide a way of understanding the observed
spatial pattern of investment and rebel violence in the maps of Figure 1. If tax rates are indeed lower
than extortion rates then norms favoring rebels predict both low investment and high rebel violence.
Spatial variation in those norms would then imply a negative cross-sectional correlation of
investment and rebel violence, which is what we observe in Figure 1. Without assuming that
extortion rates exceed tax rates the spatial pattern of investment and rebel violence is hard to
explain, since investors would flock to the tax haven that rebels offer.
Why then is government enforcement (i.e., government initiated attacks) in Figure 1 more
common in peripheral, low investment areas (such as the Muslim majority provinces)? The model’s
answer is that enforcement effort increases in rebel violence, conditional on norms.
Proposition #5: Government enforcement, m , increases in rebel violence, ceteris paribus.
Proof: See Appendix.
14

The logic of the proposition is that violence increases damage costs A(v) for government,
which increases the return to suppressing the probability of rebel control. Enforcement, m,
strategically complements v in increasing p, so that the optimal response of government to increased
violence is to increase enforcement. Graphically, this result is illustrated by the upward sloping curve
best response function m*(v,I), in Figure 4, which graphs enforcement against violence.
[Insert Figure 4 about here.]
Returning to the map, though the low probability of information sharing reduces the return
to enforcement (through the complementarity in the technology of control –Proposition #3), that
effect can be counteracted by the reduction of high levels of rebel violence typical of regions with
norms favoring rebels (Proposition #5).

D. Tax capture and predatory violence
Investment occurs against a backdrop of enforcement (government attacks) and rebel violence.
We’ve just shown that enforcement increases optimally in rebel violence. In contrast, violence
declines in enforcement, as illustrated by the downward sloping best response curve v*(m,I) in Figure
4. Intuitively, m increases the probability of government control, p, reducing expected marginal
benefits of violence, in terms of both damage and extortion revenue.
Proposition #6: Rebel violence, v, declines in government enforcement, m, ceteris paribus.
Proof: See Appendix.
How would this system respond to an exogenous increase in investment, perhaps in
response to a new economic opportunity? For government the answer is straightforward: increased
tax revenue provides an added incentive to control territory when investment increases, so that
enforcement, m, rises in response to increases in I, as government uses it to raise its probability of
achieving control. This “tax capture” response by government is the analogue to the predatory
response of rebels, which has received much more attention in the literature on economic activity
and political violence (Grossman 1999; Collier 2000). The next proposition captures that logic.
Proposition #7: Government enforcement increases in response to investment, ceteris paribus.
Proof: See Appendix.
15

The tax capture effect of increased enforcement is illustrated by the serrated best response
curve m*(v,I’) in Figure 4, which shifts vertically upward to an intersection at point B, with higher
enforcement and lower violence. (This is a partial equilibrium response because the response of
violence to investment must still be accounted for.)
How does rebel violence reacts to investment? Rebels face countervailing pressures in
optimally choosing v. Recall that R maximizes [A(v )+ θR(v)I ](1-p) – B(v,I). Increased violence raises
the extortion rate, which increases expected revenue θR(v)I (1-p) by raising θR. That is the rate effect
(or ‘rent-capture’ effect) emphasized by Collier and Hoeffler (2004). Yet violence also reduces the
probability of rebel control of territory, as it antagonizes communities (in Figure 3), lowering the
expected incidence of any extortion revenue at all, by raising p. That ‘expected incidence’ effect is
violence-reducing. Moreover, our model also allows investment to raise the marginal cost of
violence through increased opportunity costs or gratitude. An exogenous increase in investment
amplifies these mechanisms, so that the net effect of investment on rebel violence is ambiguous.
Proposition #8: Violence increases in investment if and only if the rate effect, θR'(v*)(1-p*), exceeds the
sum of the incidence effect, θR(v*) f h(m), and the opportunity cost (or gratitude) effect

,

holding enforcement constant.
Proof: See Appendix.
[Insert Figure 5 about here.]
Figure 5 illustrates the ambiguous effect of investment on rebel violence. Point A illustrates
the initial equilibrium, as in Figure 4, with point B illustrating the “tax capture” effect: an increase in
enforcement due to investment (as the best response of enforcement shifts to the serrated line
m*(v,I′) ), and the accompanying decline in violence. The response of violence to investment can be
either positive or negative. If predation (i.e., the rate effect) dominates, then the best response
function of violence shifts to the right, as illustrated by the dotted line labeled v*(m,I′), and new
equilibria will be at higher rates of enforcement and violence (perhaps even greater violence than at
the initial equilibrium A) at a point like C. If the incidence and opportunity cost (or gratitude) effect
dominate, then the best response function of investment will shift left to lower violence, as

16

illustrated by the dotted line labeled v*′(m,I′), and new equilibria will be at lower levels of
enforcement and violence (perhaps even lower enforcement than at A) at a point like D.
Figure 5 also illustrates an important analytical result: government enforcement increases in
investment under much weaker assumptions than does rebel violence. A necessary condition for
violence to increase in response to investment is that the v* curve shifts up and to the right as
investment increases (as the rate effect dominates in proposition #8). That is a sufficient condition
for enforcement to increase, given that the v* curve declines in violence. In other words, if
investment increases violence (comparing point A to point C) despite the increase in enforcement,
then that same investment must certainly have increased enforcement.

E. How enforcement and rebel violence affect investment
To close the model we solve for optimal investment choices. How would firms’ investments react to
increased effort by government to control the territory (through increased enforcement)? Since
government taxes at a lower rate than rebels extort, increased enforcement implies higher expected
net returns on investment, so investment will increase as firms avoid expected extortion.
Proposition #9: Investment increases with enforcement, holding violence constant.
Proof: See Appendix.
The response of investment to rebel violence is more complicated, as it involves two
countervailing forces. Violence dissuades investment by raising the extortion rate, which we termed
the “rate effect.” (This is the basis of the Kapstein-Converse predictive investment mechanism, by which
expected violence depresses investment, so that increased investment is a leading indicator of
reduced violence –should investors be good predictors of peace.) Yet violence also indirectly
encourages investment by reducing the expected incidence of predation (since violence induces the
community to share information, which raises the probability that rebels will lose control and
extortion will be replaced by taxation). As in proposition #8, rate and incidence effects pull in
opposite directions.
Proposition #10: Investment declines in rebel violence if and only if the rate effect, θR(v)(1-p*),
exceeds the incidence effect, (θR- θG) f h(m), holding enforcement constant.
Proof: See Appendix.

17

The slopes of best response functions derived in propositions #3 through #10 are
summarized in Table 1, with question marks denoting the two ambiguously signed slopes.
[Insert Table 1 about here.]

F. Comparative statics in investment, enforcement, and violence
How do enforcement and violence respond to investment in general equilibrium? Propositions 5
through 10 have signed the best response functions conditional on the third variable (e.g.,

),

but the unconditional slopes all have ambiguous signs. That follows from the mix of strategic
complements and substitutes between m and v, and v and I. Fortunately, in our data we observe
measures of both rebel and government initiated violence, allowing us to estimate partial derivatives
corresponding to the partial correlations in Table 1.
We can still tease out an important analytical result. Predatory violence, which the literature
has emphasized, is characterized in our model by a rate effect of investment on violence that
exceeds the incidence effect. In terms of Figure 5, that implies a v* curve which shifts up and to the
right in response to new investment. Whether the follow-on effects of enforcement and violence on
investment are positive or negative, investment will have increased in equilibrium, so that if
predation occurs (holding m constant) then enforcement must increase in general equilibrium (by
Proposition #7). In other words, rebel predation implies government tax capture.23
Rebel predation also has another implication: if rebels are predatory (i.e., violence optimally
increases in investment), then optimal investment must decline in violence. The logic is as follows:
rebel predation requires that the rate effect dominate both the incidence and the opportunity cost
effects --for rebels to increase violence when faced with new investment, despite the expected loss
of incidence and the opportunity costs. Firms similarly balance rate against incidence effects when
setting investment. If the rate effect dominates for rebels it must do so for firms as well, which
implies that violence causes higher expected extortion rates and lower investment.

The converse is not the case, as Figure 5 illustrates. Possible equilibria include a point C to the left of point
A, in which investment reduces violence –by inducing increased enforcement-- so that on net there is no
predatory violence. Alternatively, if the incidence effect dominated we could get a general equilibrium result
in the neighborhood of C, in which enforcement increased while violence declined. So tax capture is possible
without predation. Though investment can cause both increases or decreases in both types of attacks,
predation is sufficient for tax capture, but not necessary.
23

18

Proposition #11: If violence increases in investment, then investment must be decreasing in violence,
holding enforcement constant.
Proof: See Appendix.
That proposition will provide some inferential leverage in the discussion below. We turn
now to data on investment, enforcement and violence to see whether predation and tax capture are
present.

III. Data
We match data on industrial building permits (our measure of investment) to violent incident data,
for eighty Philippine provinces between 2002 and 2008. Descriptive statistics are provided in Table
2. Building permits data are from the National Statistics Office of the Philippines website.24
Industrial buildings permits have a price increasing in the value of investment. The provincial
average is 65 PHP per capita. Population data are from the Philippines National Statistics Office for
the 2000 and 2007 Census. Provinces averaged 2.6m inhabitants over the sample period, which is
skewed by the national capital region, at 11.5m.
Data on violence come from original incident reports generated by deployed units in the
Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) between 2002 and 2008. The resulting dataset is a complete
set of information from every such incident reported to the AFP’s Joint Operations Center (JOC).
Specifically, the data include information on date, location, initiator (government, rebel group),
casualties, and the type of casualty (government, rebel, civilian). These data are an invaluable source
of information for empirical analysis of violence (Felter 2005; Crost, Felter and Johnston 2014). The
AFP reports an average of 0.29 incidents per 10,000 residents per province-year, of which about two
thirds are government initiated. Rebel initiated incidents account for fifty-five percent of fatalities,
averaging 0.054 fatalities per 10,000 residents per province-year, while government initiated
incidents average 0.044. 25 Since the identity of fatalities in irregular warfare is subject to biases we
concentrate our analysis on the identity of the initiator, which we think is reported more accurately.
One concern with incident data is that more troops may simply imply more complete
reporting. That would bias our estimated correlation of investment and violence in a positive

http://www.census.gov/ph/data/sectordata/databldgperm.html, accessed November 9, 2011.
Almost half of fatalities reported for rebel initiated incidents are among government forces (0.033), while
39% of reported fatalities in rebel initiated incidents (0.026) are civilians. Seventy-eight percent of fatalities
reported in government initiated incidents are among rebels, while eighteen percent are among government
forces and four percent are among civilians.

24

25

19

direction. Berman et al (2013) find no evidence of such a bias when estimating the effects of CERP
programs in IRAQ, when augmenting their estimating equation with a measure of troop strength.
Crost, Felter and Johnston (2014) conduct a robustness test for bias due to troop strength by
measuring effects on violence in neighboring regions and find no evidence of bias.26

IV. Violence and Investment in the Philippines: What Do the Data Say?
The rich data available on rebel-related violence in the Philippines allow us to test competing
theories linking economic activity to both rebel- and government-initiated violence, in the context of
our model. We begin by revisiting the spatial correlations in the cross-section, as illustrated by Figure
1. We then estimate effects of investment on enforcement (i.e., government-initiated political
violence) and rebel violence. We lack in instrument for investment, so we will lean heavily on fixed
effects, and on interpretation in the context of a model.
Before estimating equations implied by the model Table 3 explores the correlations in a
simple regression of measures of violence on our investment measure. It reports results using the
560 province-years available for analysis, covering the period 2002 through 2008. Column (1) reports
the coefficient from a cross-sectional regression of incidents (m+v) on industrial building permits,
pooling 560 observations. The coefficient is negative and highly statistically significant, reflecting the
pattern we observed in Figure 1: violence and investment have a negative spatial correlation.
Revisiting our interpretation of that correlation, in light of the full set of predictions reported in
Table 1: norms favoring rebels are more common in the sparsely populated provinces and in the
Muslim majority provinces of Mindanao (anecdotally); those norms predict higher violence (dv*/dn
>0, column two, row one) and lower investment if extortion exceeds taxation (dI*/dn <0, column
four, row one); rebel violence also predicts high government violence (dm*/dv >0, column three,
row two). Note that the spatial predictions for investment and government enforcement are
ambiguous in the model, so that the data reveal two insights: first, extortion rates likely exceed
taxation rates –as we assumed, so that investment declines rather than increases in norms favoring
violence (proposition #4); second, enforcement reacts more to rebel violence (proposition #5) than
26

Crost, Felter, and Johnston (2014) express a second concern with these data. AFP units may selectively
misreport casualties, exaggerating harm by rebel groups and understating that done by themselves. This is a
lesser concern for us, as our results (below) will turn out to be robust across measures of violence and hold
for overall fatalities –which are less susceptible to misreporting. Information gathered for Felter (2005) and
Crost, Felter, and Johnston (2014) suggest that strong institutional incentives imply that the magnitude of
such misreporting is likely small. The JOC relies on accurate internal reporting to plan future operations, so
that misreporting could mean risking the lives of AFP members.

20

it is dissuaded by norms (proposition #3), and enforcement does not completely reverse the norminduced increase in rebel violence (proposition #6), so that violence remains higher in lowinvestment areas. Recall that the model used norms to represent all time-invariant characteristics of
provinces, which more broadly might include terrain, infrastructure, access to markets, the
effectiveness of service provision by government relative to that by rebels, and other persistent
factors.
The most important conclusion from the spatial pattern of investment and violence is that
firms perceive taxation as preferable to predation when investing –otherwise they would invest more
in rebel-influenced areas.27
We turning now to estimates in first-differences, that hold norms and other time-invariant
characteristics of provinces constant. Column (2) of Table 3 reports estimates of the correlation of
fatalities and investment, in first differences. The coefficient on violence switches from negative in
the cross-section (as we saw in the spatial pattern of Figure 1), to positive. That positive coefficient
evokes the pattern described as predation in the literature, in which investment predicts increased
violence.
In columns (3) and (4) we report the result of disaggregating that predicted increase in
violence into violence initiated by government and that initiated by rebels. While both coefficients
are positive, the larger statistically significant coefficient is due to government-initiated violence.
Columns (5) through (7) suggest the same pattern using incidents rather than fatalities to measure
violence, though these coefficients are estimated with less precision. Regardless of measure, the
pattern of investment predicting violence in first differences comes from both government-initiated
and rebel-initiated violence.
In order to understand these simple correlations we turn now to estimating the slopes of
best response functions for government and rebel initiated violence (enforcement and violence)
predicted by the model.

Enforcement and Investment
Consider an estimating equation relating enforcement to investment. While the spatial (i.e., crosssectional) correlation of enforcement and investment is negative, as we have seen, it includes the
effects of persistent factors such as norms. By estimating (6) with a fixed effect

we remove

In the narrow context of the model that is a statement about relative taxation and extortion rates. A
broader interpretation might be that firms prefer the predictability and low risk associated with government
control over a more arbitrary and potentially more violent predatory system of extortion.

27

21

the effects of persistent factors and trends so as to recover the coefficient

, which reflects the

effects of changes in investment on changes in enforcement, as derived in proposition #7, and
discussed above in terms of comparative statics.
(6)
Recall that, as illustrated in Figure 5, proposition #7 predicts that

is positive: enforcement

increases in investment because the returns to enforcement increase in tax revenue available. We
may nevertheless be concerned about omitted variable bias due to reverse causality, given that we
can’t rule out exogenous variation in enforcement causing increased investment (Proposition #9).
Conditional on fixed effects and violence, we suspect that investment generates more exogenous
variation than does enforcement, given our understanding of enforcement as reactive to violence
and local conditions. In any case, a positive estimate of

is consistent with two predictions of the

model.
Table 4 reports estimates of

in columns (3) through (12) for various measures of

enforcement, including government initiated incidents, total fatalities in government initiated
incidents, and, of those, for fatalities among government forces, rebels and civilians. (Coefficients
are estimated using a first-differenced specification rather than fixed-effects because the residual is
nonstationary in levels, as the note to the table explains.) Coefficients are statistically significant and
positive for all fatalities (column 6) and rebel fatalities (column 10).
The correlation of government initiated fatalities and investment is illustrated in the top
panel of Figure 6, where each dot represents a change in both building permits and fatalities in a
province over a one year period. Note that two points are very influential outliers. They represent
the province of Zambales in the years 2003/4 and 2004/5, reflecting a spike in investment and
fatalities in the year 2004 (Zambales has a moderately large population of about 700 thousand). The
bottom panel of Figure 6 represents the same correlation with Zambales excluded. Table 4A reports
estimates of the same coefficients as in Table 4, for the subsample excluding Zambales. Results are
qualitatively the same, though with smaller t-ratios.
[Insert Figure 6 about here.]
The evidence for investment predicting enforcement is highly influenced by the events of
2004 in the single province of Zambales, so it’s worth closely investigating that episode. In the year
2000 a Japanese development bank loaned the government $215m to modernize a commercial port
facility in a former US navy base on the shore of Subic Bay, at the southern tip of Zambales. The
province until then had a small but persistent Maoist rebel presence. Rebel initiated incidents
22

subsequently rose slowly, peaking in 2013. In 2004 a Japanese firm broke ground on the facility
project. In that same year, government initiated incidents spiked, resulting in 21 fatalities. Those
operations included Special Operations teams, combat troops, intelligence operations and police. In
subsequent years incidents declined to a relatively low level, with government still initiating more
incidents than rebels. By 2007 a Korean firm was building ships and operating a cargo port in the
facility, which is planned to grow into the fourth largest dry dock in the world. The episode can be
read as consistent with the logic of Figure 5, in the sense that a very large local investment invited
both predatory violence by rebels and suppressive violence by government, shifting the equilibrium
from a point like A to one like C.
Overall the left panels of the two tables tell a clear story about enforcement and investment:
while these two variables are negatively correlated spatially, changes in investment are positively
correlated with changes in enforcement, as illustrated in Figure 4, both with and without rebel
violence held constant. Our preferred interpretation is that enforcement increases in investment –an
unambiguous prediction of the model. Yet another possible interpretation is that investment
increases in enforcement –also an unambiguous prediction of the model (Proposition #9). While
these two refutable implications of the model are consistent with the data we cannot tell which one
the data supports. We return to this issue below in our discussion, where we will attempt to infer
whether factors shifting I* or m* are likely to be generating more variance.
What the data reject is the possibility that two conditions can simultaneously be true: that
government is indifferent to investment (strictly speaking, to tax revenue) when making
enforcement decisions, and that investors are indifferent as to who controls territory –government
or rebels.
Another persistent pattern in Table 4 (and Table 4A) is that rebel violence is positively
correlated with enforcement, both in the cross section and in the time series, and both
unconditionally and conditional on investment. In the context of the model that implies a shifting v*
curve (in Figure 4) tracing out an upward sloping m* curve, both across Philippine provinces and
within provinces over time.

Rebel Violence and Investment
We now turn to predation, or more generally to the relationship between investment and rebel
violence, which can be estimated for the first time holding enforcement constant. Hypotheses about
predation, opportunity costs and gratitude would all be expressed in this correlation. We know from
23

Figure 1 that investment is negatively correlated with violence spatially, which might suggest that
violence reduces investment (a dominant rate effect), or that investment reduces violence (a
dominant incidence, opportunity cost, grievance or gratitude effect). Yet that inference is potentially
confounded by persistent effects such as positive norms towards rebels, which increase rebel
violence and depress investment.
Equation (7) defines a linear coefficient

relating investment to rebel violence which holds

time-invariant factors such as norms constant, and holds measured enforcement constant,
(7)

.

Unlike the corresponding coefficient predicting enforcement in equation (6), theory does not allow
us to sign

. Even if we could distinguish the direction of causality between investment and

violence in (7), both the effect or violence on investment and the effect of investment on violence
are theoretically ambiguous, because rate and incidence effects pull in opposite directions. The only
clear result we have is Proposition 11, which states that if the rate effect dominates, then violence
must increase in investment (holding enforcement constant), which implies that investment must
decline in violence (again holding enforcement constant). The converse is not true: if the incidence
effect dominated then both derivatives could be negative.
Table 5 reports that regressions of changes in measures of rebel violence on changes in
industrial building permits yield persistent but weak partial positive correlations. All five measures
are positive, in columns (3)-(12), but only one is marginally significant (at the 10% level), and
becomes insignificant when enforcement is included in the regression. The evidence in Table 5A,
which excludes the large outlier province of Zambales, is clearer. All five partial regression
coefficients on investment are again positive, with two of them significant at the 5% level (incidents
and civilian fatalities).28

As discussed above, a possible explanation for the positive correlation of violence with investment is that
investment induces troop presence, which in turn generates more reporting of incidents by construction. We
think that this is unlikely, based on our experience with similar data in other countries, where measures of
troop presence did not affect results (Berman et al., 2013). Following Crost, Felter and Johnston (2014) we
also provide a robustness test. Deploying more troops to one province requires taking some away from
another. If increased troop strength creates more reported incidents by construction, then reported violence
should decline in neighboring provinces. We test this hypothesis and find no evidence of spillovers. We
estimate the specification in Table 5 using permits in province , and average violence in other provinces in
the same geographic region in year . There are seventeen such regions in the Philippines. The resulting
coefficients are either statistical zeros, or positive. Results are available upon request.
28

24

Concluding that, in differences, the partial correlation of violence and investment is positive,
proposition #11 forces us to choose how to interpret that correlation: the derivatives

and

must have opposite signs, so they cannot both be positive. We revisit this point in the next
section.

V. Discussion
In terms of the model, we’ve interpreted the evidence as tax capture by government and predation
by rebels, both in response to investment. Theory predicts that the former correlation should be
stronger than the latter, and it is, but only because of one episode of a well-protected and massive
investment of foreign capital at Subic Bay. In this section we discuss another possible interpretation
of the regression results –a dominant incidence effect. We then return to discuss the broader
implications of a dominant rate effect in terms of the literature.
The positive correlation of changes in violence with changes in investment, which we
reported in Tables 5 and 5A, theoretically admits a reverse causal interpretation, in which violence
shocks are exogenous and investment optimally increases in violence (which occurs if the incidence
effect dominates the rate effect, in Proposition #10 –violence reduces the probability of rebel
control, encouraging investment). We find that interpretation unlikely for three reasons: First, on
empirical grounds, we think that fixed effects estimates (our estimation procedure –which uses year
to year variation) are much more likely to pick up changes in investment opportunities (which could
be due to changes in prices, wages or technology) than shifts in the local technology of, or returns
to, violence, which would occur less frequently.
Second, evidence of predatory violence in response to economic activity exists not only in
the literature in general (Collier 2000), but in the Philippines in particular, where Crost, Felter and
Johnston (2014), find that exogenous announcement of forthcoming government sponsored
community driven development projects in rural municipalities predicted increased rebel violence.
A final reason follows from proposition #11. Recall that if rebels are predatory (i.e., violence
optimally increases in investment), then investment must decline in violence (rather than increase),
because predatory violence requires a dominant rate effect. Combined with the measured positive
partial correlation between violence and investment, the proposition implies that if violence were to
decline in investment, then investment must increase in violence. Though a dominant incidence
effect is theoretically possible, we’ve found no anecdotal or empirical evidence for it in the
25

Philippines or in the literature. If investment increased in rebel violence it would be hard to explain
the cross-sectional correlations evident in Figure #1, in which violent areas in the Philippine
periphery tended to have low investment. We have found no anecdotal evidence that investors flock
to areas with high rebel violence because of the incidence effect.
If we accept the inference that rate effects dominate, then not only must we conclude that
predation exists in the Philippine data, but three other conclusions also follow: First, neither
incidence effects, nor opportunity cost mechanisms, nor a gratitude mechanism can be the dominant
force relating rebel violence to investment in the rural Philippines, since those would generate a
violence-reducing effect of investment, and we instead find that a violence-increasing predation
effect dominates. Second, proposition #11 implies that the Converse-Kapstein mechanism by which
investment should be a leading indicator of reduced violence, must hold theoretically, even if we
have not found direct evidence of a negative contemporaneous correlation of investment and
violence in our data. Third, to reiterate the theoretical point of Figure 5, if rebel violence increases in
investment, then government enforcement must increase even more, both as a direct response to
investment and as in indirect response to rebel violence.
Importantly, concluding that rate effects dominate also provides indirect evidence of tax
capture. The positive correlation between investment and violence must be the result of shifts in the
I* curve mapping out an upward sloping v* curve in I-v space (since by Proposition #11 the I* curve
is downward sloping). So exogenous variation shifting I* must be larger than exogenous variation
shifting v*. That would happen if investment conditions varied relatively often, which should not be
surprising in an open economy. The regression results in Table 6 indicate that this is true both with
and without m held constant. Moreover, the model unambiguously predicts that the m* curve is
upward sloping in m-v space, as illustrated in Figure 5 and implied by Proposition #5. So by
analogous reasoning, the positive partial correlation of v* and m* in Tables 4-7 implies that
exogenous variation shifting the v* curve must dominate variation that shifts the m* curve (which is
again evident both conditional on I and unconditionally). That might happen, for instance, if rebel
initiatives were subject to fast-changing local politics and conditions, while government enforcement
initiatives were subject to slower national campaign decisions, or slowly reactive. Combining those
patterns, exogenous variation shifting the I* curve must dominate exogenous variation shifting the
m* curve in I-m space, where both are upwards sloping (Propositions #7 and #9). From that we
must infer that the positive correlation of investment and enforcement reported in Table 4 is
evidence of tax capture (enforcement increases in investment), rather than evidence that investment
26

increases in enforcement, though both are predicted by theory (Propositions #7 and #9,
respectively).
Dynamics
Our model is static, but the data allow us a peek at dynamics as well. If investment creates persistent
economic returns then we would expect both government and rebels to use violence to establish
access to future revenue streams when the investment takes place. In future periods they might
conduct another round of conflict, or a Coasian bargain may be possible, or future conflict might be
deterred by the winning side (or, in principle, opportunity costs might preclude rebel violence –
though the evidence above weighs against opportunity costs being a dominant mechanism). We can
check by estimating an equation in which past investment predicts current violence.
Results of estimating those equations are reported in Tables 6 and 7, which retain the format
of Tables 4 and 5 but with lagged building permits on the right hand side rather than the concurrent
value. Interestingly enough, lagged investment predicts a decline in current enforcement of about the
same magnitude as the concurrent increase we saw in Table 4. That decline is highly statistically
significant for all fatalities and for the two subcategories government fatalities and rebel fatalities.
One possible interpretation is that government response sometimes requires a year, contradicting
proposition #7 (or proposition #9).29 We find that unlikely as the Philippine military has a fairly
agile national counterinsurgency force, and investment is easily predicted, given the permitting
process. An alternative interpretation is that one period of enforcement is sufficient to deter future
rebel violence (perhaps by signaling capacity or commitment) so that the optimal enforcement
response need only last a year.
Table 7 also reiterates the message of Table 5. Like current investment, lagged investment
shows no evidence of a negative correlation with violence, providing no supporting evidence for
predictive investment, opportunity cost, or grievance (or gratitude) mechanisms. If we repeat the
analysis for the sample excluding Zambales province, we obtain essentially the same results
(available upon request). Overall, the combination of concurrent and lagged results suggest that, in a
simple dynamic extension of our model, tax capture occurs in the same year as investment and that
the increase in enforcement is fully reversed within a year, with no long term effect on violence
(perhaps due to deterrence).
29

In general equilibrium enforcement could decline as an indirect response to investment if investment
caused rebel violence to decline, which in turn reduced necessary enforcement (proposition #5). Yet that
explanation is undermined by results in Table 7 showing no response of rebel violence to lagged investment.

27

VI. Conclusions
Some governments, and their allies, have turned to economic programs alongside other instruments
as part of their strategy to reduce rebel violence. Underlying this approach is often a view that once a
degree of prosperity is achieved, people will become hopeful about the future, making political
choices that in turn spur stability and economic growth. Growth might become self-reinforcing
should it increase the opportunity cost of violence for rebels and motivate noncombatants to
cooperate with government in its efforts to expel rebels. Recent studies have attempted to develop a
theoretical underpinning to that logic, and test it. Yet about half of the empirical studies at the
subnational level are inconsistent with the coarse hypothesis that all economic activity is violencereducing, including studies of asymmetric conflicts like that in the Philippines (Berman and
Matanock, forthcoming).
In this paper we have examined the relationship of investment to violence using data and
theory that explicitly allow for government-initiated violence. We’ve expanded a standard theory of
counterinsurgency to a four-sided game, including for the first time firms who make investments,
‘tax capture’ by government, and rebel predation. In the context of the model, the data yield a
number of findings. Most importantly, the combination of empirical estimates and theory leads us to
conclude that investment invites violence initiated by government (tax capture) as well as violence
initiated by rebels (predation). Our findings are also consistent with the idea that predation and tax
capture are the dominant mechanisms linking investment to rebel violence, rather than opportunity
costs, gratitude, grievances or predictive investment.
Our study leaves open the question of whether tax capture is socially desirable. On the one
hand, it is violent. On the other, empirical results suggest that it is temporary. Without measuring the
long term benefits of governance by government (as opposed to by rebels) we cannot say if
residents are better off with one or the other, especially if the transition is to be violent. Given
current policy concerns with the negative externalities of ungoverned space within countries
(including terrorism, infectious diseases, smuggling, human trafficking and the like) we would argue
that further research on the net benefits of incentivizing a geographical expansion of effective
governance should be a prioritized.

28

References
Akerlof, George and Janet L. Yellen. “Gang Behavior, Law Enforcement, and Community Values.” In Values
and Public Policy, ed. Henry J. Aaron, Thomas E. Mann, and Timothy Taylor. Washington, DC:
Brookings, 1994.
Berman, Eli, Jacob N. Shapiro and Joseph H. Felter. “Can Hearts and Minds be Bought? The Economics of
Counterinsurgency in Iraq.” Journal of Political Economy 119 (2011): 766-819.
Berman, Eli, Jacob N. Shapiro, Joseph H. Felter and Michael Callen, “Do Working Men Rebel? Insurgency
and Unemployment in Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Philippines,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 55 (2011):
496-528.
Berman, Eli, Joseph H. Felter, Ethan Kapstein, and Erin Troland. “Predation, Economic Activity and
Violence: Evidence from the Philippines,” NBER WP #18375 (2012).
Berman, Eli, Joseph H. Felter, Jacob N. Shapiro, and Erin Troland. “Modest, Secure and Informed:
Successful Development in Conflict Zones.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 103
(2013): 512-517.
Berman, Eli and Aila Matanock. “The Empiricists’ Insurgency,” Annual Review of Political Science (forthcoming).
Besley, Timothy and Hannes Mueller. “Estimating the Peace Dividend: The Impact of Violence on Housing
Prices in Northern Ireland.” American Economic Review 102 (2012): 810-33.
Blattman, Christopher and Edward Miguel. "Civil War." Journal of Economic Literature 48 (2010): 3-57.
Brückner, Markus and Antonio Ciccone. “Rain and the Democratic Window of Opportunity.” Econometrica 79
(2010): 923-947.
Chaney, Eric. “Assessing Pacification Policy in Iraq: Evidence from Iraqi Financial Markets.” Journal of
Comparative Economics 36 (2008):1-16.
Chaney, Eric. “Revolt on the Nile: Economic Shocks, Religion, and Institutional Change.” Working paper,
Harvard University, 2010.
Collier, Paul. “Rebellion as a Quasi-Criminal Activity.” The Journal of Conflict Resolution 44 (2000): 839-853.
Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler. “Greed and Grievance in Civil War.” Oxford Economic Papers 56 (2004): 563595.
Coyne, Christopher, Gregory Dempster and Justin Isaacs. “Asset Values and the Sustainability of Peace
Prospects.” Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 50 (2010).
Crost, Benjamin, Joseph H. Felter and Patrick Johnston. “Aid Under Fire: Development Projects and Civil
Conflict.” American Economic Review, 104:1833-56 (2014).
Dube, Oeindrila and Juan Vargas. “Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict: Evidence from Colombia.”
Review of Economic Studies, 80:1384-1421, (2013).
Felter, Joseph H. “Taking Guns to a Knife Fight: A Case for Empirical Study of Counterinsurgency.” PhD
diss., Stanford University, 2005.
Fearon, James D. “Why Do Some Civil Wars Last So Much Longer Than Others?” Journal of Peace Research 41
(2004):275-302.
Fearon, James. “Economic Development, Insurgency, and Civil War.” In Institutions and Economic Performance
edited by Elhanan Helpman. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2008.
Fielding, David. “Modelling Political Instability and Economic Performance: Israeli Investment During the
Intifada.” Economica 70 (2003):159-86.
Government of the Philippines, National Statistics Coordination Board. n.d.
Gradstein, Mark. “Governance and Growth.” Journal of Development Economics 73 (2004):505-518.
Grossman, Hershel. “Kleptocracy and Revolutions.” Oxford Economic Papers 51 (1999): 267-283.
Gurr, Ted Robert. 1970. Why men rebel. Princeton, N.J.: Published for the Center of International Studies,
Princeton University by Princeton University Press.
Hanson, Matthew, Radha Iyengar, and Jonathan Monten. “Building Peace: The Impact of Aid on the Labor
Market for Insurgents.” Working Paper 17297, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
Hirshleifer, Jack. “Conflict and Rent-Seeking Success Functions: Ratio vs. Difference Models of Relative
Success.” Public Choice 63 (1989): 101-112.
Hirshleifer, Jack. The Dark Side of the Force. New York: Cambridge University Press: 2001.

29

International Crisis Group. “The Philippines: Counter-insurgency vs. Counter-terrorism in Mindanao.” Asia
Report Nº152, May 14, 2008.
International Crisis Group. “The Communist Insurgency in the Philippines: Tactics and Talks.” Asia Report
N°202, February 14, 2011.
Jones, Charles I. Introduction to Economic Growth. New York: W.W. Norton, 2002.
Kalyvas Stathis N and Laia Balcells. International system and technologies of rebellion: how the end of the
cold war shaped internal conflict. American Political Science Review 104:415—29, 2010.
Kapstein, Ethan B. Sharing the Wealth: Workers and the World Economy. New York: W.W. Norton, 1999.
Kapstein, Ethan B. “Two Dismal Sciences are Better than One: Economics and the Study of National
Security.” International Security 27 (2002):158-187.
Kapstein, Ethan B. and Nathan Converse. The Fate of Young Democracies. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2008.
Kilcullen, David. The Accidental Guerrilla. New York: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Kilcullen, David. Counterinsurgency. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Malkasian, Carter and Gerald Meyerle. Provincial Reconstruction Teams: How Do We Know They Work? U.S. Army
War College, 2009.
Marston, Daniel and Carter Malkasian, eds. Counterinsurgency in Modern Warfare. New York: Osprey, 2008.
Mas-Collel, Andreu, Michael D. Whinston and Jerry R. Green. Microeconomic Theory. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1995.
Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti. “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An
Instrumental Variables Approach.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (2004):725-753.
Morales, Ricardo C. Perpetual Wars: The Philippine Insurgencies. Master’s thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 2003.
Nordland, Rob. “Aid Worker’s Death Stirs Debate on Strategy.” New York Times, December 13, 2010.
North, Douglass C. Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: W. W. Norton, 1981.
Nunn, Nathan, and Nancy Qian. “Aiding Conflict: The Impact of U.S. Food Aid on Civil War.” American
Economic Review104:1630-66, 2012.
Perkins, Dwight H., Steven Radelet, David L. Lindauer, and Steven A. Block. Economics of Development. New
York: W.W. Norton, 2013.
Powell, Robert. “War as a Commitment Problem.” International Organization 60 (2006): 169-203.
Ross, Michael. “How Do Natural Resources Influence Civil War? Evidence from Thirteen Cases.”
International Organization 58 (2004): 35-68.
Rubin, Alissa J. and James Risen. “Costly Afghanistan Road Project is Marred by Unsavory Alliances.” New
York Times, May 1, 2011.
Sambanis, Nicholas, Paul Collier, Lani Elliott, Håvard Hegre, Anke Hoeffler, and Marta Reynal-Querol.
Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy. Washington, DC: Oxford University Press
and World Bank Publications, 2003.
Sarsons, Heather. “Rainfall and Conflict.” Manuscript, Yale University, 2011.
Stubbs, Richard. “From Search and Destroy to Hearts and Minds: The Evolution of British Strategy in
Malaya, 1948-1960.” In Counterinsurgency in Modern Warfare, edited by Daniel Marston and Carter
Malkasian. New York: Osprey, 2008.
Svensson, Jakob. “Investment, property rights and political instability: Theory and evidence.” European
Economic Review 42 (1998): 1317-1341.
Tilly, Charles. From Mobilization to Revolution. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1978.
US Army. Field Manual 3-24, Counterinsurgency Field Manual. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007.
US Senate. Evaluating Foreign Assistance to Afghanistan. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 2011.
World Bank. World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development. Washington DC, 2011.

30

Figure 1: Population, Investment and Political Violence in Philippine Provinces
Note: Clockwise from top left: population, industrial building permits/capita, casualties from
government-initiated violence and casualties from rebel-initiated violence.

31

Figure 2: Predation and taxation in a model of asymmetric conflict

FIRMS
Taxation
ion
Taxes

Extortion

Enforcement

GOVERNMENT

REBELS

Rebel Violence
Inf
Ci
Se
or
vili
rvi
m
an
ce
ati
Ca
s
on
su
alt
ies

Se
rvi
ce
s

COMMUNITY

32

Figure 3: Utility of noncombatant community from information-sharing

EUC

n<v

Information (i)
n>v

33

Figure 4: Best response functions of enforcement and violence

m*(v,I')
m*(v,I)

Enforcement
(m)
B •
A •
v*(m,I)

Violence (v)

34

Figure 5: Tax capture and predation in response to investment

m*(v,I')

C

Enforcement
(m)

v*(m,I')

B •
A •

D

v*(m,I)
v*'(m,I')

Violence (v)

35

Figure 6: Investment and Govt. Initiated Violence

Note: Top panel illustrates regression coefficient of building permits, Table 4,
column (6), for full sample. Bottom panel illustrates regression coefficient of
building permits, Table 4A, column (6), for sample excluding Zambales province.

36

Figure 7: Investment and Rebel-Initiated Violence

Note: Top panel illustrates regression coefficient of building permits, Table 5,
column (6), for full sample. Bottom panel illustrates regression coefficient of
building permits, Table 5A, column (6), for sample excluding Zambales province.

37

Table 1: Optimal choices

Community
information
sharing (i*)

Rebel
initiated
violence
(v*)

Norms
favoring rebels
(n)

-

Rebel initiated
violence
(v)

-

Government
initiated
violence
(m)

0

-

0

?#

+

Government
initiated
violence (m*)

Firms’
Investment (I*)

(Enforcement)

-

-

+

?#

+

(Enforcement)
Investment (I)

+

Notes: The table lists the derivatives dy*/dx of the column variables y with respect to the row
variables x, when all other row variables are held constant (as well as norms). For example, the top
right positive sign indicates that di*/dn|v,m,,I, < 0. These results are stated in the text as propositions
#3 through #7, #9 and #11. Community information sharing is not listed as a row since rebels,
government and firms make choices anticipating optimal response by communities in a later stage.
#

If the partial derivative

is positive then

must be negative, by Proposition #11.

38

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
Obs
Incidents / 10K
Govt Initiated Incidents (GI)
Total GI Fatalities
Govt Fatalities
Rebel Fatalities
Civilian Fatalities
Rebel Initiated Incidents (RI)
Total RI Fatalities
Govt Fatalities
Rebel Fatalities
Civilian Fatalities

560
560
560
560
560
560
560
560
560
560
560

Weight
Mean
LEVELS
579984131
0.2920597
579984131
0.1885914
579984131
0.0437253
579984131
0.0076726
579984131
0.0343113
579984131
0.0017414
579984131
0.1018476
579984131
0.0543291
579984131
0.0267594
579984131
0.0063105
579984131
0.0212592

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

0.4027358
0.2638765
0.094605
0.0276077
0.0740779
0.0086107
0.1734013
0.0969217
0.0539714
0.0282851
0.0424385

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

4.444788
3.232574
1.346906
0.4872676
1.212215
0.1195494
1.610619
0.9267434
0.6771753
0.7116066
0.3781036

Value of Industrial Building
Permits per Capita (PHP)

560

579984131

0.0654696

0.1018505

0

1.295499

Lagged Value of Industrial
Building Permits per Capita
Population

480
560

502363824
579984131

0.0696258
2604672

0.1073403
2986180

0
15974

1.295499
1.15E+07

FIRST DIFFERENCES
Incidents / 10K
Govt Initiated Incidents (GI)
Total GI Fatalities
Govt Fatalities
Rebel Fatalities
Civilian Fatalities
Rebel Initiated Incidents (RI)
Total RI Fatalities
Govt Fatalities
Rebel Fatalities
Civilian Fatalities

480
480
480
480
480
480
480
480
480
480
480

502363824
502363824
502363824
502363824
502363824
502363824
502363824
502363824
502363824
502363824
502363824

0.0117517
0.01189
-0.0019671
0.0009655
-0.0027906
-0.000142
-0.0001129
-0.0055969
-0.0030554
-0.0001815
-0.00236

0.2558822
0.1866488
0.0891239
0.0307652
0.0690093
0.0126537
0.1165021
0.0885958
0.0523314
0.0369223
0.0461349

-1.697044
-1.849644
-0.8093589
-0.462789
-0.5395726
-0.1195494
-0.8959716
-0.6095483
-0.6095483
-0.5984372
-0.2863266

1.618357
1.63037
0.8093589
0.4064789
0.5395726
0.1195494
0.7241455
0.8589457
0.609367
0.7116066
0.3781036

Value of Industrial Building
Permits per Capita (PHP)

480

502363824

-0.00132

0.1087733

-1.284107

1.27067

Lagged Value of Industrial
Building Permits per Capita
400
422998661
0.0018524
0.1153617
-1.284107
1.27067
Note: Each observation is a province–year, over the seven years 2002 through 2008, for 80 provinces, NT= 560 for
levels and 480 for first differences less 80 for lagged variables. All population figures are extrapolated based on the
censuses of 2000 and 2007. Means and standard deviations are weighted by estimated population. The variable "weight"
reports the sum of population over all NT province-years.

39

Table 3: Investment and violence by initiator
LEVELS
(1)

(2)

Left hand
side variable

All
Incidents

All
Fatalities

GI
RI
All
RI
Fatalities Fatalities Incidents Incidents

GI
Incidents

Value of
industrial
building
permits

-1.017***
(0.294)

0.141***
(0.0436)

0.0942**
(0.0421)

0.0439
(0.0341)

0.108*
(0.0579)

0.0432
(0.0533)

0.0514
(0.0444)

0.317***
(0.0565)

0.0413*** 0.0105 0.0308**
(0.0144) (0.00678) (0.0125)

0.0409
(0.0253)

0.0153
(0.0150)

0.0256*
(0.0140)

Constant

(3)

FIRST DIFFERENCES
(4)
(5)

(6)

(7)

Observations
R-squared

560
0.068

480
0.044

480
0.034

480
0.040

480
0.023

480
0.017

480
0.036

Mean DV

0.409

0.279

-0.00197

-0.00560

0.0118

0.0119

-0.000113

All specifications include a complete set of year indicators. Regressions are weighted by estimated
population. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by province. First differenced
specifications are chosen over fixed effects because of suspected nonstationarity of incidents per capita
in levels (Breitung panel unit root test has p=0.925 for rejecting a null hypothesis of a unit root in
levels of per capita incidents, allowing for demeaning and trends. For changes in per capita incidents
that statistic is p=0.000, lambda=-4.85.) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

40

Table 4: Government Violence and Investment
LEVELS

FIRST DIFFERENCES
(7)
(8)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Left hand
side variable

GI
Incidents

GI
Incidents

GI
Incidents

GI
Incidents

GI
Fatalities

GI
Fatalities

GI Govt
Fatalities

Value of
industrial
building
permits

-0.659***
(0.193)

-0.352***
(0.116)

0.0432
(0.0533)

0.0202
(0.0566)

0.0942**
(0.0421)

0.0851*
(0.0455)

0.0281*
(0.0156)

All RI
Fatalities

Constant

Observations
R-squared

1.600***
(0.244)

0.524***
(0.195)

0.208*
(0.111)

(9)

(10)

(11)

GI Govt
Fatalities

GI Rebel
Fatalities

GI Rebel
Fatalities

GI Civilian
Fatalities

(12)
GI
Civilian
Fatalities

0.0267
(0.0163)

0.0696***
(0.0264)

0.0622**
(0.0288)

-0.00349
(0.00339)

-0.00385
(0.00359)

0.0310
(0.0379)

0.168**
(0.0803)

0.00836
(0.00871)

0.183***
(0.0307)

0.0518***
(0.0158)

0.0153
(0.0150)

-0.000810
(0.0142)

0.0105
(0.00678)

0.00408
(0.00694)

0.00122
(0.00159)

0.000264
(0.00223)

0.00841
(0.00630)

0.00323
(0.00607)

0.000843
(0.000981)

0.000586
(0.00101)

560
0.075

560
0.392

480
0.017

480
0.077

480
0.034

480
0.075

480
0.015

480
0.023

480
0.035

480
0.080

480
0.010

480
0.014

Mean DV
0.266
0.266
0.0119
0.0119
-0.00197
-0.00197 0.000965 0.000965 -0.00279
-0.00279
-0.000142 -0.000142
All specifications include a complete set of year indicators. Regressions are weighted by estimated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by
province. First differenced specifications are chosen over fixed effects because of suspected nonstationarity of incidents per capita in levels (Breitung panel unit root test
has p=0.925 for rejecting a null hypothesis of a unit root in levels of per capita incidents, allowing for demeaning and trends. For changes in per capita incidents that
statistic is p=0.000, lambda=-4.85.) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

41

Table 4A: Government Violence and Investment – Zambales Province Excluded
LEVELS

FIRST DIFFERENCES
(7)
(8)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Left hand side
variable

All GI
Incidents

All GI
Incidents

All GI
Incidents

All GI
Incidents

All GI
Fatalities

All GI
Fatalities

GI Govt
Fatalities

Value of
industrial
building
permits

-0.805***
(0.205)

-0.439***
(0.123)

-0.000866
(0.0615)

-0.0430
(0.0506)

0.0407*
(0.0238)

0.0238
(0.0213)

0.00724
(0.00738)

All RI Fatalities

Constant

Observations
R-squared
Mean DV

1.583***
(0.245)

0.532***
(0.196)

0.213*
(0.112)

(9)

(10)

GI Govt
Fatalities

GI Rebel
Fatalities

0.00461
(0.00759)

0.0396*
(0.0203)

0.0331
(0.0381)

GI Rebel
Fatalities

(11)
GI
Civilian
Fatalities

(12)
GI Civilian
Fatalities

0.0260
(0.0182)

-0.00611
(0.00502)

-0.00679
(0.00529)

0.172**
(0.0807)

0.00865
(0.00882)

0.191***
(0.0311)

0.0577***
(0.0159)

0.0156
(0.0151)

-0.000255
(0.0142)

0.0105
(0.00685)

0.00414
0.00135
(0.00697) (0.00161)

0.000364
(0.00222)

0.00829
(0.00635)

0.00317
0.000864
(0.00612) (0.000991)

0.000607
(0.00102)

553
0.090
0.266

553
0.397
0.266

474
0.018
0.0119

474
0.079
0.0119

474
0.025
-0.00197

474
0.069
-0.00197

474
0.017
0.000965

474
0.028
-0.00279

474
0.075
-0.00279

474
0.015
-0.000142

474
0.008
0.000965

474
0.011
-0.000142

All specifications include a complete set of year indicators. Regressions are weighted by estimated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by
province. First differenced specifications are chosen over fixed effects because of suspected nonstationarity of incidents per capita in levels (Breitung panel unit root test
has p=0.925 for rejecting a null hypothesis of a unit root in levels of per capita incidents, allowing for demeaning and trends. For changes in per capita incidents that
statistic is p=0.000, lambda=-4.85.) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

42

Table 5: Rebel Violence and Investment
LEVELS

FIRST DIFFERENCES
(7)
(8)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Left hand
side variable

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Fatalities

All RI
Fatalities

RI Govt
Fatalities

Value of
industrial
building
permits

-0.363***
(0.113)

-0.231***
(0.0631)

0.0514
(0.0444)

0.0233
(0.0506)

0.0439
(0.0341)

0.0247
(0.0374)

0.0183
(0.0142)

All GI
Fatalities
Constant
Observations
R-squared

1.083***
(0.237)

0.299***
(0.0962)

0.204**
(0.0810)

0.134***
(0.0270)

0.0669***
(0.0152)

0.0256*
(0.0140)

0.0224*
(0.0131)

0.0308**
(0.0125)

560
0.055

560
0.396

480
0.036

480
0.087

480
0.040

(9)

(10)

RI Govt
Fatalities

RI Rebel
Fatalities

0.000458
(0.0165)

0.0126*
(0.00733)

0.190**
(0.0821)

0.0286** 0.00991* 0.00792
(0.0125) (0.00548) (0.00549)
480
0.081

480
0.029

480
0.130

RI Rebel
Fatalities

(11)
RI
Civilian
Fatalities

(12)
RI
Civilian
Fatalities

0.0110
(0.00757)

0.0130
(0.0210)

0.0133
(0.0204)

0.0173
(0.0144)

-0.00290
(0.0409)

0.00925
(0.00581)

0.00907
(0.00583)

0.0116*
0.0116*
(0.00671) (0.00677)

480
0.020

480
0.022

480
0.028

480
0.028

Mean DV
0.141
0.141
-0.000113 -0.000113 -0.00560 -0.00560 -0.00306 -0.00306 -0.000181 -0.000181 -0.00236 -0.00236
All specifications include a complete set of year indicators. Regressions are weighted by estimated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by
province. First differenced specifications are chosen over fixed effects because of suspected nonstationarity of incidents per capita in levels (Breitung panel unit root
test has p=0.925 for rejecting a null hypothesis of a unit root in levels of per capita incidents, allowing for demeaning and trends. For changes in per capita incidents
that statistic is p=0.000, lambda=-4.85.) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

43

Table 5A: Rebel Violence and Investment – Zambales Province Excluded
LEVELS

FIRST DIFFERENCES
(7)
(8)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Left hand side
variable

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Fatalities

All RI
Fatalities

RI Govt
Fatalities

Value of
industrial
building
permits

-0.428***
(0.131)

-0.228***
(0.0747)

0.104**
(0.0491)

0.0917**
(0.0437)

0.0793*
(0.0432)

0.0707*
(0.0393)

0.0193
(0.0225)

All GI Fatalities

Constant

Observations
R-squared
Mean DV

1.084***
(0.240)

0.308***
(0.0973)

0.210**
(0.0814)

(9)

(10)

RI Govt
Fatalities

RI Rebel
Fatalities

0.0115
(0.0211)

0.0188*
(0.00970)

0.191**
(0.0824)

RI Rebel
Fatalities

(11)
RI
Civilian
Fatalities

RI Civilian
Fatalities

0.0180*
(0.00943)

0.0412**
(0.0191)

0.0412**
(0.0186)

0.0184
(0.0145)

(12)

0.000639
(0.0415)

0.137***
(0.0276)

0.0671***
(0.0158)

0.0245*
(0.0140)

0.0212
(0.0130)

0.0298**
(0.0124)

0.0276**
(0.0124)

0.00960*
(0.00549)

0.00760
(0.00549)

0.00929
(0.00585)

0.00910
(0.00588)

0.0109
(0.00666)

0.0109
(0.00673)

553
0.062
0.141

553
0.396
0.141

474
0.040
-0.000113

474
0.093
-0.000113

474
0.041
-0.00560

474
0.084
-0.00560

474
0.028
-0.00306

474
0.130
-0.00306

474
0.021
-0.000181

474
0.023
-0.000181

474
0.032
-0.00236

474
0.032
-0.00236

All specifications include a complete set of year indicators. Regressions are weighted by estimated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by province.
First differenced specifications are chosen over fixed effects because of suspected nonstationarity of incidents per capita in levels (Breitung panel unit root test has
p=0.925 for rejecting a null hypothesis of a unit root in levels of per capita incidents, allowing for demeaning and trends. For changes in per capita incidents that statistic is
p=0.000, lambda=-4.85.) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

44

Table 6: Government Violence and Past Investment
LEVELS

FIRST DIFFERENCES
(7)
(8)

Left hand
side
variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

All GI
Incidents

All GI
Incidents

All GI
Incidents

All GI
Incidents

All GI
Fatalities

All GI
Fatalities

GI Govt
Fatalities

Lagged
value of
building
permits

-0.722***
(0.192)

-0.451***
(0.132)

-0.0699
(0.0445)

-0.0721
(0.0443)

-0.0740***
(0.0224)

-0.0749***
(0.0227)

-0.0196***
(0.00632)

All RI
Fatalities
Constant
Observatio
ns
R-squared
Mean DV

1.438***
(0.224)

0.568***
(0.190)

0.260*
(0.146)

(9)

(10)

GI Govt
Fatalities

GI Rebel
Fatalities

GI Rebel
Fatalities

-0.0198***
(0.00649)

-0.0473***
(0.0150)

-0.0481***
(0.0158)

0.0467
(0.0480)

(11)

(12)

GI Civilian GI Civilian
Fatalities
Fatalities

-0.00705
(0.00760)

0.210**
(0.105)

-0.00707
(0.00760)
0.00285
(0.00927)

0.192***
(0.0314)

0.0531***
(0.0183)

0.00870
(0.0199)

0.0161
(0.0154)

-0.0282***
(0.0106)

-0.0248**
(0.00955)

-0.00227
(0.00193)

-0.00166
(0.00194)

-0.0251***
(0.00914)

-0.0223***
(0.00823)

-0.000868
(0.000982)

-0.000831
(0.000981)

480
0.096
0.266

480
0.350
0.266

400
0.021
0.0119

400
0.077
0.0119

400
0.027
-0.00197

400
0.077
-0.00197

400
0.011
0.000965

400
0.023
0.000965

400
0.027
-0.00279

400
0.084
-0.00279

400
0.014
-0.000142

400
0.014
-0.000142

All specifications include a complete set of year indicators. Regressions are weighted by estimated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by province.
First differenced specifications are chosen over fixed effects because of suspected nonstationarity of incidents per capita in levels (Breitung panel unit root test has p=0.925
for rejecting a null hypothesis of a unit root in levels of per capita incidents, allowing for demeaning and trends. For changes in per capita incidents that statistic is p=0.000,
lambda=-4.85.) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

45

Table 7: Rebel Violence and Past Investment
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Left hand
side variable

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Incidents

All RI
Fatalities

All RI
Fatalities

RI Govt
Fatalities

RI Govt
Fatalities

RI Rebel
Fatalities

Lagged value
of building
permits

-0.374***
(0.112)

-0.186***
(0.0590)

-0.0135
(0.0189)

0.00708
(0.0229)

0.00376
(0.0158)

0.0184
(0.0174)

9.10e-05
(0.0111)

0.0141
(0.0115)

-0.000462
(0.00510)

All GI
Fatalities
Constant

1.073***
(0.246)

0.278***
(0.103)

0.198**
(0.0889)

0.189**
(0.0946)

RI Rebel
Fatalities

(11)
RI
Civilian
Fatalities

RI Civilian
Fatalities

0.000438
(0.00513)

0.00413
(0.0135)

0.00390
(0.0137)

0.0122
(0.0156)

(12)

-0.00318
(0.0379)

0.146***
(0.0319)

0.0717***
(0.0205)

-0.00761
(0.0176)

0.000233
(0.0149)

-0.0130
(0.0123)

-0.00745
(0.0115)

-0.00932
(0.00631)

-0.00399
(0.00525)

-0.00712
(0.00510)

-0.00678
(0.00523)

0.00341
(0.00740)

0.00332
(0.00741)

Observations
R-squared

480
0.066

480
0.370

400
0.081

400
0.008

400
0.058

400
0.021

400
0.138

400
0.013

400
0.014

400
0.012

400
0.012

Mean DV

0.141

0.141

400
0.031
0.000113

-0.000113

-0.00560

-0.00560

-0.00306

-0.00306

-0.000181

-0.000181

-0.00236

-0.00236

All specifications include a complete set of year indicators. Regressions are weighted by estimated population. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by
province. First differenced specifications are chosen over fixed effects because of suspected nonstationarity of incidents per capita in levels (Breitung panel unit root
test has p=0.925 for rejecting a null hypothesis of a unit root in levels of per capita incidents, allowing for demeaning and trends. For changes in per capita incidents
that statistic is p=0.000, lambda=-4.85.) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

46

Appendix: Proofs of Propositions
Proposition #1: The community will share information with government if and only if the costs of
violence exceed norms of noncooperation.
Proof: The community chooses i on the closed interval [0,1] to maximize expected utility,
EUC(i, n, v, m )│n = u[ c – n ] h(m ) i + u[ c – v ](1-h(m ) i ) ..
Note that since the probability of control is proportional to information shared, monitoring and
information are complements. Since C chooses i,
0≥

= h(m), so the first order condition for C is

u[c – n ] h(m ) - u[c – v ]h(m ),

which implies that either m = 0 or that the best response function of the community is

where the equivalent conditions to the right follow from u(.) being strictly monotonic. Prop. #2 of
BSF rules out the case where m = 0.
Note: In proofs below it will be useful to define p*≡p(i*,m ), the probability of government control,
anticipating optimal information sharing by the community. If m > 0 then
E(i*) = P(i*=1) = P(n < v ) = F( v ) = ( v - nL )f,
where f =

, the density of the uniform distribution, so that
(5)

p* = (v - nL) f h(m ) if m > 0 ,
or p* = 0 if m = 0.

Proposition #2: A unique Nash equilibrium in pure strategies exists for this game.
Proof: First we show that all choice variables in steps #2 and #3 have best response functions, then
we invoke concavity and convexity of objective functions to show existence and uniqueness.
For a proof that enforcement, m, is strictly positive see BSF. Note that this resolves the ambiguity in
step #3 so that i* is determined by equation (4) and p* by equation (5).
The proof of uniqueness requires continuing backwards through the sequence of play to step #2 (in
which government, rebels and firms make simultaneous choices). The government anticipates
optimal behavior of C and minimizes expected costs by optimally choosing m, trading off reductions
in expected damage against the marginal costs of counterinsurgency. G solves
47

ECG( v , m , p*, I ) = A(v )[1-p*] + D(m ) – θG I p* ,
where p* is defined in (5) above. The first order condition for m is 0 ≤

-[A(v )+ θG I ](v -nL)f

h'(m ) + D'(m ), which for an interior solution equates the marginal cost of counterinsurgency effort
to the marginal benefit in reduced expected violence costs and increased expected tax revenue.
Solving for enforcement,

-[A(v ) + θG I ] (v -nL) f h''(m ) + D''(m ) > 0. (Recalling that v > nL

and h''(m ) <0 by assumption.) Thus m has a unique interior solution m* > 0, given v and I, defining
a best response function for enforcement m*(v, I ).
Rebels choose a level of violence to maximize expected violence costs imposed on government,
anticipating optimal behavior of C.
The first order condition 0 ≥

EUR(v , m, p*,I ) = [A(v )+ θR(v )I ](1-p*) – B(v , I ).
[A'(v ) + θR'(v )I ](1-p*) – [A(v ) + θR(v )I ] f h(m) –

indicates how rebels weigh the marginal benefit of increased violence against the increased
probability of government control and increased marginal costs. The second order condition,
A''(v ) + θR''(v )I ](1-p*) – 2[A'(v ) + θR'(v )I ]f h(m) -

< 0, so that v* is a unique

maximum (due to the concavity of A(.) and θR , and the convexity of B(.)), given v. Thus the first
order condition defines R’s best response function v*(m,I). Since A(0) = 0 and A' > 0, v* must be
positive.
Firms solve

, E (v,m,p*,I ) = x(I) – I – [θG p* +θR (v)[1-p*]] I which yields a first order condition
0 ≤ EΠ(v,m,p*,I ) = x'(I) – 1 – [θG p* + θR(v) [1-p*]] .

The concavity of x(.) implies a negative second derivative, which together with a condition on the
profitability of the first unit implies a unique interior maximum at some positive level of investment
I. Thus the first order condition holds with equality, defining a best response function I*(m,v).
Collecting first order conditions for the four players, equilibrium will be characterized by five
equations in five unknowns.
We have a closed form solution for optimal information sharing by C in stage #3
.
In stage #2, three equations in three unknowns determine best response functions m*(v, I) for G,
v*(m, I ) for R in and I*(m, v ) for F, in stage #2:
0=

-[A(v)+ θGI ] ( v - nL ) f h'(m*) + D'(m*),
48

0=
0=

[A'(v*)+ θR'(v*)I ](1-p*) – [A(v*) + θR(v*)I ] f h(m) ) –

, and

E Π(v,m,a,I ) = x'(I*) – 1 – [θG p* + θR (v) (1-p*)] .

Though in general we cannot solve closed form solutions for m*, v* and I*, the concavity of EUR
and EΠ and the convexity of ECG ensure existence of a unique Nash equilibrium for the game.30

Proposition #3: In regions where norms favor rebels, communities have a lower probability of
sharing information with government, rebels choose to use more violence, and government chooses
to provide less enforcement, all ceteris paribus.
Proof: A shift in norms towards rebels is a change in the endpoints of the uniform distribution F(n),
in which ∆nL = ∆nU. Note that this shift leaves f =

, the density of the uniform distribution,

unchanged. The probability that communities share information is E(i*) = P(i*=1) = P(n < v ) = F(v
) = (v - nL )f, so the effect on information sharing of a shift in norms toward rebels is given by
dE(i*)/ dnL|m,g,v = -f . The effect on violence of a shift in norms is dv*/ dnL|m,I = -

/

|m,I , by the implicit function theorem. The denominator is negative (see proposition #2) and
the numerator is - d[A'(v ) + θR'(v )I ](1-p*)/ dnL|m,I =- [A'(v ) + θR'(v )I ] f h(m ) <0, so dv*/ dnL|m,I
>0. For government, the effect on enforcement is dm*/ dnL|m,g,I = -

/

|v,I . The

denominator is positive and the numerator is [A(v)+ θGI ] f h'(m*)>0, so dm*/ dnL|m,g,I <0.

Proposition #4: Investment is higher where norms favor government if and only if the government
tax rate is less than the rebel extortion rate, ceteris paribus.
Proof: dI*/ dnL|m,v = –

/

|m.v . The denominator is negative because of the concavity of

x(.). The numerator is the cross partial derivative

= ( θR – θG) dp*/ dnL

= –( θR –θG)f h(m). So sgn (dI*/ dnL|m,v ) = sgn (θG– θR) .

30

See Mas-Collel, Whinston, and Green, proposition 8.D.3.

49

Proposition #5: Government enforcement increases in rebel violence, ceteris paribus.
Proof: The government chooses a level of enforcement, m*, that solves the first order condition 0 =
-[A(v)+ θGI ] ( v - nL ) f h'(m*) + D'(m*), , which equates the marginal cost of enforcement to
the marginal benefit in reduced expected costs of violence and increased expected tax revenue. The
cross partial

= -A'(v ) ( v -nL) f h'(m ) - [A(v ) + θG I] f h'(m )< 0, and

(v -nL) f h''(m ) + D''(m ) > 0, so that

-[A(v ) + θG I ]

> 0, by the implicit function theorem.

Proposition #6: Rebel violence declines in government enforcement, ceteris paribus.
Proof: The first order condition 0

[A'(v ) + θR'(v )I ](1-p*) – [A(v ) + θR(v )I ] f h(m) –

indicates how rebels weigh the marginal benefit of increased violence against the increased
probability of government control and increased marginal costs. The second order condition,
A''(v ) + θR''(v )I ](1-p*) – 2[A'(v ) + θR'(v )I ]f h(m) -

< 0, (due to the concavity of

A(.) and θR , and the convexity of B(.)), given I. To sign how rebels’ optimal choice of violence
responds to counterinsurgency effort, m, we calculate
- [A(v ) + θR(v )I ] f h'(m) < 0, so that

= -[A'(v )+θR'(v )I ]( g + v - nL )f h'(m)

< 0 by the implicit function theorem.

Proposition #7: Government enforcement increases in investment, ceteris paribus.
Proof: The government chooses a level of enforcement, m*, that solves the first order condition 0=
-[A(v)+ θGI ] ( v - nL ) f h'(m*) + D'(m*), , which equates the marginal cost of enforcement to
the marginal benefit in reduced expected costs of violence and increased expected tax
revenue
so that

= - θG (v -nL) f h'(m ) < 0, and

-[A(v ) + θG I ] (v -nL) f h''(m ) + D''(m ) > 0,

> 0, by the implicit function theorem.

Proposition #8: Violence increases in investment if and only if the rate effect, θR'(v*)(1-p*), exceeds
the sum of the incidence effect, θR(v*) f h(m), and the opportunity cost (or gratitude) effect

,

holding enforcement constant.

50

Proof: The slope of

has the same sign as the cross partial

since EUR is concave in

violence. Rebels set violence according to the first order condition 0 =
p*) – [A(v ) + θR(v )I ] f h(m) –
h(m) -

The cross partial derivative

[A'(v ) + θR'(v )I ](1= θR'(v*)(1-p*) – θR(v*) f

which reflects how the marginal utility of violence for rebels is influenced by increased

investment. The first term captures the rate effect, which is positive, the second captures the
incidence effect, which is negative, and the third reflects the increased marginal cost of violence for
rebels when investment is high, which is positive (by assumption). Thus sgn(
[θR'(v*)(1-p*) – θR(v*)f h(m) -

) = sgn

].

Proposition #9: Investment increases in enforcement, holding violence constant.
Proof: The firm’s first order condition is 0 = EΠ(v,m,a,I ) = x'(I*) – 1 – [θG p* + θR (1-p*)] , and the
second order condition is negative, as in the proof of Proposition #4 above. The cross partial
derivative



= (θR - θG ) (v - nL) f h(m ) has the same sign as θR - θG , which is positive by

assumption. By the implicit function theorem,

> 0.

Proposition #10: Investment declines in violence if and only if the rate effect, θR(v)(1-p*), exceeds
the incidence effect, (θR- θG) f h(m), holding enforcement constant.
Proof: To solve

we require the cross partial

= (θR- θG) f h(m) - θR(v)(1-p*). The second

derivative of expected profits in investment is negative (see proof of proposition #5) so by the
implicit function theorem the slope
sign(

will have the same sign as this cross-partial derivative.

) = sign [(θR- θG) f h(m) - θR(v)(1-p*) ] .

Proposition #11: If violence increases in investment, then investment must decrease in violence,
holding enforcement constant.

51

Proof:

implies θR'(v*)(1-p*) > θRf h(m) +

(by proposition #8).

h(m) >0 so subtracting both from both sides implies that θR'(v*)(1-p*) that θR'(v*)(1-p*) > (θR -θG) f h(m). Thus

> 0 and θG f

> (θR -θG) f h(m) , and

< 0 (by proposition #10).

52

