                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  POPULATION GROWTH, LABOR SUPPLY,
                         AND EMPLOYMENT IN
                        DEVELOPING COUNTRIES




                          David E. Bloom


                        Richard B. Freeman




                      Working Paper No. 1837




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 1986




We thank reviewers from the Committee on Population at the National
Academy of Sciences for useful comments. We also thank Vijaya
Ramachandran for excellent research assistance and for especially
helpful discussions and suggestions. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper #1837
                                                         February 1986

                Population   Grc,qth, Labor Supply, and ETp1oyrrent
                              in Developing Countries

                                      ABSTRC

        The economies of the less developed Countries are about to face perhaps
  the greatest challenge in their histories: generating a sufficient number of
  jobs at reasonable wages to absorb their rapidly growing populations into
  productive employment. In terms of absolute magnitude, this challenge has no
  precedent in human history. In some respects, this challenge is also
  unprecedented in terms of its nature, given, on the one hand, the limited
  availability of natural resources in many countries and, on the other hand,
  the widespread availability of advanced technology.

       This paper examines the nature and magnitude of the principal effects of
  population growth on labor supply and employment in the developing economies
  of the world. On the supply side of labor markets, we discuss key features
  of the interrelations between population growth and the labor force. These
  include the lags between population growth and labor force participation; the
  independent effects on labor supply of accelerated population growth due to
  changes in fertility, mortality, and migration; patterns and trends in labor
  force participation rates; and gender differences in labor supply behavior.
  On the demand side, we describe and analyze the nature of labor markets in
  developing economies and attempt to identify the key factors that condition
  their labor absorption capacity.

      Descriptive statistics on the characteristics of developing country labor
 markets and on the relationships between population growth, labor supply,
 employment shifts, and growth of output per worker are presented and
 discussed.

      The key result of our analysis is that, despite the unprecedented
 magnitude of population growth and the existence of imperfections in labor
 markets, developing economies tended to shift between 1960 and 1980, from low-
 productivity agriculture to the higher productivity service and industrial
 sectors and, albeit with some exceptions, to raise real income per capita.

      With respect to their prospects for the remainder of this century, we also
 conclude that Malthusian disasters will not necessarily be the result of
 forecasted population growth, provided the developing economies can generate
 human and physical capital investments of comparable relative magnitudes to
 the past two decades. However, on the basis of past history, the middle-
 income developing countries are likely to perform better in this respect than
 the low-income countries, some of whom may need considerable help if they are
 to absorb increased population while shifting labor to more productive sectors
 and raising output per worker.

David E. Bloom                                          Richard B.    Freeman
Deparrent of Economics                                  Departrrent of Economics
Harvard University                                      Harvard University
Can-bridge,    02138                                    Cantridge, W 02138
                                  Table of Contents

Abstract

I.       Introduction

II.      Population Growth and Labor Supply

III. Labor Supply and Employment

IV.      Population and Employment, 1960-1980

V.       Country-Specific Experiences

VI.      Conclusions and Speculations About the Future



References

Tables

Appendix
                  POPULATION GROWTH, LABOR SUPPLY, AND EMPLOYMENT

                               IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES



 I.    Introduction



      The population of today's less developed countries increased by roughly 1.2

 billion people between 1960 and 1980. This increase is larger than the 1984

population of all of the more developed countries of the world combined. [1] It

 is also more than twice the 1984 population of Africa, and three times the 1984

population of Latin America.     By the end of this century, all of the surviving

children of this global baby-boom will have reached working ages. In the first

twenty years of the next century, this pattern will repeat itself, but with even

larger numbers. 1.7 billion people are expected to be added to the populations

of today's developing countries between 1980 and the year 2000. This increase

is roughly equal to the total population of the less developed world as recently

as 1950. (2]

      As these projections and comparisons make clear, the economies of the less

developed countries are about to face perhaps the greatest challenge in their

histories: generating a sufficient number of jobs at reasonable wages to absorb

their rapidly growing populations into productive employment. In terms of

absolute magnitude, this challenge has no precedent in human history. In some

respects, this challenge is also unprecedented in terms of its nature, given, on

the one hand, the limited availability of natural resources (and especially

land) in many countries and, on the other hand, the widespread availability of

advanced technology.

      The purpose of this paper is to examine the nature and magnitude of the

principal effects of population growth on labor supply and employment in the
                                      -2-


developing economies of the world. We do this mainly by analyzing the effect of

population growth on the operation and evolution of developing country labor

markets. On the supply side of the market, we discuss key features of the

interrelations between population growth and the labor force. These include the

lags between population growth and labor force participation; the independent

effects on labor supply of accelerated population growth due to changes in

fertility, mortality, and migration; patterns and trends in labor force

participation rates; and gender differences in labor supply behavior. On the

demand side of the market, we describe and analyze the nature of labor markets

in developing economies and attempt to identify the key factors that condition

their labor absorption capacity.

     Although it is tempting to try, we do not provide a comprehensive empirical

description of the structural labor supply and labor demand changes that result

from rapid population growth. Cross—country experiences vary too widely and

data on many key variables are too sketchy and unreliable. Moreover, our review

of existing literature indicates that there is no standard pattern of labor

market responses to population growth to which a large number of countries

closely conform. We will, however, buttress our descriptive analysis with a

discussion of a range of country-specific experiences.

     In proceeding this way, we hope to clarify some of the labor market issues

that are central to the ongoing debate between two groups of leading students of

the relationship between population and development: the population pessimists

and the population optimists. [3) On the one hand, the pessimists advance the

view that rapid population growth hinders the growth of income per capita,

thereby reducing rates of savings and investment, and resulting in mass

underemployment, unemployment, and poverty. The optimists, on the other hand,
                                      -3-


stress the point that population growth can stimulate both technological change

and the adoption of techniques that realize economies of scale, and therefore

promote economic growth. Indeed, cross-country correlations between growth in

income per head and the rate of population growth are typically quite weak [4]

and there are a number of countries that have simultaneously experienced rapid

growth of both their economies and populations. Until the 1930's, moreover,

population tended to grow more rapidly in countries with more rapid productivity

growth, most notably of course in the areas settled by European immigrants.

     As we will try to make clear, these alternative views are overly

simplistic. Population and labor force growth are not necessarily related

strongly to labor absorption. Other factors, including labor market

imperfections and technical considerations relating to the marginal productivity

of labor in agriculture are also key conditioning variables.

     In Section II we discuss the relationship between population growth and

labor supply and analyze selected descriptive statistics. In Section III we

discuss the nature of labor demand in models of developing country labor

markets. Section IV analyses descriptive statistics on structural changes in

employment in less developed economies and on the growth of employment relative

to the growth of output per capita. It presents our chief optimistic finding:

that despite the unprecedented population growth in developing countries in the

1960—SO period, the countries were generally able to "absorb" the new labor

supply at increased productivity and with a shift towards more productive

employment. Section V presents a discussion of recent labor market experiences

in a number of individual developing countries. Section VI outlines our

conclusions and offers some speculations on the ability of developing economies

to absorb the massive numbers of workers that will enter their labor markets in

the next few decades.
                                      _4...




II. Population Growth and Labor Supply


    A.    Conceptual Interrelations


     The purpose of this section is to identify and discuss the principal

linkages between population growth and labor supply. In so doing, we will

simply think of labor supply in terms of published labor force participation

rates (i.e., the ratio of individuals who are either employed or unemployed but

seeking work, to employed, unemployed, and economically inactive individuals).

We will overlook issues relating to the number of hours people work, to

measurement problems related to the determination of whether individuals are, or

would like to be, "economically active," and to qualitative characteristics of

members of the labor force such as their ability and motivation. Although these

characteristics of a working population are obviously important determinants of

an economy's productive capacity, the measurement issues they raise are simply

beyond the scope of this paper. [5)

    Generally speaking, the labor supply forthcoming from any population

depends on the size of the population, broken down into different sex and age

groups, and the participation rates for each of those groups. Whereas

population size by age and sex is directly determined by population growth (and

more specifically, by the history of fertility, mortality, and migration

patterns), participation rates tend to be more economically and culturally

determined. For example, labor force participation is nearly universal for

prime-aged males in less-developed economies, whereas its incidence is

considerably lower for younger and older men. Participation rates for these

latter groups also exhibit considerable variability over time and across

countries. In addition, although it is well known that published labor force
                                       —5-.




 participation rates f or women are poor indicators of their economic
                                                                        activity
 levels (especially in countries in which women work predominantly in

 agriculture), these rates tend to vary widely across countries and over time and

 to be lower at each age than corresponding rates for men.   Nevertheless, it is
 undoubtedly the case that labor force participation rates are themselves

 influenced by the same fertility, mortality, and migration patterns which

 determine population size. Thus, in discussing the effects of population growth

 on labor supply, we will want to distinguish between pure "accounting" effects

 and other effects which are fundamentally "behavioral" in nature.

      There are three main points we would like to make about the interrelation-

ship between population growth (and changes in population growth) and labor

supply: (1) population growth will affect labor supply with a lag whose length

depends on the reasons underlying the growth; in particular, an acceleration of

population growth because of an increase in net in-migration or a decline in

mortality will have a different impact on the labor force than an acceleration

of population growth that results from an increase in fertility; (2) fertility

and mortality levels are important determinants of labor supply, independently

of their relation to each other; and (3) fertility increase and mortality

decline are likely to have an immediate effect on labor supply through their

"behavioral" effects on labor force participation rates. We will consider each

of these points in turn.

    (1) It is well known that population growth will tend to have a lagged

effect on labor supply. For example, if population growth is the result of

relatively high fertility or of an age distribution that is heavily Concentrated

in the childbearing years, the growth in any year will have its impact focused

at age 0 of the age distribution. Thus, it will take at least ten to fifteen
                                      -6-


years before the effects of a particular year's population growth even begin to

be felt in the labor force. It will probably be more like 20 to 25 years before

the net additions to the population begin to have a substantial impact on its

labor force. (6]

     On the other hand, if population growth is mainly the result of substantial

in-migration, its principal effect on labor supply will not be lagged since

migration propensities tend to be relatively low before the teenage years.

Although in-migration is a relatively small contributor to population growth in

most developing countries, this point also applies to regions within a country.

In other words, population growth resulting from an excess of births over deaths

in rural portions of an economy may create pressures for migration to urban

areas. To the extent that the migrants tend to be of working age, population

growth in the urban areas will have an immediate -- as opposed to a lagged --

effect   on labor force growth. [7]

    (2) Although changes in levels of fertility and mortality will both affect

population growth rates, they will do so in ways that tend to have different

labor force implications. For example, an acceleration of population growth

because of an increase in fertility will result in a more steeply sloped age

distribution and a higher dependency burden, both immediately and when the

population achieves a stable form. In contrast, an acceleration of population

growth due to a mortality decline may steepen the age distribution somewhat, and

increase the dependency burden of the population, but not by as much as a

fertility increase. This difference is due to the fact that the effects of

mortality decline are not concentrated at one point on the age distribution but

rather, spread out across the age distribution. In fact, mortality declines

will affect the age distribution differently at different initial levels of
                                          —7-


mortality. For example, it is well known that mortality reductions in

high-mortality populations are enjoyed mainly by infants and young children,

whereas mortality reductions in middle mortality populations are more evenly

spread throughout the age distribution. (In low mortality populations,

mortality declines are largely concentrated at the oldest ages, where labor

force participation rates are quite low.) Thus, mortality declines in high-

mortality populations will be analogous to fertility increases and therefore

have effects on labor supply that have long lags. In contrast, mortality

declines in middle-mortality populations will be more immediately felt

throughout the age distribution.

     Because changes in mortality and fertility tend to differentially affect an

age distribution, even holding constant the rate of natural increase in a stable

population, fertility and mortality levels are potentially important

determinants of the proportion of a population in the working ages. To

illustrate this point, consider the example of the two West model stable

populations presented in McNicoll (1984a, p. 187). The first population has a

birth rate of 4.5 percent and a death rate of 2.0 percent, while the second

population has a birth rate of 3.0 percent and a death rate of 0.5 percent.

Thus, both populations have identical rates of increase. However, they do not

have identical age distributions. In the first population, 54 percent of the

population falls between the ages 15 and 64. In the second population, 57

percent of the population is of working age. Although this difference in the

age distributions is not particularly large, it does illustrate the point that

fertility and mortality levels have an effect on the age distribution -— and

therefore on the labor force --   that   is independent of their crude difference.

    (3) The final point about the effect of population growth on labor supply
                                      -8-


relates to the behavioral relationships between fertility and mortality levels

and changes and labor force participation rates. To begin with, it must be

recognized that childrearing and labor force participation are both time-

intensive activities in developed and developing countries alike. It is,

however, difficult to generalize about the extent to which women can engage in

both simultaneously. For example, in some high fertility populations, women

are constrained either from working at all or from working away from the home.

But in other high fertility populations women are able to spend a great deal of

time working outside the home by having older children take care of their young

children. Despite the difficulty of generalizing, the possibility of combining

children and work is greater in rural areas of developing countries than in

urban areas since the workplace and the home are not separated by as much time

and distance. In addition, women have relatively more freedom to work, at

least for a greater portion of their lives, in low fertility populations. Thus,

a decline in fertility may have an immediate impact on the size of the labor

force because of its effect on the participation rates of women. Empirical

evidence on this point is mixed, however, with participation rates of 30-45 year

old women increasing after fertility declines in some countries, and decreasing

in others. As noted above, this suggests that labor force participation rates

of women, which can be an important component of overall participation rates,

are not just economically determined, but also culturally determined, in many

developing economies. Of course, this conclusion is weakened to the extent that

the types of jobs women do are also culturally and economically determined,

since some economic activities are measured better than others (i.e., "disguised

employment" may be an important issue). [8]

     Mortality changes may also have an effect on the labor force. In this
                                      -9-


case, however, the effect does not operate entirely through the effect of

mortality decline on age-specific participation rates. Rather, the effect also

operates through the positive effect of declining morbidity on the quality and

productivity of the labor force. Of course, to the extent that a decline in

mortality is perceived by individuals as extending their worklife horizons, it

may also provide greater incentives for undertaking human capital investments.

Whereas such investments will tend to contribute to the overall quality of the

labor force, it will also tend to delay the entry of individuals into the labor

force and therefore reduce aggregate participation rates. Indeed, one of the

few patterns in labor force participation rates that has been observed with some

degree of regularity in different developing economies is the declining rate of

labor force participation for both men and women at the younger ages, a trend

that is highly correlated with the expansion of developing countries' education

systems.


     B. Empirical Patterns


     In this section we present and discuss evidence on the linkages between

population growth and the size and the structure of the labor force in

developing countries. Most of the statistics we analyze are drawn from various

publications of the World Bank, although some of those statistics were

originally produced by the UN or the ILO. Countries will be grouped in two

conventional ways for purposes of our analysis: by income group and geographic

location. The income classification is based on levels of GNP per capita for

most countries, with other characteristics thought to be correlated with income

group used to classify countries for which per capita GNP data are either

unreliable or unavailable. The figures for low-income developing economies are
                                       -10-


based on data for 34 countries whose 1982 per capita GNP was less than 410 U.S.

dollars (average income per capita for these countries is 250 U.S. dollars).

The figures for lower middle-income economies are based on data for 38 countries

whose 1982 per capita GNP exceeded 410 U.S. dollars but was less than 1650 U.S.

dollars (average per capita income for these countries is 840 dollars). The

figures for the upper middle-income developing economies are based on data for

22 developing economies with GNP per capita in excess of 1650 U.S. dollars

(average equals 2490 dollars). Finally, the figures for the industrial market

economies are based on data for 19 countries that had an average GNP per capita

of 11070 dollars.

     The geographic grouping of developing economies also follows the standard

World Bank classification. Thus, countries are grouped into the following

regions:   (1) Sub-Sahara Africa, 34 countries; (2) Middle East and North Africa,

11 countries; (3) East Asia and Pacific, 14 countries; (4) South Asia, 8

countries; (5) Latin America and Caribbean, 22 countries; and (6) South Europe,

5 countries. All of the countries represented in our tables are listed

individually by income group and geographic region in Tables A.1 and A.2 of the

Appendix. All of the population, labor force, and output statistics reported

represent weighted averages of the individual country statistics, with 1960,

1970, or 1980 population sizes used to construct the weights. For the

low-income developing countries, statistics are reported both separately and

together for China, India, and other low-income countries.

    Table I presents growth rates of population and labor force by countries

grouped according to income. The statistics in this table reveal several

interesting patterns. First, with the exception of China after 1970, population

growth rates for the low-income and lower middle-income developing countries
                                       —11—


have been extremely high since 1960 (i.e., implied doubling times are less than

30 years). Population growth rates in the upper middle-income developing

countries have also been quite high although they are showing some evidence of

moderating. In contrast, the decline in the growth rate for China is

substantial. Indeed, this decline is larger in proportionate terms (e.g., from

an implied doubling time of 30 years in 1960-70 to 50 years in 1970-82) than for

the industrial market economies (which had an implied doubling time of 100 years

during the 1970-82 period).

     Second, declining population growth rates in the 1970's have not yet shown

up in the form of declining labor force growth rates for either China, the upper

middle—income developing economies, or the industrial market economies. This

pattern illustrates the point made in the preceding subsection about the

existence of a time lag between population growth and labor force growth.

     The third noteworthy pattern in Table 1 is that during the 1960-82 period,

none of the groups of developing countries (with the single exception of China

in the 1970's) experienced labor force growth in excess of population growth.

If there had been either no technological progress in this period or no

increases -in capital per worker, these economies' productive capacities per

capita would have declined between 1960 and 1982. Nonetheless, the difference

between population and labor force growth rates decreased for the developing

economies between the 1960's and the 1970's. This decrease reflects the age

distribution effects of population growth prior to 1960 and suggests that the

secular deterioration of developing economies' ratios of labor force to total

population is slowing. In China, this decline was actually reversed as labor

force growth exceeded population growth during the 1970's.

     Fourth, one pattern not revealed in Table 1 but worthy of note relates to
                                       —12—


the considerable variability of population and labor force growth rates between

countries within the same income group. For example, among the low-income

economies, Kenya and Mozambique had population growth rates of 4.0 and 4.3

percent between 1970 and 1982 while Sri Lanka and Haiti had growth rates of 1.7

percent. As another example, among the upper middle-income economies, Syria,

Venezuela, and Iraq had population growth rates of about 3.6 percent from 1970

to 1982, roughly nine times the rate of 0.4 percent in Uruguay and more than

twice the rates in Argentina, Chile, and North Korea.

     In Table 2 we present male and female labor force participation rates for a

somewhat abridged income grouping of economies. One striking feature of these

statistics is that the labor force participation rates of men in industrial

market economies exceeded the rates for men in the two groups of developing

economies in both 1960 and 1980. This differential results from the relatively

older age distributions of the industrial market economies, a consequence of

their lower rates of population growth. This pattern is especially interesting

given that labor force participation rates for men tend to fall at the young and

old ages as development proceeds (see Durand, 1975). In this case the

demography of the age structure dominates the behavioral factors in determining

aggregate labor force participation.

     A second apparent regularity in Table 2 is that the labor force

participation rates for males in the middle-income developing countries are

lower than in the low-income countries. In addition, participation rates in

both groups of countries have declined over time. These findings seem to

reflect the facts that (1) population growth was substantial in both groups of

developing economies in the 1950's and 1960's (as they began their demographic

transitions), thereby tending to raise the youth share of their populations, and
                                      —13—


(2) population growth was relatively greater in the middle-income countries than

in the low-income countries in the 1950's and 1960's, resulting in a greater

increase in the youth proportions of their populations (and consequently a

greater decline in their male labor force participation rates).

     Turning now to the labor force participation rates for females, we observe

a slight decline from 1960 to 1980 for the low-income developing countries,

most likely due to the effect of population growth on the age distribution. On

the other hand, we observe a stable pattern in the middle-income developing

countries, although the participation rates are substantially below those of the

low-income developing countries. Whether this difference is a consequence of

the notoriously poor data on female labor force participation in developing

countries and problems of definition in countries with large agricultural

sectors, or whether it is indicative of a tendency for women to withdraw from

the labor force as development proceeds, is unclear. It is also unclear whether

this pattern is due to some omitted factors that affect the labor force

participation of women and that are correlated with income group.

     To get some idea of the extent to which the striking differences in the

labor force participation rates of women in low and middle-income developing

countries are due to an omitted variable problem, Table 3 reports participation

rates in 1960 and 1980 broken down by geographic region. As this table makes

clear, there is considerable variation in female participation rates across

regions, although those rates are quite stable within regions but over time. In

1980, for example, participation rates for women ranged from 5.6 percent in the

Middle East and North African countries to 33.5 percent for East Asian and

Pacific countries (which is even slightly greater than the average rate for the

Industrial market economies). This pattern suggests that the dramatically
                                           —14—


different female labor force participation rates across income groups reported

in Table 2 may be due to geographic participation differences that are

correlated with income group or culture, as discussed earlier. Indeed,

examination of the country breakdown (by income group and geographic region) in

Appendix Table A.1 seems to confirm this supposition since none of the Middle

East and North African countries and only one of the Latin American and

Caribbean countries --    the   two geographic groups with the lowest participation

rates --   fall   into the low-income developing category. Nonetheless, this

conclusion is offered tentatively since the data on female labor force

participation rates in these countries are thought to be especially poor.

     Table 3 is also interesting with regard to the participation patterns for

men. In particular, the participation rates are declining over time for all

regions except East Asia and the Pacific. In addition, and in contrast to the

pattern for women, male labor force participation rates exhibit relatively small

differences across the developing countries.

     As a basis for comparison, Table 3 also presents labor force participation

rates for males and females in 1960 and 1980 in selected developed economies.

Since these participation rates are computed relative to the population aged 15

(or 16) and over, they are not comparable in terms of their levels to the rates

for the developing countries. However, the rates for men do show about the same

degree of variation across countries and a similar tendency to decline over

time. In the case of the developed countries the declines are largely due to

increased educational attainment resulting in delayed entry into the labor force

and to a decline in the age of retirement.        (For some countries the declines are

also partly the result of post-World War II baby-booms and their tendency to

youthen the labor force.) To the extent that these patterns in the developed
                                        —15—


countries may be taken to foreshadow trends in the developing countries, we see

that development carries with it forces that ease the burden on labor markets

to adjust to rapid population growth.

     In contrast to the rates for men, the participation rates for women in the

developed economies show mixed trends over time. For example, participation

rates climbed substantially between 1960 and 1980 in the U.S., Canada,

Australia, the United Kingdom, and Sweden. During these same years, however,

the rates increased little or declined in Japan, France, Germany, and Italy.

This pattern for the industrial economies tends to confirm the point made in the

preceding subsection about female participation rates tending to be much more

culture-specific than the rates for men. It also adds a good deal of

uncertainty to any attempts one might make to project female labor force

participation rates for the developing economies.

     Finally, turning back to demographic issues, consider the figures in

Table 4, which present the percent of the population aged 15—64 (an approximate

measure of the working ages) by income group. The statistics in this table show

a large increase for China, reflecting its declining population growth rate.

The estimates also show that developing countries have smaller proportions of

their populations at the working ages than the industrial market economies, a

reflection of their relatively high population growth rates which tend to

increase the share of youth in their populations. The fact that the dependency

burden (i.e., the inverse of the proportions shown in Table 4) in the

developing countries is so high is, of course, a hindrance to development in two

main ways. First, the high dependency burden indicates that these economies

must sustain themselves on the income that can be generated by a relatively

small proportion of their populations. Second, because most of the dependency
                                        -16-


burden in these rapidly growing populations is associated with the young, there

is a relatively great need to invest social savings in welfare capital such as

schools and hospitals for persons out of the workforce, as opposed to physical

capital for persons in the workforce.
                                      —17—


III. Labor Supply and Employment


     Modeling the relationship between population growth and employment is not a

problem that is uniquely of interest in the developing country context.

Following World War II, a number of industrialized countries, including the

U.S., Canada, and Australia, experienced baby booms in which population growth

was substantial. As the baby-boom generations in those countries began to reach

labor force age, a theoretical and empirical literature on the labor market

effects of large cohort size was spawned. The basic premise of that literature

is quite simple: large cohort size suggests an outward shift of labor supply

that has adverse implications for the labor market experience of the large

cohorts relative to the experience of smaller cohorts. Moreover, there are two

key dimensions along which these adverse implications may be observed: wages

and employment (or unemployment).

     One of the most interesting empirical findings of the baby-boom literature

relates to the considerable diversity that appears to exist across countries in

the nature of their adjustment to large-sized cohorts. For example, some

countries (including the U.S.) appear to have adjusted to the baby boom mainly

through a lowering of relative wages whereas the adjustment in other countries

(including Canada) has primarily taken the form of diminished employment

opportunities for members of the baby-boom cohorts. Perhaps the main lesson to

learn from this diversity of experience is that labor market responses to

population growth are not necessarily dictated by a simple supply-demand model

which is common across countries. Rather, different countries may have

differently-sloped labor supply and labor demand curves,   different industrial

mixes, and different labor market institutions and policies (such as minimum
                                       -18-


wages, government incentives to join the military or to stay in school, etc.),

which result in different responses. Empirical work does seem to bear out,

however, the theoretical notion that either wages or employment opportunities

 (or both) suffer as a result of an outward shift of labor supply that results

from past population growth. (9]

     These lessons about the labor market responses of industrial economies to

population growth are also applicable to the experience of developing economies.

Indeed, institutional factors and the slope of labor demand curves are crucial

determinants of the capacity of developing economies to absorb growing

populations into productive employment. In addition, as in the case of the

developed economies, there seems to be considerable variation in the less

developed economies with regard to the nature and operation of their labor

markets, making it difficult to reach any general conclusions about the effects

of rapid population growth on employment in developing countries. [10]

However, several economic models of this relationship do shed light on the key

variables that determine whether labor markets have more or less "absorptive"

     To begin with, a standard one-sector neoclassical model of the labor market

suggests that the degree to which population growth will be absorbed into

employment will depend on the slope of the aggregate labor demand curve (e.g.,

if labor demand is perfectly inelastic an increase in labor supply will not be

absorbed as increased employment; in addition, employed individuals will take

wage cuts, unless there is a minimum wage, in which case there may be

substantial involuntary unemployment). However, the theoretical literature on

developing country labor markets does not focus on the slope of labor demand

curves. Instead, the literature is largely oriented toward analyzing a feature

of developing country labor markets which is thought to be critical to their
                                      -19-


operation: their dual nature. The dual sectors of a developing country labor

market have been referred to by a variety of names. One sector is     usually
referred to as agricultural, rural, non-commercial, peasant, traditional, or

backward; the other sector is usually referred to as capitalistic,

nonagricultural, commercial, formal, modern, or urban. More recently,

distinctions have been made between a formal and informal sector within the

urban economy, creating a trichotomy: agricultural, informal urban, and formal

urban (of which more will be said later). While there is considerable debate

over the extent of mobility among the sectors, and the causes and meaning of

potentially large income differences between sectors, their economic differences

are important in any assessment of how the labor market will "absorb" population

increases. Without losing ourselves in the semantics of the issue, we merely

note that the key distinguishing feature of the sectors is the nature of their

dominant production Units. In the traditional agricultural and urban informal

sectors, the production unit (e.g., a household) is characterized by

self-employment and small-scale enterprise employment (exclusive of

plantations). On the other hand, the chief characteristic of the production

Unit in the modern sector is that it is based on labor hired on a contractual

basis. [11]

     The earliest of the popular two-sector models is due to Arthur Lewis (1954,

1958). According to the Lewis model, the main characteristic of the traditional

sector labor market is the presence of surplus (or excess, or redundant) labor.

In one extreme version of this model, the marginal product of labor (i.e., the

derivative of output with respect to the number of workers) In the traditional

sector is zero. In other words, all members of a household who are able to work

do so and they share the output with the entire household. Moreover, it is
                                      -20--



assumed that each production unit attains the maximal level of output possible

from its non-labor resources, given its production technology. If the number of

working members of a household increases, each member either works fewer hours

(Sen, 1968) or expends less effort for the same number of hours (Leibenstein,

1978). This is the sense in which the marginal product of additional laborers

is zero. In a less extreme version of this model, the marginal product of labor

is viewed as being less than the average product (which is the wage received by

tne nousenoias workers). it makes little aitierence to tne qualitative

implications of Lewist model which assumption is correct.

     The capitalist sector in the Lewis model closely resembles a neoclassical

labor market. Employers have garden-variety downward-sloping labor demand

curves and they hire labor to the point at which the marginal product of labor

equals the market wage. This wage will be determined by the nature of

alternative job opportunities available to modern sector workers. Thus, in a

closed and frictionless economy, the market wage in the modern sector will equal

the average product in the agricultural sector. However, because of the

transactions costs associated with migration to the modern sector, most models

of developing economy labor markets view modern sector wages as being greater

than the average product of labor. This feature of the theoretical models is

consistent with empirical evidence that demonstrates the existence of a positive

wage differential between the industrial and agricultural sector in most though

not all developing countries (see Table 5) as well as uniformly higher output

per worker in industry and services relative to agriculture (see Table 11).

     Within the context of this two-sector model, one can easily identify the

linkages between population growth and labor absorption. In particular, at

early stages of development, the supply of labor to the modern sector is
                                      —21—


horizontal at a relatively low wage because of the existence of surplus labor in

the agricultural sector. Enterprises will thus earn relatively high profits, a

substantial fraction of which they are assumed to reinvest. Consequently,

capital formation will be relatively great in the labor surplus economy and will

lead to further outward expansion of labor demand, thereby resulting in the

dynamic expansion of employment. Thus, a large population in the agricultural

sector promotes the growth of industry by making available a large supply of

low—wage labor. [12)

     In terms of its dynamic properties, the economy described by this simple

model does not continually experience rapid economic growth. Eventually, the

modern sector draws enough labor out of the traditional sector so that the

marginal product of labor in the agricultural sector equals its average product.

Beyond this point, as capital formation leads to further economic expansion,

alternative opportunities will improve for both potential and actual modern

sector workers and urban wages will rise. This will, of course, tend to

moderate the further growth of employment —-   although   it will not curtail it

completely. Moreover, during this second phase of development (i.e., beyond the

point at which the aggregate labor supply curve begins to slope upward) the

importance of distinguishing between the two sectors of the economy is lost

because both sectors behave neoclassically. Naturally, reaching this turning

point does not signify that an economy is no longer developing. More

interesting to analyze, because it seems to characterize the experience of a

greater number of developing countries, is the effect of rapid population growth

on the labor market before an economy reaches its "turning point." Here, the

basic idea is that population growth leads to a fall in average product in the

agricultural sector, which may lead to a fall in the industrial sector wage,
                                      —22—


although the more important effect of population growth is that it extends the

horizontal portion of the labor supply curve faced by the industrial sector

employers. Thus, by expanding the reservoir from which modern sector firms are

able to hire labor, and perhaps making that labor even cheaper, population

growth postpones the point at which wages increase, and leads to a decline in

living standards in both the agricultural and industrial sectors along the way.

In addition, as the discussion makes clear, just focusing on the absorption

problem associated with population growth may be a bit misguided since, in both

dual and neoclassical economies, an increase in population may be substantially

or even completely absorbed -into the employed labor force at the cost of reduced

wages and living standards.

     Although the main implication of this basic model is that population growth

slows the rate at which surplus labor decreases and postpones the elimination

of dualism and a rise in living standards, this model can be (and has been)

complicated in a variety of ways that have significant implications for the

relationship between population growth and employment. We will not, in the

remainder of this Section, attempt a comprehensive review of the many twists on

the Lewis model, but we will discuss the main variations. (13)

     First, one of the most widely observed facts about the operation of

developing country labor markets is that the difference between modern sector

and agricultural sector wages exceeds the amount that would cover transactions

costs associated with movement from one sector to the other. In some cases, the

excess is substantial (see Table 5). A common explanation of these wide

differentials is the existence of labor market imperfections in the modern

sector. For example, it is often argued that modern sector wages are Set

institutionally by the government at artificially high levels, perhaps because
                                         —23—


of trade union pressure or politics associated with other interest groups. To

the extent that wages are maintained at artificially high levels, employment

will be lower than it would otherwise have been, and capital formation will

proceed at a slower rate. [14)

     Table 6 presents some readily available information on one such

imperfection --   the   minimum wage. At the present time, minimum wages, which

were introduced into most developed countries much later in their economic

histories, are found in virtually all developing countries although the level

and enforcement of the minimum varies substantially across them. The figures in

the table show that minimum wages are typically set at 30-50 percent of

manufacturing wages, which are comparable to the levels of minimum wages in

developed countries relative to their manufacturing wages. It is likely that

the minimum wages are solely enforced in the larger modern sector enterprises

and thus impact not so much levels of total employment as employment in those

enterprises.

     Of equal or greater importance than minimum wages in creating dualistic

labor market structures are the government pay policies in many developing

countries. As Table 7 shows, public sector employment constitutes a relatively

large proportion of nonagricultural employment in many developing countries and,

ipso facto, an even larger proportion of formal modern sector employment. The

proportions far exceed those in currently developed countries at a similar stage

in their economic histories, giving government pay policy a potentially

important role in creating and maintaining dualistic markets. Finally, as Table

8 shows, government pay in developing countries has tended to be much larger

than per capita income, with the differences greatest in the poorest countries.

Until the 1980's, the "overpaid civil servant" was often cited as a problem in
                                                                  —24—


African countries.

          While one might expect the effectiveness of policies in altering modern

sector wages relative to those elsewhere to be extensively studied, with firm

research conclusions, in fact there are only scattered studies for developing

countries, and no clear consensus of either the direction or effectiveness of

the policies. According to one leading scholar, "the experiences of the various

countries has called attention to the importance of the role of government in

I... I   LIII   VI   1.1 I .U I L I J1 I   •
                                               ' riri  T. —
                                                  L J J I. II U     I III I I UI V   I I, UI RJ LII I U—.—.
                                                                                                        lid i y1••i-
                                                                                                                 L L.IJII I.   II U


that      "the root of the wage problem lies in one fact: the export giants and

local monopolies are willing ...                        to   pay high wages." [16] By contrast, another

scholar argues that "the high wage policy that allegedly characterizes LDC's

 is a misrepresentation." [17] With respect to unionism, while many attribute

high wages in Africa to union influence, some studies have found lower wages in

unionized sectors, suggesting that organized sectors are more amenable to

incomes policies. [18) In his summary of the debate in 1977, Webb cited studies

showing both "the role of active or permissive government wage and unionization

policies" in raising wages and the converse, with lack of enforcement of

policies (such as those regulating minimum wages) making nominal

policy-initiated wage increases ineffective. [19] In her analysis, Krueger

noted "how little is known" about labor market distortions due to policies. [20]

         A second widely observed fact about the operation of developing country

labor markets is that rates of rural to urban migration have tended to exceed

the absorptive capacity of the modern sector, leading to growth of the "informal

sector." This fact is consistent with our earlier point about the differential

between industrial and agricultural sector wages, given that migration is

generated by a Harris-Todaro type of migration model (or some variant thereof).
                                      —25-


According to that genre of models, migration flows do not equalize observed

wages across sectors; rather, they equalize expected wages. Thus, given the

existence of rural-urban wage differences in excess of the amount due tà

transactions costs, the migration flow to the modern sector will surpass its

ability to absorb additional labor (i.e., because equilibrium is reached when

the probability of securing employment in the modern sector times the modern

sector wage is equal to the actual wage in the rural sector plus mobility

costs).

     If rural-urban migration is generated according to a Harris-Todaro type of

model, migration flows will tend to be greater the higher are institutionally-

determined wages in the modern sector. However, since industry is unable to

absorb labor as fast as it arrives, one would expect to observe substantial

urban unemployment, which turns out not to be the case. Instead, we have

observed the rise of a tertiary sector in urban areas —- an informal sector in

which individuals queued up for high-wage industrial employment work as

handicraftsmen, artisans, and suppliers of a variety of personal services. To

the extent that this group of workers is underutilized, they may be viewed as a

group of "disguised unemployed" workers in the urban sector.

     Several additional comments about the urban informal sector also seem in

order. First, it is widely hypothesized that the informal sector arises because

of the way in which labor markets operate in developing countries, with

institutionally-fixed wages in excess of market wages. This feature of urban

labor markets suggests that both measured unemployment and the growth rate of

the urban labor force are poor measures of the absorption power of an economy.

In other words, informal sector employees work in a labor market that is perhaps

more closely akin to the traditional sector than to the modern sector. However,
                                                    -26-


two features of the informal sector do suggest that it is a positive force in

the development process. First, to the extent that one factor limiting the

absorption of workers into industry is their lack of understanding of the

culture of the urban sector (e.g., requisite work habits and other skills), the

presence of a traditional-like sector in an urban area can serve as a massive

training and acculturation program that partially eases hiring constraints faced

by employers. Second, largely because of the high cost of housing in urban

at     ,   it i u I iai iiv   LVI I I'JIII at tu ,wi r, ai lu ii u I t UIIII I ia,. I   I   I   I I y UI I I
                                                                                                 .1




that   often accompanies rural-urban migration, urban-dwellers tend to have lower

fertility than rural—dwellers (although there seems to be no definitive evidence

on this often-asserted point). Thus, growth of the informal sector may help to

curb population growth. The main upshot of all this, then, is that population

growth seems to be transforming the structure of developing country labor

markets from dual—sector to tn—sector in nature with two main implications:

(1) that new measures of labor absorption are needed and (2) that a tn-sector

labor market may be an efficient mechanism for helping to curtail population

growth and for channeling surplus agricultural labor into industry, and

therefore promoting development.

       The final major wrinkle on the basic Lewis model relates to the dynamics of

technological and institutional change in developing economies. In the original

version of the Lewis model, production functions were assumed to be stable over

time. However, it has been argued that population growth stimulates

technological progress and makes possible the realization of economies of scale

that provide incentives for the adoption of more efficient techniques and

institutional arrangements (see Binswanger, 1979; Boserup, 1981; and Hayami and

Ruttan, 1985). It has also been argued, although without supporting evidence,
                                       —27—


 that population growth leads to the birth of more "geniuses," some of whom may

 contribute to technological progress and others of whom may determine how to

 reorganize production in a way that effectively taps the productive capacity of

excess rural labor (see Kuznets, 1965; and Simon, 1981). Taken together, these

notions suggest that population growth promotes development by moving outward an

economy's production possibility frontier. Although it is of critical

importance to know whether the outward shift is greater than or less than some

appropriate measure of the increase -in population, these ideas cannot be refuted

at a theoretical level. However, in an excellent review of existing studies of

these issues, McNicoll (1984a) concludes that the evidence so far is mixed. [21]

     A second technology-related issue involves recent attempts to identify a

key difference between the past experience of today's developed economies and

the prospective experience of today's developing economies. Briefly, the

argument is that countries trying to develop today are doing so in the context

of surplus labor and readily-transferable capital-intensive technologies. In

contrast, the development experience of today's industrial market economies was

generally characterized by labor shortages and less advanced technologies. In

other words, while industrial market economies adjusted to their situation by

developing labor-saving technology, today's developing economies would probably

be best off developing labor-intensive methods of production. However, the

presence of already-developed transferable technologies from the industrial

economies, with scarce capital to back it up, substantially eliminates those

incentives. Thus, it has been argued that patterns of technological development

and utilization today are tending to reduce the absorptive capacity of

developing economies since industrialization is taking place without labor

absorption. [22]
                                         -28-


    To sum up the main point of this section, at a theoretical level, population

and labor force growth are not necessarily strongly related to labor absorption.

A variety of factors condition the absorptive ability of an economy, allowing

some analysts to argue that economies can readily absorb a large increase in the

labor force (under specified conditions) and others to argue the converse (also

under specified conditions). The issue is an empirical one, on which observed

historical experience can contribute significantly to an assessment of the

 JI.IIIIII.II... OIIU IJCIIIIILI VIY UI LII     UI     ...:J
                                                     I fJIU fJUIJUILIOII yIUV!LII.
                                       —29-


 IV. Population and Employment, 1960-1980


      As the preceding section makes clear, a central indicator of the pace at

which a developing economy is absorbing labor is the rate at which the sectoral

balance of the economy is shifted from agricultural to nonagricultural

employment. In this section, we present and discuss a series of statistics on

these shifts. We will use World Bank data to examine differentials across both

income groups and geographic regions. The three sectors on which we will focus

our attention are the agricultural, industrial, and service sectors. The

agricultural sector encompasses forestry, hunting, and fishing, in addition to

agriculture. [23] The industrial sector is comprised of manufacturing,

mining,construction, and utilities. Services are defined as a residual category

of economic activity (i.e., not agriculture or industry, as defined above).

Although we focus our attention mainly on the expansion of the industrial and

service sectors, we do not mean to suggest that agricultural development is of

little consequence. Indeed, increases in productivity in the agricultural

sector, which we will also discuss, usually precede and are the primary cause of

sectoral shifts in employment. [24]

     The key result of our analysis is that, in the 1960-80 period, despite the

unprecedented magnitude of population growth and the existence of imperfections

in labor markets, developing countries tended to shift from low-productivity

agriculture to the higher-productivity service sector and to a slightly lesser

extent to the high—productivity industrial sector, and to raise income per head,

although with some exceptions (e.g., some African countries). We do not address

the question of whether these changes could have been more extensive in some

counterfactual world with slower growth of population and labor force.
                                      -30-


     Table 9 reports the distribution of the labor force across economic sectors

in 1960 and 1980, by country income categories. A number of patterns are

revealed by this table. First is the well-known fact that the fraction of the

labor force engaged in agricultural production is inversely related to the stage

of development. In addition, there was a decrease in the share of the labor

force in agriculture between 1960 and 1980 for all income groups in Table 9.

However, with the exception of the upper middle-income developing economies,

agriculture has been and remains the largest utilizer of labor in the developing

economies. Even in the upper middle-income countries, the proportion of the

labor force in agricuture was five times that in the industrial market economies

in 1980. [25]

     Second, Table 9 reveals that the relative decline of agriculture coincided

mainly with growth in the share of the labor force in the service sector, which

tended to be larger in size than the industrial sector in both 1960 and 1980.

It is interesting to note, however, that an important exception to the pattern

of services comprising a larger share of the labor force than industry is China

(in 1980), in which this pattern is reversed, and substantially so. With regard

to country—specific differences, the statistics for India are also interesting

insofar as they show a relatively small decline between 1960 and 1980 in the

proportion of the labor force in agriculture.

    Table 10 is similar to Table 9 except that the sectoral labor force shares

are reported for developing countries grouped by their geographic region (and

not by their income). This table indicates the existence of large differences

across regions in the sectoral share distributions. For example, the

agricultural sector is substantially more dominant in South Asia and Sub-Saharan

Africa in both 1960 and 1980 than it is in the Middle East and North Africa and
                                      —31—


in Latin America and the Caribbean. Table 10 also indicates that the decline of

the labor force share in agriculture between 1960 and 1980 was associated with

an increase in the labor force share in both industry and services —-    in   all

regions. However, there were some differentials in the extent of decline in

agriculture and the relative expansion of industry and services. For example,

the biggest decline in agriculture was in the South European countries, while

the smallest decline was in the South Asian countries. Of the regions

experiencing the largest declines in agriculture, services tended to grow the

most, although not necessarily in proportionate terms. In this regard, the

Middle East and North Africa stand out, insofar as their moderate decline in

agriculture was associated with a growth rate in industry that exceeded the

growth rate in services.

     Taken together, Tables 9 and 10 indicate the existence of differences in

both regions and income groups in the sectoral distribution of the labor force.

These tables also provide evidence of changes over time, only some of which have

been uniform across income groups and geographic regions.

     The shifts in the labor force distribution shown in Tables 9 and 10 have,

it is important to note, contributed to increased income per capita in

developing countries. To see this we have made a two-part calculation. First,

we have estimated relative labor productivity in each sector; second, we have

evaluated the impact of changes in labor force allocation across sectors to the

growth of economy-wide productivity. Table 11 reports the results of our first

calculation. It shows the ratio of gross domestic product per worker in

agriculture, industry, and services to the economy-wide gross domestic product

per worker. Figures greater than 1.0 indicate that a sector has above-average

productivity. Figures below 1.0 indicate the reverse. In all income groups of
                                             —32-


economies, agriculture has below-average productivity. In all but the

industrial market economies, industry has markedly higher average productivity,

as does services. There is, moreover, a general tendency for the industry-to-

all-economy differential to fall as agriculture's share of the labor force

drops.

        Table 12 provides estimates of the contribution of the labor force shifts

shown in Table 9 to the growth of GOP per worker from 1960 to 1980.                 It uses

aflr%
.LUV                (ID
           iQl lv i.LJr   Jl l\I   QilulflOfl
                                         iJiJ I lai. lV IJIJF
                                                          C1D   JI VJl rI G   ,Ji       lvi
weights" to evaluate the shift. The results show that in the developing
countries (with the exception of India), changes in the sectoral distribution of

the labor force have contributed significantly to the growth of overall labor

productivity: a 21-25 percent increase in middle—income developing countries

and a 14-15 percent increase in low-income countries exclusive of China and

India. With productivity growth over the period of nearly 150 percent in

middle-income developing countries and about 100 percent in low-income

countries, the observed ability of the labor markets to shift labor to the

relatively more productive sectors despite rapid population growth contributed

from one—tenth to one-fifth of observed overall productivity growth.

        The next issue that needs to be addressed goes beyond establishing the

existence of patterns or changes in the sectoral distribution of the labor

force. Rather, it involves assessing whether or not developing countries have

been expanding their productive capacities within sectors. In other words, have

the sectoral shifts affected output per worker, within or between sectors, as in

the simple Lewis model?

        Table 13 provides us with a preliminary answer to this question. This

table presents statistics by country income groups, on the growth of GOP and the
                                        —33-


labor force between 1960 and 1980, broken down by economic sector. Presumably,

if economic development were not taking place, one would expect this table to

reveal GOP growth falling short of labor force growth. One would also expect to

see little evidence of growth in the agricultural sector's share of GOP due to

the presence of surplus labor. Alternatively, agricultural productivity (i.e.,

the difference between the growth of GOP from agriculture and the growth of the

agricultural labor force) would tend to be stable or decline over time.

r1
..I.II h,7 , I Vtt1el vr.er4. .   U
                                       1441 n,—,,.a+k
                                      —UU   U
                                                      ir 4ê ehr. rf (fl r.nm4rie
                                               flUUUIUUU
                                                U




from industry because of the slow growth of capital, and little growth in the

share of GOP coming from services because of the slow emergence of an informal

sector.

     Table 13 is highly illuminating on all of these points. Over the 1960-80

period, GDP growth actually exceeded labor force growth in all three economic

sectors and for all income groups of economies. Thus, GOP per member of the

labor force, a crude measure of productivity, increased over time. However, the

magnitude of the increase was relatively small in the agricultural sector. For

example, in low-income developing countries, GOP associated with agricultural

output grew 56 percent between 1960 and 1980, while the agricultural labor force

grew by about 35 percent. In other words, output per labor force member grew by

roughly one-fifth over this twenty-year period. In comparison to this figure,

output per labor force member grew four times as much in the industrial and

service sectors of low-income developing economies. For middle-income developing

economies, agricultural output per agricultural labor force member grew by about

75 percent between 1960 and 1980. In comparison, this measure of productivity

grew by approximately 140 percent in industry and 60 percent in services. This

last figure is particularly interesting since It indicates that productivity
                                      -34—


growth in the service sector was less than in agriculture in the middle-income

developing economies. However, this pattern is more an indication that

agricultural productivity growth was large, than an indication that service

productivity growth was small. For example, the productivity growth figures for

agriculture and services in the middle-income developing countries are extremely

close to those for the industrial market economies. Perhaps the pattern of

agricultural productivity growth in middle-income developing countries signals

that population growth has either stimulated technological change or has reached

the point at which these countries have sufficient incentives to adopt more

efficient production techniques or economic institutions. It also seems worth

noting that overall GDP growth per labor force member grew more in the

middle-income developing countries between 1960 and 1980 than in the low-income

developing economies or the industrial market economies, where roughly equal

growth rates were attained.

     Overall, then, although the tables presented in this section do not permit

us to distinguish between alternative theoretical views of the relationship

between population growth and employment, they do not paint a particularly dire

picture of developing countries' labor absorption prospects. The evidence of

the rapid growth of the size of the nonagricultural sectors, and of the growing

productivity of workers in those sectors, suggest that developing countries

have, in fact, been able to absorb considerable additions to their populations

into productive employment. Although the road ahead does look rockier for the

low-income developing countries than for the middle-income developing countries,

labor market structures in both groups of economies seem to be geared-up for at

least some further expansion.
                                         —35—


V.   Country-Specific Experiences j26]


     In the preceding three sections, we presented a broad overview of the

central relationships between population growth, labor supply, and employment in

developing countries. We also reviewed aggregate indicators of many of those

relationships using data for different income and geographic groups of

countries. An important caveat to those sections is that they reflect general

tendencies, and not necessarily the experience of any particular country.    In

other words, a particular country's culture, labor market institutions,

international trade policies, stock of natural resources, etc., may have

considerable influence on the extent to which (1) population growth leads to

increased labor supply and (2) increased labor supply is absorbed into

productive employment. The purpose of this section is to document this claim

with examples of the recent labor market experiences of a selected number of

developing countries. Identifying all of the country—specific factors that

can influence labor absorption is beyond the scope of this paper, but we will

try to list some of the main ones and to provide illustrative examples. In this

connection, we will focus on the role played by (1) external sources of demand

for a particular economy's labor; (2) the availability of land and other natural

resources; and (3) governmental policies which directly or indirectly impinge on

the labor market.

     In the simple theoretical models of developing country labor markets

outlined in earlier sections, it was assumed that the economies were closed,

i.e., that all labor absorption would take place domestically. However, the

recent experience of several developing countries demonstrates that, to a

substantial extent, this need not be the case in practice. For example, the
                                      -36-


economies of India, the Philippines, and Egypt have all been affected by the

substantial emigration of their resident labor forces to the oil-rich Arab

economies. To illustrate, it is estimated that there were 1—2 million Egyptians

working abroad at the beginning of this decade, a magnitude equal to between 10

and 20 percent of Egypt's resident labor force. This massive emigration has

both positive and negative implications for the Egyptian economy. On the

positive side, the substantial absorption of labor into relatively high-wage

employment externally, has resulted in a sharp decline in agricultural

employment, accompanied by an increase in agricultural wages and the onset of a

trend toward capital intensity and higher productivity in agricultural

production. In addition, these high-wage emigrants (the majority of them being

skilled construction workers) have tended to remit substantial portions of their

earnings to their relatives in Egypt (with remittances alone amounting to 10

percent of Egypt's GNP in 1980), thereby providing a major source of foreign

exchange and a major stimulus to domestic demand. 27] On the other hand, the

massive emigration of Egyptian labor has increased the dependence of the

Egyptian economy on the world price of oil and on the construction boom in the

Arab countries. Moreover, it appears that the structural transformation of

Egyptian agricultural production has reduced its labor absorption capacity,

which could be important under conditions of massive return migration.

     A second key factor affecting the labor absorption capacity of a developing

economy is the size and characteristics of its stock of idle land and other

natural resources. In particular, labor absorption in developing economies is

generally associated with a transition from predominantly agricultural to

nonagricultural production and employment. However, the agricultural sectors of

several developing economies have exhibited great labor absorption capacity. A
                                      —37-


good example is Mexico, which experienced a five-fold increase in the area of

its land under cultivation from 1940 to 1970; Mexico also experienced rapid

population growth during those years and growth of GNP per capita that was

above the average for countries in its income group. However, starting in the

late 1960's, Mexico's safety valve f or labor absorption began to close up as the

supply of unfarmed arable land in Mexico began to disappear. As a consequence,

growth of GNP per capita was below average for Mexico in the 1970's. Moreover,

population and labor force growth in Mexico have continued to be substantial and

have resulted in fairly massive increases in rural-urban migration. Indeed,

this migration far exceeds the absorptive capacity of the industrial sector of

the Mexican economy and has resulted in the swelling of the informal urban

sector and the steady flow of both legal and illegal emigration to the United

States. Thus, Mexico no longer seems to provide an excellent counterexample to

the pessimistic view that population growth hinders development (see Coale,

1978).

     Another country that seems to be enjoying some degree of development

despite rapid population growth is Kenya, a low-income developing country that

had a population growth rate of 4.0 percent from 1970-82. Labor absorption in

Kenya has been high, despite industrial wage levels that are considerably higher

than agricultural sector wages, and the presence of substantial urban

unemployment. To a large extent, Kenyan development reflects the continuing

availability of unfarmed arable land and the sizeable magnitude of foreign

exchange that is generated through tourism (and the substantial growth of an

informal urban sector). Indeed, GNP per capita in Kenya increased 2.3 percent

per year from 1955-1983, in contrast to the experience of the bordering

countries of Somalia, Ethiopia, Tanzania, and Uganda, which had growth rates of
                                      -38-


-0.8 percent, 0.5 percent, -0.9 percent, and -4.4 percent, respectively, over

the same period (and 1970-82 population growth rates of 3.1 percent, 2.7

percent, 3.2 percent, and 3.1 percent, respectively).

     Although some countries may be able to facilitate labor absorption by

bringing additional land under cultivation, other countries may already be too

densely populated to make that a viable option. Examples of such countries

include India and Indonesia. In these countries, however, labor absorption can

be facilitated by changes in agricultural technology. For example, in the

Punjab region of India, the labor—intensive "Green Revolution" has resulted in

an expansion of both agricultural output and employment. Similarly, in

Indonesia, the traditional rice economy has been transformed by the use of

(relatively labor-intensive) high-yielding varieties of rice and by the growing

practices of double- and triple-cropping.

     In Brazil, by contrast, where population density is modest, the

productivity of agricultural labor was increased by the adoption of more

efficient agricultural production techniques rather than by increased land

cultivation, thereby releasing labor to other sectors and compounding the

absorption problem. In fact, employment in Brazil seems to have kept pace with

increased labor supply, although apparently at the expense of real wages, which

have fallen over time. The Philippines is another example of a country in which

absorption has been achieved at the expense of falling real wages.

     In addition to land, oil is another natural resource that can (and has)

figured quite prominently in the absorption ability of developing economies.

Here, we cite Indonesia, Venezuela, and Mexico as examples of countries who

either export, or have the capacity to export, oil in international markets. To

the extent that oil exports contribute to the generation of foreign exchange,
                                         -39-


they can provide an important boost to capital formation and the expansion of

industrial employment in developing economies. On the other hand, oil

dependency can greatly hinder the pace and stability of a country's development.

For example, many of the balance-of-payments problems in the Philippines, which

have affected economic growth and labor absorption through their affects on

domestic capital markets and government monetary and fiscal policies, have been

traced to variations in world oil prices.

        The final factor conditioning the labor absorption capacity of individual

developing economies to which we would like to draw attention is governmental

policy impacting on the labor market. Earlier, we noted the importance of

government-established minimum wages in creating growth-inhibiting distortions

in an economy. Here, we mention another government policy aimed directly at

increasing labor absorption: public employment programs. One example of a

country in which such programs have been heavily relied upon is Egypt.

Excluding the military, public employment in Egypt increased at an annual rate

of nearly 7 percent between 1966 and 1978. This trend is largely the

consequence of the government's establishment of employment guarantees f or

university graduates (since 1966) and military conscripts (from 1973 to 1976).

This policy, which resulted in substantial labor absorption at a time when Egypt

was still a classic surplus labor economy (i.e., before the massive emigration

of Egyptian labor to the oil-rich Arab countries), appears to be constraining

productivity growth under the current circumstances of labor scarcity since

government workers have relatively low productivity. This highlights the point

that it is not simply employment that matters, but employment in productive

jobs.
                                      —40-


     Another set of government policies deserving of mention are those that

relate to the relative price of capital. In an effort to stimulate the growth

of industry, a number of developing countries have adopted aggressive fiscal and

monetary policies that tend to induce a capital bias in their overall

development pattern. For example, Brazil, Indonesia, and the Philippines have

all had macroeconomic policies that provided incentives for private companies

to borrow from abroad or forced the central government to borrow heavily to

cover a deficit. As a consequence, economic conditions in these countries have

been highly sensitive to the state of world capital markets and relatively

capital-intensive patterns of development have been induced.   In contrast,

other developing countries such as India (and both Brazil and the Philippines in

past years) have pursued more conservative monetary and fiscal policies in

concert with import substitution strategies designed to impart internal

stability to their economic systems and to promote long-run growth and labor

absorption. Foreign exchange restrictions, which can be used to depress the

importation of capital, can also help to promote labor absorption.

     Finally, many developing countries have intervened in agricultural markets,

often purchasing output from farmers and providing low-cost food for urban

dwellers. These policies can affect the allocation of labor among sectors,

rural-urban migration, and the success of adjusting to population increases. As

yet, there has been no definitive study of the effects of food price policy (or

capital price policy) on the overall success of countries in absorbing labor

into productive jobs.
                                      —41—


VI. Conclusions and Speculations About the Future


     This review of evidence has shown that developing countries have faced an

enormous increase in population in the past two decades. Fertility and

mortality patterns guarantee a similar large increase in the future. The

experience of the past indicates, however, that despite population increasing

more than the labor force, and despite inefficient dualistic labor markets due

potentially to government-induced and other imperfections, developing countries

were, on the whole, relatively successful in improving their economic positions

over the period. The labor markets absorbed a "huge" population increase, with

per worker incomes rising and shifts taking place in the labor force

distribution toward more productive sectors of the economy. Our analysis has

also highlighted the wide range of country experiences in population growth, in

labor market policies likely to influence "absorption" in modern sectors, and

ultimately in the likely impact of population growth on per capita incomes.

Overall, the experiences of the 1960-1980 period tend to be more supportive of

an optimistic view of the ability of developing economies to adjust to

population 9rowth, than of a pessimistic view.

     What about the future?

     Simply because the developing economies managed to raise productivity and

shift employment into the service and manufacturing sectors in the 1960-80

period does not necessarily mean that they will be able to do so in the next two

decades. We consider next the factors likely to make absorption of the

increased population easier and those likely to make it more difficult in the

1980-2000 period.
                                      -42-


     To begin with, consider the projected population and labor force growth

rates in Table 14. The figures here show two advantages compared to the 1960-80

period examined in Table 1. First, rates of population growth will be smaller

than in the earlier periods: for all low-income developing countries the rates

of growth fall from 2—3 percent (1960-70) and 1.9 percent (1970-82) to a

projected 1.7 percent. The rate of population increase also falls for lower-

and upper middle-income developing countries. Second, in sharp contrast to the

earlier period, the labor force will increase more rapidly than population in

all types of economies. For the first time in recent years, dependency rates

will be getting lower. Hence, smaller increases in income per worker will be

needed to produce any given increase in income per capita.

     Qn the negative side are the absolute magnitudes of the increases noted at

the outset of the paper. From 1960 to 1982, labor supply in less developed

countries grew by 173 million workers. From 1980 to 2000, supply will increase

by 255 million workers. In lower middle-income developing countries the

absolute growth in labor force will rise from 50 million (1960—82) to 84 million

(1980-2000) while in upper middle-income countries the increase will be from 35

million (1960-82) to 59 million (1980-2000). [28] To be productive, these

workers must be equipped with both material and human capital. In absolute

magnitudes, this growth will place great demands on world capital markets (both

public and private) and thus on world savings behavior. To the extent that less

developed countries rely on capital flows from more developed countries they

will, in turn, require greater per capita investments from those countries.

     In our view, if modern technology is applied to less developed countries at

the same rate as in the past two decades —- which presumably requires both human

and physical capital investments of enormous absolute magnitudes but of
                                      —43—


comparable relative magnitudes to the past —-   Malthusian   disasters will not

necessarily be the result of forecasted population growth. However, on the

basis of past history, the midd1e—income developing countries are flkely to

perform better in this respect than the low-income countries, some of whom may

need considerable help if they are to absorb increased population while shifting

labor to more productive sectors and raising output per worker.
                                      —44-


                                     Notes



 1. By developed countries we mean Western Europe, Australia, Japan, Canada,

and the United States, as indicated in Appendix Table A.2. Except for countries

with mid—1982 populations below one million, high-income oil exporters, and East

European nonmarket economies, all other countries are considered less developed,

despite the wide range of industrialization and income per capita among them.


 2. These figures are taken from the World Development Report 1984 and from the

Population Reference Bureau's 1984 World Population Data Sheet.


 3. See Simon (1981) for a presentation of the optimists' point of view; see

Coale and Hoover (1958) for a statement of the pessimists' view.


 4. For such correlations see Kuznets (1973, p. 43) who reports the rank

correlation between the rate of growth of population and per capita product as

—.31 for all countries and .11 for all underdeveloped countries.


 5. See Standing, 1976 for an excellent discussion of this issue; see also

Dixon, 1982 and Anker, 1983 for thorough treatments of the problems involved in

measuring the labor force participation of women in developing countries.


 6. This simple insight into the dynamic relationship between population and

labor force growth underlied some of the main results derived in one of the

earliest neoclassical treatments of the relationship between population and

economic growth, the classic volume by Coale and Hoover (1958).


 7. One can think of individuals choosing to migrate to urban areas in response

to fertility or mortality changes which affect the benefits and costs of such
                                      —45-


migration. See Stark and Bloom (1985) for a review of recent developments in

the migration literature. See Williamson (1986) for some discussion of age

selectivity in migration.


 8. See Durand (1975) for a thorough empirical study of labor force

participation rates in less developed economies.


 9. See Freeman and Bloom (1985) for a review of this literature and for some

new empirical results.


10. See Chenery and Syrquin (1975) for an attempt to characterize "average"

patterns of development. Note, however, that Chenery and Syrquin do not focus

on deviations from those average patterns, which are substantial. Nor do they

focus on empirical testing of theoretical relationships between the variables in

their analysis.


11. See Ranis and Fei (1984) for further discussion of this point.


12. In this model, the average product of labor in the agricultural sector

will, of course, increase somewhat as more labor is drawn into the modern

sector. This will tend to raise wages in the modern sector in the simple model

outlined here.


13. Further references to theoretical models of dual economies include

Jorgensen, 1961; Fei and Ranis, 1964; and Dixit, 1973.


14. This conclusion rests, of course, on the assumption that the savings rate

from industrial sector wages is less than that from profits. If this assumption

is reasonable, labor market market imperfections in the modern sector will

constrain the economy's ability to absorb new labor.
                                      -46-


15. Gregory (1975, p. 121).


16. Berg (1970, p. 296).


17. Webb (1977, p. 246).


18. House and Rempel (1976).


19. Webb (1977, pp. 237-8).


20. Krueger (1983, pp. 146-7).


21. According to McNicoll, "...there is strong evidence of population-induced

innovation in some agricultural settings; but there are cases too where rapid

population growth has been accompanied by stagnant productivity or by

labor—saving rather than labor—using technical progress." (1984a, p.197)


22. Indeed, at the level of casual empiricism, this theory is not inconsistent

with the emergence of the urban informal sector. See Portes and Benton, 1985.


23. Since much agricultural production in developing countries is not

exchanged, the World Bank has imputed part of its value for many countries.


24. Ideally, we would also analyze the wage effects of rapid population growth.

Unfortunately, the sketchy and unreliable nature of wage data for most

developing countries render such an analysis beyond the scope of this paper.

However, we will analyze variations in a kindred measure --   output   per worker --

across   sectors and over time.


25. See Kuznets (1984) for a detailed analysis of the decline of agricultural

employment.
                                      —47-


26. The material presented in this section draws heavily on the studies by Alba

(1984), Hansen and Radwan (1982), International Labour Office (1972), Leiserson

(1980), Liuch and Mazumdar (1983), McNicoll (1984b), Paiva (1984), Paqueo

(1984), Radwan (1984), and Visaria (1984).


27. See Lucas and Stark (1985) for an interesting analysis of immigrant

remittances.


28. These figures are extracted from World Bank, World Development Report 1984,

p. 148 and p. 218.
                                        -48-


                                     References



Alba, F.   1984. "Country Case Studies. Mexico: Achievements and Limitations

     in Labor Force Absorption." Unpublished paper presented at the Bellagio,

     Italy conference on "Population Growth and Labor Absorption in the

     Developing World: 1960-2000".

Anker, R. 1983. "Female Labour Force Activity in Developing Countries: A

     rt,que or Lurrent uerintions ana Data oiiect,on MetnoOs. international

     Labour Review 122: 709-723.

Berg, E. 1970. "Wage Structures in Less Developed Countries." In Wage Policy

     Issues in Economic Development. Smith, A.B., Ed., London: Macmillan.

Binswanger, H.P. 1979. "Induced Technical Change: Evolution of Thought." In

     Binswanger, H.P. and V.W. Ruttan, Eds., Induced Innovation: Technology,

     Institutions, and Development. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Boserup, E. 1981. Population and Technological Change-—A Study of Long-Term

     Trends. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Chenery, H. and M. Syrquin. 1975. Patterns of Development, 1950-70. London:

    Oxford University Press.

Coale, A.J. 1978. "Population Growth and Economic Development: The Case of

    Mexico." Foreign Affairs: 415-29.

___________and E.M. Hoover. 1958. Population Growth and Economic Development

     in Low-Income Countries. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University

    Press.

Dixit, A. 1970. "Models of Dual Economies." In Mirrlees, J.A. and N.H. Stern,

    Eds. Models of Economic Growth. New York: John Wiley, 327-352.

Dixon, R.B. 1982. "Women in Agriculture: Counting the Labor Force in
                                      —49-


     Developing Countries." Population and Development Review 8: 539-566.

Durand, J.D. 1975. The Labor Force in Economic Development: A Comparison

     of International Census Statistics: 1946-66, Princeton, New Jersey:

     Princeton University Press.

Fel, J.C.H. and G. Ranis. 1964. Development of the Labor Surplus Economy.

    Homewood, Illinois: Irwin.

Freeman, R.B. and D.E. Bloom. 1985. "The Youth Problem: Age or Generational

    Crowding?" Unpublished Report to the OECD. December.

Gregory, P. 1975. "The Impact of Institutional Factors on Urban Labor

    Markets." In Studies in Employment and Rural Development. Washington:

    World Bank.

Harris, J. and M.P. Todaro. 1970. "Migration, Unemployment, and Development:

    A Two-Sector Analysis." American Economic Review 60: 126-142.

Hansen, B. and S. Radwan. 1982. Employment Opportunities and Equity in a

    Changing Economy: Egypt in the 1980s. Geneva: International Labour

    Office.

Hayami, Y. and V.W. Ruttan. 1985. Agricultural Development. Baltimore:

    Johns Hopkins University Press.

Heller, P.S. and A.A. Tait. 1983. "Government Employment and Pay: Some

     International Comparisons." International Monetary Fund Occasional

    Paper No. 24. Washington, D.C.

Hirschmari, A.O. 1958. The Strategy of Economic Development. New Haven: Yale

    University Press.

House, W.J. and H. Rempel. 1976. "The Impact of Unionization on Negotiated

    Wages in the Manufacturing Sector in Kenya." Oxford Bulletin of Economic

    Statistics 38.
                                          -50-


Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas. 1977. Chile: Anuarlo Estadisticas,

     1976. Santiago.

International Labour Office. Yearbook of Labour Statistics. 1975, 1961,

     and 1984 Editions. Geneva: International Labour Office.

International Labour Office. 1972. Employment, Incomes, and Equality: A

     Strategy for Increasing Productive Employment in Kenya. Geneva:

     International Labour Office.

Jorgenson, D.W. 1961. "The Development of a Dual Economy." Economic Journal

     LXXI:    309-334.

Krueger,   A. 0. 1983. Trade and Employment in Developing Countries, 3:

     Synthesis and Conclusions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kuznets, S. 1965. Economic Growth and Structure: Selected Essays. New York:

     Norton.

__________      1973.    Population, Capital, and Growth. London: Heinemann

     Educational Books.

___________     1984.    "The Pattern of Shift of Labor Force from Agriculture,

     1950-70." In Gersovitz, M., C.F. Diaz-Alejandro, 6. Ranis, and M.R.

     Rosenzwe-ig, Eds., The Theory and Experience of Economic Development.

     London: George Allen and Unwin. 44-59.

Leibenstein, H. 1978. General X-Efficiency Theory and Economic Development.

    New York: Oxford University Press.

Leiserson, M. and others. 1980. Employment and Income Distribution in

     Indonesia. Washington: The World Bank.

Lewis, W.A. 1954. "Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour."

    Manchester School 22: 137-91.
                                         —51—


                1958. "Unlimited Labour: Further Notes." Manchester School

     26: 1—32.

Lluch, C. and D. Mazumdar. 1983. Wages and Employment in Indonesia.

     Washington: The World Bank.

Lucas, R.E.B. and 0. Stark. 1985. "Motivations to Remit: The Case of

     Botswana." Journal of Political Economy.

McNicoll, G. 1984a. "Consequences of Rapid Population Growth: An Overview

     and Assessment." Population and Development Review 10: 177-240.

___________     1984b.   "Population Dynamics and Labor Absorption in Indonesia:

     A Case Study." Unpublished paper presented at the Bellaglo, Italy

     conference on "Population Growth and Labor Absorption in the Developing

     World: 1960-2000".

Paiva, P. 1984. "Fifty Years of Population Growth and Labor Absorption in

     Brazil: From 1950 to 2000." Unpublished paper presented at the Bellaglo,

     Italy conference on "Population Growth and Labor Absorption in the

     Developing World: 1960-2000".

Paqueo, V. B.    1984. "Population Growth, Employment and Total Factor

     Productivity Growth: Problems and Prospects of the Philippine Political

     Economy." Unpublished paper presented at the Bellagio, Italy conference

     on "Population Growth and Labor Absorption in the Developing World:

     1960—2000".

Portes, A. and L. Benton. 1984. "Industrial Development and Labor Absorption:

     A Reinterpretation." Population and Development Review 4: 589-611.

Radwan, S. 1984. "The Labour Markets in an Open Economy: Egypt." Unpublished

     paper presented at the Bellagio, Italy conference on "Population Growth

     and Labor Absorption in the Developing World: 1960-2000".
                                                     —52-


Ranis, G. and J.C. Fei. 1984. "Lewis and the Classicists." In Gersovitz, M.,

      C.F. Diaz-Alejandro, G. Ranis, and M.R. Rosenzweig, Eds., The Theory and

      Experience of Economic Development. London: George Allen and Unwin.

      31—42.

Sen, A.K. 1968. Choice of Techniques. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Simon, J. 1981. The Ultimate Resource. Princeton: Princeton University

      Press.

 1 — —I
cr,,i4r         1QR1   mr1r',,mn+
                        ...p.. • •.... — Pr,1
                                         .      ., . ,r
                                                     ••     .   .   III   S41,   I I   a.   wT.,. I I I   S . II .   Tk
                                                                                                                     I I IC


     World     Bank.

Standing, G.M. 1976. "Concepts of Labour Force Participation and

     Underutilisation." International Labour Office, Population and Employment

     Working Paper No. 40, Geneva.

____________       1978.   Labour Force Participation and Development. Geneva:

      International Labour Office.

____________and G. Sheehan, Eds. 1978. Labour Force Participation in

     Low-Income Countries. Geneva: International Labour Office.

Stark, 0. and D.E. Bloom. 1985. "The New Economics of Labor Migration."

     American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings.

Starr, G. 1981. Minimum Wage Fixing. Geneva: International Labour

     Office.

United Nations. Yearbook of Industrial Statistics. 1968 to 1980 Editions.

     New York: United Nations.

U.S. Department of Labor. 1983. Handbook of Labor Statistics. Washington,

     D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Visaria, P. 1984. "The Growth of Population and Labour Force in India:

     1961—2001." Unpublished paper presented at the Bellagio, Italy conference
                                      —53-


     on "Population Growth and Labor Absorption in the Developing World:

     1960-2000".

Webb, R.C. 1977. "Wage Policy and Income Distribution in Developing

    Countries." In Income Distribution and Growth in   the Less Developed
    Countries. Frank, C.R. and R.C. Webb, Eds. Washington: Brookings

     Institution.

Wiliamson, J.G. 1986. "Migration and Urbanization." In Handbook of

    ment Economics. H. Chenery and T.N. Srinivasan, Eds. Forthcoming.

World Bank. 1984. World Development Report 1984. Oxford: Oxford University

    Press.

World Bank. 1983. World Tables. Volume II. Social Data. Oxford:

    Oxford University Press.
                                                                   Table 1

                                    Growth Rates of Population and Labor Force, by Income Group

                                                                                                               Difference in
                                                             Average Annual             Average Annual         Growth Rates
                                   1982 Population       Population Growth Rates   Labor Force Growth Rates    (Labor Force—
Type of Economies*                  (In millions)             (in percent)               (in percent)            Population)
                                                           1960—70       1970—82      1960-70     1970-82     1960-70   1970—80
Low-income Developing                 2,266.5               2.3              1.9        1.7        2.0        -0.6       0.1
    China                             1,008.2               2.3              1.4       1.7         1.8        -0.6       0.4
    India                               717.0                2.3             2.3        1.7        2.1        -0.6      -0.2
    Other Low-Income                    541.3               2.5              2.6       1.8         2.3        -0.7      -0.3
Lower Middle-Income Developing          669.6               2.5              2.5       1.9         2.4        -0.6      -0.1

Upper Middle-Income Developing          488.7               2.6              2.3       2.3         2.3         -0.3      0.0
Industrial Market                       722.9                1.1             0.7       1.2         1.2         0.1       0.5


Source:     World Bank, World Oevelopment Report 1984.
                                   Table 2

           Labor Force Participation Rates for Males and Females,
                               by Income Group


                                      Males                  Females
Type of Economy                   1960      1980*         1960     1980*

Low-Income Developing             56.6       54.4         31.5      29.5

Middle—Income Developing          53.4       49.4         19.5      19.7

Industrial Market                 59.2       59.0         27.0      32.5


Source: World Bank, World Tables, Volume II, Social Data, 1983.

*Circa 1980.
                                     Table 3

             Labor Force Participation Rates for Males and Females,
                 by Geographic Region and for Selected Countries


Developing Economies (All ages)                 Males              Females
                                         1960           1980    1960     1980
    Region

    Africa South of Sahara               55.3           50.2    31.8     28.1

    Middle East and North Africa         51.6           45.4     4.5      5.6

    East Asia and Pacific                55.3           55.5    34.5     33.5

    South Asia                           57.1           52.0    24.4     22.8

    Latin America and Caribbean          52.9           49.8    12.5     14.8

    South Europe                         60.3           55.2    31.9     29.1


Developed Economies (Ages 15+)

    Country

    United States                        83.3           77.4    37.7     51.5

    Canada                               82.8           78.3    30.1     50.3

    Australia                           85.3*           79.2    33.8*    455
    Japan                                84.2           79.6    49.3     46.6

    France                              81.4            70.6    40.1     42.7

    Germany                             82.7            70.4    40.3     38.2

    Great Britain                       88.1        79.2        28.6     29.9

    Italy                               82.0            67.8    28.6     29.9

    Sweden                              87.1**      749         46.8**   593

Source: Developing economy data: World Bank, World Tables, Volume II, 1983.
         Developed countries: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Handbook of
         Labor Statistics, 1983.

 *Datum for 1964.
**Datum for 1961.
                        Table 4

 Percent of Population Aged 15-64, by Income Group


Type of Economies                 1960       1982

Low-Income Developing             55          59

   China                          56          63

   India                          54          57

   Other Low-Income               54          53

Lower Middle-Income Developing    54          55

Upper Middle-Income Developing    55          57

Industrial Market                 63          66


Source: World Bank, World Development Report 1984.
                                       Table 5

            Ratio of Average Agricultural to Average Manufacturing Wages




Argentina                      0.64112             0.641,2,3           o.69
Barbados1                      0.66                0.71

Burma                          1.311               1.211               1.22

Colombia                       0.381               O.42                0.46

Costa Rica2                     —-                 0.50                0.50

    .                            .,                v.j.
                                                   1                   U.4
Cyprus1                        1.24                1.10                0.71

El Salvador1                                       0.30                0.30

Guyana                         0.971               0.841               0.72

Malawi                         0.33                0.29                0.28

Mauritius                      0.97                1.31                1.52

Mexico2                        0.311               0.336               0.37

Morocco1'2                     0.51                0.30                    --
Sri Lanka1                     0.44                0.41               0.53

Syria2                         Q•757               0.40               Ø•394

Zambia8                        0.55                0.41               0.42k


Source: International Labour Office; Yearbook of Labour Statistics. 1975 and
           1981, Geneva.

Males only.
Minimum rates.
1973.
51977.
61976.
71975.
81969.
Zambian nationals only.
                                      Table 6

                      Cross Section Variation in Minimum Wages


                                           World Bank                      I LO
Country             Year   Minimum    Avg. Manuf.     Ratio   Avg. Manuf.         Ratio

Algeria             1975      2.08                                 3.13           0.66
  (dinars/h.)
Argentina           1976   7608          --           ——
                                                              12,896.00       •
                                                                                  0.59
  (peso/rn.)
Brazil              1974    355        1151.34       0.31          ——              ——

  (cruzeiro/m.)
Cameroon            1976     64         188.24       0.34          —               --
  (CFA/h.)
Central African
  Republic          1976     35.60      135.56       0.26          ——              ——

  (CAF/h.)
Colombia            1977   1573       7,090.98       0.22     4,005.30            0.39
  (peso/rn.)
Costa Rica          1975    585       1,001.52       0.58     1,123.00            0.52
  (colones/m.)
Ecuador             1977   1500       4,494.01       0.33     4,022.20            0.37
  (sucres/m.,)
El Salvador         1977    186         386.36       0.48        297.441          0.62
  (culones/rn.)
Egypt               1976     40         153.85       0.26        108.11           0.37
  (piastre/d.)
Ghana               1977    400         781.26       0.51          ——              —-
  (pesewa/d.)
Guatemala           1975     57         177.31       0.49         93.69           0.61
  (guetzal/m.)
Ivory Coast         1977    115         289.40       0.40          —-              —-
  (CFA/h.)
Kenya               1977    350         977.82       0.36        978.30           0.36
  (shillings/rn.)
                    1976      2.00        4.24       0.47          ——              ——
Libya
  (dinars/d.)
Mexico              1977   2766       6,832.36       0.40     4,984.20            0.55
  (peso/rn.)
Panama              1977    114         295.59       0.39        237.21           0.48
  (balboa/rn.)
Papua,
  New Guinea        1977     28.46       58.30       0.49
  (kina/w.)
Peru                1975   3270      10,784.99       0.30     5,525.00            0.59
  (sol/m.)
Table 6, Continued


                                                  World Bank                      I LO
Country              Year      Minimum       Avg. Manuf.     Ratio   Avg. Manuf.         Ratio

Philippines          1977        15.18          27.99       0.54
  (peso/d.)
Sri Lanka            1977         8.96                                  19.05            0.47
  (rupee!d.)
Tanzania             1974       340            563.90       0.60
  (shillings/rn.)
Tunisia              1977         0.193          0.45       0.43
  (dinar/h.)
Uruguay              1977       312.2          504.12       0.62
  (new peso/rn.)
7mhi                 a   Q'7                    ,           (1          Al   fl          n   A
  (angwee/h.)
Turkey               1977        60.00         238.58       0.25       127.52            0.47
  (lira/d.)


Sources: Minimum Wages:

                -
                    Starr, Gerald, Minimum Wage Fixing, International Labour
                    Office, Geneva, 1981.
                -   For Chile: Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas, Republica de
                    Chile, Chile: Anvario Estadistico, 1976. Santiago, 1977.

            Manufacturing Wages:
                -   U.N. Yearbook of Industrial Statistics, 1968-1980 Editions.
                -   Industrial    Surveys and Census of Various Countries.

                —   International       Labour Office, Yearbook of Labour Statistics,
                    1981, 1975.

1Males only.
                                   Table 7

         Public Sector Employment as Share of Nonagricultural Employment


                                                             1979-80
Low-Income Developing Countries

     Computed average of all
     countries except India and China                          54.4

     India                                                     72.0


Lower Middle-Income Developing                                 43.5

Upper Middle-Income Developing                                 22.8


Source: Tabulated from "Government Employment and Pay: Some International
         Comparisons," Peter S. Heller and Alan A. Tait. Washington, D.C.:
         International Monetary Fund, Occasional Paper No. 24, October 1983.
                                    Table 8

                   Public Sector and Government Average Wage
                         Relative to Per Capita Income


                                                               1979—80

Low-Income Developing Countries                                  6.61
     (except India and China)

     India                                                       4.80


Lower Middle-Income Developing Countries                         4.84


Upper Middle-Income Developing Countries                         2.94


Source: Tabulated from "Government Employment and Pay: Some International
         Comparisons," Peter S. Heller and Alan A. Tait. Washington, D.C.:
         International Monetary Fund, Occasional Paper No. 24, October 1983.
                                           Table 9

            Distribution of Labor Force Across Economic Sectors, by Income Group


                                                     Percent of Labor Force fl:

                                     Agriculture             Industry               Services
Type of Economies                   1960     1980          1960     1980          1960     1980

Low-Income Developing*               77       72             9      13             14       15

    China                           na.       69           n.a.     19            n.a.      12

    India                            74       71           11       13            15        16

    Other Low-Income                          73             7      11            11        16


Lower Middle-Income Developing       71       56           11       16            18        28

Upper Middle-Income Developing       49       30           20       28            31       42

Industrial Market                    18        6           38       38            44       56


Source: World Bank, World Tables, Volume II, Social Data, 1983.

*Figures for 1960 do not include data for China.

n.a.: not available.
                                          Table 10

         Distribution of Labor Force Across Economic Sectors, by Geographic Region


                                                   Percent of Labor Force In:

                                    Agriculture            Industry              Services
Region                             1960     1980         1960     1980          1960    1980

Africa south of Sahara            77.6      67.4          8.8     13.4          13.6    19.2

Middle East and North Africa      58.6      42.4         16.1     27.8          25.3    29.8

East Asia and Pacific*            71.1      53.2          9.5     16.9          19.4    29.9

South Asia                        74.4      68.9         10.6     13.2          15.0    17.9

Latin America and Caribbean       48.8      31.9         19.2    23.7        32.0       44.4

South Europe                      64.0      40.7         17.3     23.4          18.7    35.9


Source: World Bank, World Tables, Volume II, Social Data, 1983.

*Excludes China.
                                    Table 11

                           Gross Domestic Product Per Worker,
                         For Each Sector Relative to the Economy,
                                        1960-1980


                           Agriculture             Industry             Services
Type of Economies         1960     1980          1960     1980        1960     1980
Low Income Economies*     0.64     0.50          2.89      2.69       1.79     1.93
    China                 N.A.     0.49          N.A.      2.47       N.A.     1.83

    India                 0.68     0.52          1.82      2.00       2.00     2.31
    Other Low Income      0.60     0.62          1.33      1.55       3.54    2.38


Lower Middle-Income
  Developing**            0.52     0.41          2.00      2.19       2.28    1.50

Upper Middle-Income
  Developing**            0.37     0.37          1.65      1.46       1.59    1.14
Industrial Market         0.33


Source: World Bank, World Development Report 1982 and Table 9.

 *Figures for 1960 do not include China. N.A. =    not   applicable

**1982 GOP share by 1980 labor share for 1980.
                                        Table 12

                    Estimates of the Contribution of Shifts in Sectoral
                     Distribution of Labor to Growth of GOP Per Worker,
                                        1960- 1980



                                           Percentage Change in GOP
                                               Per Worker UsinQ

                                       1960 Relative       1980 Relative
Type of Economy                        GOP by Sector       GOP by Sector


Low Income Economies                       10.5                11.5

    China

    India                                   3.9                 5.2

    Other Low-Income                       15.1                13.8


Lower Middle-Income Developing             25.0                23.2


Upper Middle-Income Developing             24.1                21.0


Industrial Market                          10.8                 2.3


Source: Tables 9 and 11, calculated by applying 1980 distribution of labor
         force to 1960 relative GOPs per worker and 1960 distribution of labor
         force to 1980 relative GDPs per worker.
                                                       Table 13

                                Growth of Product and Labor Force by Sector, 1960-1980


                              Growth of Real GDP, 1960-80 (in percent)      Growth of Labor Force, 1960-80 (in percent)
Type of Economies           Overall   Agriculture   Industry   Services     Overall   Agriculture   Industry   Services


Low—Income Developing        141.2       56.1        185.9        134.3       44.3        34.9       108.4            54.6



Middle-Income Developing     203.0       89.6        258.8        191.8       56.0        15.7       118.4           130.6



Industrial Market            116.?       37.4        123.3        127.9       26.9       -42.2        26.9           61.5


Source: Authors' calculations using data contained in World Development Report 1984 and World Tables, Volume   II,
Social Data, 1983.
                                      Table 14

            Projected Population and Labor Force Growth Rates 1980-2000,
                                  by Income Group


Type of Economies                    Population      Labor Force     Difference

Low-Income Developing                   1.7             2.0                0.3

    China                               1.0              1.6               0.6

    India                               1.9             2.1                0.2

   Other Low-Income                     2.9             3.0                0.1

Lower Middle-Income Developing          2.4             2.6                0.2

Upper Middle-Income Developing         2.1              2.5                0.4

Industrial Market                      0.4              0.6                0.2


Source: World Bank, World Development Report 1984.
                                   Appendix Table A.1

              Developing Countries by Income Group and Geographic Region


                                              Income Group
                      Low-Income               Lower Middle-        Upper Middle-
                      Developing             Income Developing    Income Developing
Region                Countries                 Countries            Countries


Africa south
of Sahara             Benin                 Angola                South Africa
                      Burundi               Cameroon
                      Cent. African Rep.    Congo People's Rep.
                      Chad                  Ivory Coast
                      Ethiopia              Lesotho
                      Ghana                 Liberia
                      Guinea                Mauritania
                      Kenya                 Nigeria
                      Madagascar            Senegal
                      Malawi                Sudan
                      Mali                  Zambia
                      Mozambique            Zimbabwe
                      Niger
                      Rwanda
                      Sierra Leone
                      Somalia
                      Tanzania
                      Togo
                      Uganda
                      Upper Volta
                      Zaire


Middle East
and North Africa                            Egypt                 Algeria
                                            Lebanon               Iran
                                            Morocco               Iraq
                                            Tunisia               Jordan
                                            Yemen Arab Rep.       Syria
                                            Yemen, PDR


East Asia
and Pacific           China                 Indonesia             Hong Kong
                      Kampuchea, Dem.       Korea, N.             Korea, S.
                      Lao, PDR              Mongolia              Malaysia
                      Viet Nam              Papua New Guinea      Singapore
                                            Philippines
                                            Thai land
 Appendix Table A.1 (continued)


                                             Income Group
                       Low-Income             Lower Middle-        Upper Middle-
                       Developing           Income Developing    Income Developing
 Region                Countries                Countries            Countries


 South Asia            Afghanistan
                       Bangladesh
                       Bhutan
                       Burma
                       India
                       Nepal
                      Pakistan
                      Sri Lanka



Latin America
and Caribbean         Haiti                Bolivia              Argentina
                                           Colombia             Brazil
                                           Costa Rica           Chile
                                           Cuba                 Mexico
                                           Dominican Rep.       Panama
                                           Ecuador              Trinidad & Tobago
                                           El Salvador          Uruguay
                                           Guatemala            Venezuela
                                           Honduras
                                           Jamaica
                                           Nicaragua
                                           Paraguay
                                           Peru



South Europe                               Turkey               Greece
                                                                Israel
                                                                Portugal
                                                                Yugoslavia


Note:     The countries listed in this table reflect the Income     group and
          geographic location classification used by the World Bank in its 1984
          World Development Report.    All of the countries in this table
          had mid-1982 populations exceeding one million persons.
                              Appendix Table A.2

                         Industrial Market Economies


Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany, Fed. Rep.
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Nhr1rr4
New Zealand
Norway
Spain
Sweden
Swi tzer land
United Kingdom
United States


Note:    The countries listed in this table reflect the income group
         classification used by the World Bank in its 1984 World
         Development Report. All of the countries in this table had
         mid-1982 populations exceeding one million persons.
