                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 AN ANATOMY OF CREDIT BOOMS AND THEIR DEMISE

                                        Enrique G. Mendoza
                                         Marco E. Terrones

                                        Working Paper 18379
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18379


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




This paper was prepared for the Fifteenth Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile. We thank
the discussant Luis Felipe Céspedes for his thoughtful comments, and the organizers for their kind
invitation and hospitality. We are indebted to many conference participants for their comments and
suggestions, particularly David Altig and José De Gregorio. We also thank to Stijn Claessens, Jörg
Decressin, Ayhan Kose and Carmen Reinhart for their comments. This paper represents only the authors’
views and not those of the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Board, or its Management. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Enrique G. Mendoza and Marco E. Terrones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
An Anatomy of Credit Booms and their Demise
Enrique G. Mendoza and Marco E. Terrones
NBER Working Paper No. 18379
September 2012
JEL No. E32,E44,E51,G21

                                               ABSTRACT

What are the stylized facts that characterize the dynamics of credit booms and the associated fluctuations
in macro-economic aggregates? This paper answers this question by applying a method proposed in
our earlier work for measuring and identifying credit booms to data for 61 emerging and industrial
countries over the 1960-2010 period. We identify 70 credit boom events, half of them in each group
of countries. Event analysis shows a systematic relationship between credit booms and a boom-bust
cycle in production and absorption, asset prices, real exchange rates, capital inflows, and external deficits.
Credit booms are synchronized internationally and show three striking similarities in industrial and
emerging economies: (1) credit booms are similar in duration and magnitude, normalized by the cyclical
variability of credit; (2) banking crises, currency crises or Sudden Stops often follow credit booms,
and they do so at similar frequencies in industrial and emerging economies; and (3) credit booms often
follow surges in capital inflows, TFP gains, and financial reforms, and are far more common with
managed than flexible exchange rates.


Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu

Marco E. Terrones
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington DC 20431
mterrones@imf.org
1.      Introduction

     Episodes in which credit to the private sector rises significantly above its long-run

trend (i.e. “credit booms”) are often associated with periods of economic turbulence.

Until recently, however, efforts at developing methodologies for identifying credit booms

and characterizing the economic fluctuations that accompany them often produced mixed

results (see, for example, Gourinchas, Valdes, and Landerretche (2001)). In addition,

little was known about the association between economy-wide credit booms and the

financial conditions of individual firms and banks, and about whether the characteristics

of credit booms differ across industrial and emerging economies. This changed with the

growing literature on credit booms developed over the last five years. In particular, in

Mendoza and Terrones (2008) we proposed a new methodology for measuring and

identifying credit booms and showed that it was successful at identifying credit booms

with a clear cyclical pattern in both macro and micro data.

     The method we proposed is a “thresholds method.” This method works by first

splitting real credit per capita in each country into its cyclical and trend components, and

then identifying a credit boom as an episode in which credit exceeds its long-run trend by

more than a given “boom” threshold, defined in terms of a tail probability event. The

duration of the boom is similarly set by “starting” and “ending” thresholds. The key

defining feature of this method is that the thresholds are proportional to each country’s

standard deviation of credit over the business cycle. Hence, credit booms reflect country-

specific “unusually large” cyclical credit expansions.

     In this paper, we apply this method to data for 61 countries (21 industrial countries,

ICs, and 40 emerging market economies, EMs) over the 1960-2010 period. We found a




                                               1
total of 70 credit booms, 35 in ICs and 35 in EMs, including 16 credit booms that peaked

in the critical period surrounding the recent global financial crisis between 2007 and 2010

(again with about half of these recent booms in ICs and EMs each).1 We then take the

peak dates of all credit booms and construct seven-year event windows around them to

examine the dynamics of macro aggregates in the upswing and downswing of credit

booms. This exercise is similar to the one conducted in our 2008 paper, but the extension

of the sample period to include 2007-2010 is a critical addition because it adds key

evidence from the credit booms that collapsed with the 2008 global financial crisis.

    The results show that credit booms are associated with periods of economic

expansion, rising equity and housing prices, real appreciation and widening external

deficits in the upswing phase of the booms, followed by the opposite dynamics in the

downswing. Moreover, credit booms tend to be synchronized internationally and centered

on “big events” like the 1980s debt crisis, the 1992 ERM crisis, the 1990s Sudden Stops,

and the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. In addition, splitting our sample into financial crisis

vs. non-crisis cases, we find that booms in the crisis group were larger.

    A major deviation in the evidence reported here relative to our previous findings in

Mendoza and Terrones (2008) is that adding the data from the recent credit booms and

crises we find that in fact credit booms in ICs and EMs are more similar than different. In

contrast, in our earlier work we found differences in the magnitude of credit booms, the

size of the macro fluctuations associated with credit booms, and the likelihood that they

are followed by banking or currency crises.




1
 For comparison, in Mendoza and Terrones (2008) we had data for 48 countries over the 1960-2006 period
and found 27 credit booms in ICs and 22 in EMs.


                                                  2
    Credit booms across EMs and ICs are similar in three key respects: First, although

credit booms are larger in EMs (with real credit per capita peaking at about 30 percent

above trend in the median of all EM credit booms v. 12 percent for IC credit booms),

normalizing by each country’s cyclical standard deviation of credit, credit booms are

remarkably uniform in size. The normalized peak of credit booms is about 2 standard

deviations for EMs and 2.1 for ICs. A similar observation applies to the magnitude of the

fluctuations that macro aggregates display during credit booms. These fluctuations are

larger in EMs, but since EMs also display higher cyclical standard deviations in these

variables, normalized fluctuations associated with credit booms are actually similar in

size.2

    The second similarity is that, while not all credit booms end in crisis, the peaks of

credit booms are often followed by banking crises, currency crises or Sudden Stops, and

the frequency with which this happens is about the same for EMs and ICs (20 to 25

percent for banking and currency crises, 14 percent for Sudden Stops). This is a critical

change from our previous findings, because lacking the substantial evidence from all the

recent booms and crises, we had found only 9 percent frequency of banking crises after

credit booms for EMs and zero for ICs, and 14 percent frequency of currency crises after

credit booms for EMs v. 31 percent for ICs. Clearly, the larger sample of credit boom

events used here yields a different picture indicating that in the aftermath of credit booms

both groups of countries suffer both types of crises, and also Sudden Stop crises, with

about the same frequency.


2
  Mendoza (1995) documents a similar finding for regular business cycle indicators in a sample of 23
developing countries and 7 ICs. Standard deviations of cyclical components of macro aggregates are
significantly higher for developing countries than for ICs, but normalized by the standard deviation of the
terms of trade, the variability of macro variables is similar across all countries.


                                                     3
    The third similarity relates to the factors that can act as potential triggers of credit

booms. In particular, surges in capital inflows, gains in total factor productivity (TFP),

policy reforms in the financial system, and managed exchange rates all play a role in both

ICs and EMs. There are some differences across the two groups, because the frequency of

credit booms in EMs is 47 percent when preceded by periods of large capital inflows (v.

33 percent in ICs) and 30 percent for financial reforms (v. 22 percent for ICs), while TFP

gains precede credit booms with a frequency of 42 percent for ICs (v. 20 percent for

EMs). But the overall message is that these three factors precede the peak of credit booms

with a frequency of roughly 1/5 to 1/2. Moreover, credit booms in both ICs and EMs are

far more frequent in the presence of fixed or managed exchange rates (with a frequency

of about 2/3rds for all countries), than under floating or dirty floating regimes (with

frequencies ranging from 3 to 20 percent).

    Our work is related to the empirical literature that identifies booms in macro variables

using threshold methods and event-study techniques. Montiel’s (2000) analysis of

consumption booms was one of the first studies in this vein. Gourinchas et al. (2001)

introduced threshold methods to the analysis of credit booms, followed by several other

studies including Cottarelli, et. al. (2003), International Monetary Fund (2004), Hilberts,

et. al. (2005), and Ottens, et. al. (2005).3 Threshold methods have also been widely used

in related studies of Sudden Stops and the boom-bust cycle of capital inflows. Reinhart

and Reinhart (2009) survey this literature and conduct a detailed cross-country analysis of

the macroeconomic dynamics associated with surges in capital inflows. In line with our




3
 There are also other studies that examine linkages between credit and macro variables without measuring
credit booms (e.g. Collyns and Senhadji (2002), Borio, et. al. (2001), and Kraft and Jankov (2005)).


                                                   4
findings, they find that booms in capital inflows are associated with periods of economic

expansion and booming credit and asset prices.

    Before our 2008 working paper provided a new methodology to measure credit

booms, the standard practice in empirical studies on this topic followed the method

proposed by Gourinchas et al (2001). There are three important differences between their

method and ours: (1) we use real credit per capita instead of the credit-output ratio as the

measure of credit; (2) we construct the trend of credit using the Hodrick-Prescott (HP)

filter in its standard form, instead of using an “expanding HP trend” (see Mendoza and

Terrones (2008) for details); and (3) we use thresholds that depend on each country’s

cyclical variability of credit, instead of a threshold common to all countries.4

    These differences have important implications. As shown in Mendoza and Terrones

(2008), an example of both methods applied to Chilean data shows that the method of

Gourinchas et al. (2001) is not robust to the choice of credit measure, and that it treats

each period’s credit observation as unduly representative of its trend (because it models

the long-run trend of credit as a smoothed, lagged approximation of the actual data).

Moreover, the two methods yield sharply different predictions about the association

between macro variables and credit booms. In particular, we find that output,

consumption and investment rise significantly above trend during the expansionary phase

of credit booms, and fall below trend during the contractionary phase. In contrast, they

found weak evidence of cycles in output and absorption associated with credit booms.

We also find a clear association between credit booms and financial crises, while they




4
 Our study also differs in that we examine credit booms in industrial countries, and study differences in the
dynamics of the tradables v. nontradables sectors.


                                                     5
found that the likelihood of financial crises does not increase significantly when credit

booms are present.

    Our work is also related to the analysis of the credit transmission channel in twin

banking-currency crises by Tornell and Westermann (2005).5 These authors document

that twin crises are preceded by rising credit-GDP ratios, increases in output of

nontradables relative to tradables, and real appreciations, followed by declines in all of

these variables. In addition, they used the World Bank’s World Business Economic

Survey (WBES) to document asymmetries in the access to credit markets of firms in the

tradables v. non-tradables sectors. We also look at sectoral differences in the evolution of

output dynamics, but our approach differs in that we examine these dynamics conditional

on credit boom episodes, rather than conditional on being on a twin-crises event.

    Our frequency analysis of the association of credit booms with capital inflows,

financial reforms, and TFP gains is related to theoretical and empirical studies on the

mechanisms that drive credit booms. These include theories in which excessive credit

expansion is due to herding behavior by banks (Kindleberger (2000)); information

problems that lead to bank-interdependent lending policies (Rajan (1994) and Gorton and

He (2005)), the underestimation of risks (Boz and Mendoza (2011) and Borio, et. al.

(2001)) and the lowering of lending standards (Dell’Ariccia and Marquez (2006)); the

presence of explicit or implicit government guarantees (Corsetti, et. al. (1999)); or limited

commitment on the part of borrowers (Lorenzoni (2005)). Similarly, our analysis of the

connection between credit booms and macroeconomic activity is related to the literature

on business cycle models that incorporate “financial accelerators,” by which shocks to


5
 Tornell and Westermann also study the extent financial market imperfections influences the cycle in the
middle income countries during tranquil times. See also Scheneider and Tornell (2004).


                                                    6
asset prices and relative good prices are amplified through balance sheet effects (see, for

example, Fisher (1933), Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist

(1999), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), and Mendoza (2005) and (2010)).

      The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes our method for

identifying credit booms, implements it using our cross-country sample, and examines

the main characteristics of credit booms in industrial and emerging economies. Section 3

studies the credit-boom dynamics of the cyclical components of macro aggregates.

Section 4 concludes.

2.       Credit Booms: Methodology and Key Features

2.1      Methodology

      A credit boom is defined in general as an episode in which credit to the private sector

grows by more than during a typical business cycle expansion. In Mendoza and Terrones

(2008) we formalized this definition as follows. Denote the deviation from the long-run

trend in the logarithm of real credit per capita in country i, date t as lit, and the

corresponding standard deviation of this cyclical component as  (li ) . The long-run trend

is calculated using the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter with the smoothing parameter set at

100, as is typical for annual data. Country i is defined to have experienced a credit boom

when we identify one or more contiguous dates for which the credit boom condition

li ,t   (li ) holds, where  is the boom threshold factor. Thus, during a credit boom the

deviations from trend in credit exceed the typical expansion of credit over the business

cycle by a factor of  or more. The baseline value of  is set at 1.65, because the 5

percent tail of the standardized normal distribution satisfies Prob( li ,t /  (li )  1.65 )=0.05.




                                                 7
We also conducted sensitivity analysis for  = 1.5 and 2 and confirmed that our main

results are robust to the value of .

      The date of the peak of the credit boom ( tˆ ) is the date that shows the maximum

difference between lit and   (li ) from the set of contiguous dates that satisfy the credit

boom condition. Given tˆ , the starting date of the credit boom is a date ts such that ts < tˆ

and ts yields the smallest difference | li ,t   s (li ) | , and the ending date te is a date te > tˆ

that yields the smallest difference | li ,t   e (li ) | , where s and e are the start and end

thresholds.6 We use baseline values s=e =1, and we also tried other values including 0,

¼, ½ and ¾.7 Once the starting and ending dates are set, the duration of the credit boom is

given by the difference te – ts.

2.2      Credit boom episodes and their main features

      We use data on credit from the financial sector to the private non-financial sector

obtained from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics for a sample of 61 countries,

21 industrial and 40 emerging economies (see Appendix 1), for the 1960-2010 period.

Our measure of credit is the sum of claims on the private sector by deposit money banks

(IFS line 22d) plus, whenever available for the entire sample period for a given country,

claims on the private sector by other financial institutions (IFS line 42d). Real credit per

capita is calculated as the end-of-year observations of nominal credit per capita deflated

by their corresponding end-of-year consumer price index. Data sources for these and all

other variables used in the paper are listed in Appendix 2.


6
  These threshold conditions are set to minimize the absolute values of differences of lit relative to targets
because the data are discrete, and hence in general lit does not match the targets with equality.
7
  We use thresholds such that s =e < , but notice that in principle s and e could differ, and one or both
could be set equal to .


                                                       8
    We identified 70 credit booms in our data, 35 in ICs and 35 in EMs.8 Figure 1

provides a summary view of these credit booms by plotting the cross-country mean and

median of the cyclical components of real credit per capita in seven-year event windows

centered at the peak of credit booms for the two groups of countries. These graphs show

that credit booms in EMs are larger than in industrial countries in absolute terms: At the

peak of the booms, the average expansion in real credit per capita reached about 30

percent above trend in EMs, twice what is observed in ICs. Normalized by the standard

deviation of the cyclical component of credit in each country, however, credit booms in

the two groups of countries show a similar distribution, with medians of 2 and 2.1 for

ICs and EMs respectively (see Figure 2). Thus, normalized by the variability of credit,

the magnitude of credit booms does not differ significantly across EMs and ICs.

    Table 1 shows the duration of credit booms for different starting and ending

thresholds, and the length of the corresponding upswing and downswing phases. In

general, the results based on medians indicate that EMs and ICs show booms with

similar duration of about 3-6 years, and the fraction of the boom spent in the upswing

and downswing phases with the duration thresholds set at 1 is about the same. Using

means, however, EMs seem to show longer and more asymmetric booms.

    Credit booms tend to be clustered geographically and not limited to a single region:

40 percent of the booms experienced by emerging economies were observed in East Asia

and 32 percent in Latin America. Likewise, 33 percent of the credit booms in industrial

countries were observed in the G7 and 18 percent in the Nordic countries (Denmark,

Finland, Norway, and Sweden). In addition, Figure 3 shows that credit booms tend to be

8
 There is also one emerging economy (Hong Kong) identified as experiencing credit booms in 2010, the
end of the sample period. We excluded it from the event analysis because this boom has yet to be
completed (i.e. the ending threshold has not been crossed yet).


                                                  9
synchronized internationally and centered around big events—e.g. the Bretton Woods

collapse of the early 1970s, the petro dollars boom in the prelude to the 1980s debt crisis,

the ERM and Nordic country crises of the early 1990s, the 1990s Sudden Stops, and the

recent Global Financial Crisis. It is interesting to note that excluding the recent crisis, the

Figure would have misleadingly suggested that the frequency of credit booms in ICs had

declined over time. Adding the turbulent period of the past few years it is clear that this

is not the case. Still, it is possible that the credit measure from IFS misses important

elements of the securitization boom occurring via non-bank financial intermediaries, and

thus lead us to underestimate the magnitude and frequency of credit booms in countries

with more developed financial systems. 9

3.       Credit Booms and Macroeconomic Dynamics

      This Section examines the business cycle behavior of the economy during credit

boom events, and conducts a frequency analysis of the association between credit booms

and financial crises, and between credit booms and some of their potential determinants.

3.1      Event analysis

      We construct seven-year event windows of the cyclical components of macro

aggregates centered on the peak of credit booms (i.e. tˆ is normalized to date t=0). The

windows show the cross-country means and medians of output (Y), private consumption

(C), public consumption (G), investment (I), the output of nontradables (YN), the real

exchange rate (RER), the current account-output ratio (CAY) and total capital inflows as

share of output (KI). All these variables are at constant prices, expressed in per-capita


9
  For example, Rajan (2005) argues that technical change, deregulation, and institutional change have
resulted in an increasing number of arm’s length transactions away from banks in the financial system.
Indeed, the growing securitization of subprime mortgages in the United States in recent years was
accompanied by an increase in the off-balance sheet operations of bank entities.


                                                    10
terms and detrended with the HP filter setting the smoothing parameter at 100, except for

RER (which is not in per-capita terms) and the current account-output and capital

inflows-output ratios (which are at current prices and not expressed in per capita terms).

   Figures 4-8 illustrate business cycle dynamics around credit boom episodes in EMs

and ICs. Except for RER in the EMs group, there is little difference in the dynamics

produced by country means and medians, indicating that the results are not driven by

outliers. Consider first the plots for EMs in the right-side of the Figures. Y, C and G rise 2

to 5 percentage points above trend in the build up phase of the credit boom, and drop to

between 2 to 3.5 percent below trend in the recessive phase. I, YN and RER follow a

similar pattern but display significantly larger expansions and recessions. Investment

rises up to about 20 percent above trend at the peak of credit booms and drops below

trend by a similar amount by t=2. YN rises to about 5½ percent above trend by t=0 and

then drops to almost 4 percent below trend by t=3. The median RER appreciates 7 percent

above trend at date t, and drops to a low of about 4 percent below trend when the credit

boom unwinds. CAY displays the opposite pattern: it declines to a deficit of about 2

percentage points of GDP in the expanding phase of the boom and then rises to a surplus

of 1 percentage point of GDP in the declining phase. In line with these current account

dynamics, the median KI rises by up to 2 percentage points of GDP by t=-1 and then

drops by 1 percentage point of GDP by t=2.

   The plots for industrial countries in the left-side panels of Figures 4-8 show several

similarities with those for emerging economies, but also some important differences.

Output, expenditures and the current account in the industrial countries follow a cyclical

pattern similar to that observed in the emerging economies, but the amplitude of these




                                             11
fluctuations is smaller (particularly for YN and RER), and government consumption

shows a different pattern (just about at trend in the expanding phase and slightly above

trend in the contraction phase). However, if we were to normalize the macro data using

standard deviations of cyclical components, and take into account that EMs display

higher business cycle variability in all their macro-aggregates (see, for example,

Mendoza (1995)), we would see again that credit booms display similar features across

EMs and ICs.

   Two important caveats apply to the event study graphs of macro dynamics. First, they

illustrate the cyclical dynamics of macro variables, but do not show if these variables

themselves are undergoing a boom (i.e. an unusually large expansion as defined by our

thresholds method). Table 2 provides evidence to examine this issue by listing the

fraction of credit booms associated with booms in output and expenditures that occur in

any year inside the seven-year window of the credit boom events. The results show that

between 30 to 60 percent of the credit booms are associated with booms in Y, YN, C, I,

and G, and this holds for EMs and ICs separately and for all the countries together. For

output, in particular, close to half of the observed credit booms are associated with output

booms, with little difference across EMs and ICs.

   The second caveat is that the macro event windows show point estimates of measures

of central tendency (means and medians), but do not demonstrate if these moments are

statistically significant. To explore this issue, we run cross-section regressions of each

macro variable for each date of the event window on a constant. The standard error for

the median (mean) is obtained using quintile (OLS) regressions. As Table 3 shows, most

of the mean and median estimates shown in the event study plots for Y, YN, C, and I are




                                             12
statistically significant. For G, RER and CA/Y, however, many of the coefficients have

large standard errors.

     We now study the behavior of inflation, equity prices and housing prices during credit

booms (see Figure 8). Using medians, there is only a week association between credit

booms and inflation in both EMs and ICs, with below-trend inflation in the upswing and

above-trend inflation in the downswing.10 Hence, credit booms are generally not

associated with sharp changes in inflation. In contrast, housing and equity prices show a

clear pattern of rising prices in the upswing and declining prices in the downswing.

Equity prices rise to 25-30 percent at the peak of credit booms, and housing prices rise to

10-15 percent in both EMs and ICs. The downswing of credit booms leads to significant

equity price collapses of about 20 percent in real terms in both groups of countries. These

movements in asset prices are important because they are consistent with theoretical

explanations of credit booms and busts that rely on financial accelerators and balance

sheet effects.

     Real M2 money balances also expand during the upswing and contract during the

downswing of credit booms (see Figure 7). This suggests that monetary policy may play

a role in fueling credit booms, inasmuch as real M2 moves along with credit during credit

boom episodes. 11




10
   The mean inflation in EMs does show a shift from sharply below-trend inflation to sharply above-trend
inflation but that reflects outliers driven by a few hyperinflation episodes in Latin America.
11
   There is the impression that central banks in developing countries often loosen (tighten) monetary policy
in good (bad) times. However, a systemic characterization of this regularity has been elusive because of
lack of good indicators of the monetary policy stance (see, for instance, Kaminsky, Reinhart and Vegh,
2005).


                                                    13
   The event windows for industrial and emerging economies mask important variations

across country regions. In ICs, the Nordic countries show larger fluctuations in credit and

in the macro variables than the G7 (Table 4, Panel A). In addition, some of the macro

variables in the Nordic countries peak earlier than credit. In the case of EMs (Table 4,

Panel B), credit expansions and the associated surge in consumption are much larger in

Latin America. In contrast, the current account reversals when the credit booms revert are

larger in Asia.

   In summary, the macro event study shows that credit booms across emerging and

industrial economies are associated with a well-defined pattern of economic expansion in

the build-up phase of the booms, followed by contraction in the declining phase. Output,

expenditures, stock prices, housing prices, and the real exchange rate move above trend

in the first phase, and drop below trend in the second phase, and the current account falls

first and then rises. All of this happens without major changes in inflation in most

countries.

   There are interesting differences in the dynamics around credit boom events across

EMs and ICs in terms of the amplitude of macro fluctuations in levels (i.e. without some

form of normalization) and in the dynamics of government expenditures. These

differences are consistent with three well-known facts in international business cycle

studies: First, as noted earlier, the larger amplitude of the fluctuations displayed by EMs

is in line with well-established evidence showing that business cycles are larger in

developing countries (see Mendoza (1995), Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2003), Neumeyer

and Perri (2005)). Second, the striking difference in the behavior of government

purchases is consistent with the evidence produced in the literature on the procyclicality




                                             14
of fiscal policy in EMs (see Kaminski, Reinhart, and Vegh (2005)). Third, the widening

current account deficits followed by reversals, and the larger booms followed by

collapses in the price and output of the nontradables sector, are consistent with

observations highlighted in the Sudden Stops literature (e.g. Calvo (1998), Mendoza

(2007), Caballero and Krishnamurty (2001)). However, it is important to note that

generally these facts have been documented by examining macroeconomic data without

conditioning for credit booms. In contrast, our results apply specifically to fluctuations

associated with credit boom episodes. This is particularly relevant for the Sudden Stop

facts (i.e. the reversals in CAY and the boom-bust cycles in RER and YN), because most

of the Sudden Stops literature emphasizes the role of credit transmission mechanisms in

explaining Sudden Stops.

      Our finding that credit booms are associated with a well-defined cyclical pattern in

output and expenditures contrasts sharply with the findings of Gourinchas et al. (2001),

showing only ambiguous evidence of this association. Figure 6 in their paper shows a

small cycle in GDP, a decline in GDP growth below trend for the entire duration of credit

booms, and no cycle in consumption.

3.3      Frequency analysis

      We conduct next a frequency analysis to examine three issues: (1) the association

between credit booms and financial crises; (2) the role of capital inflows, TFP gains,

financial reforms and exchange rate regimes as preconditions of credit booms; and (3) the

probability of experiencing a credit boom once the starting threshold is crossed.

      Credit booms are often cited as the culprit behind financial crises, particularly in

emerging economies (see Eichengreen and Arteta, 2002). If this is the case, credit booms




                                               15
should be closely associated with financial crises. Table 5 shows the percent of banking

crises, currency crises and Sudden Stops that occurred during the seven-year window of

the credit boom events in EMs, ICs and all countries combined. The percent of crises that

occurred before, at, and after the peak of the credit booms are listed in separate columns.

The dates identifying the occurrence of these crises were obtained from sources in the

empirical literature (Demirguic-Kunt and Detragiache (2006) for banking crises,

Eichengreen and Bordo (2002) for currency crises, and Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia

(2004) for Sudden Stops).

   Table 5 yields an important result: Credit booms in both EMs and ICs are often

associated with currency crises, banking crises, and Sudden Stops, although the first two

are observed more often than the third. Banking crises are observed in 44 percent of all

credit booms, in about 1/3rd of IC credit booms and ½ of EM credit booms. Currency

crises are observed in 54 percent of all credit booms, in 44 percent of IC credit booms

and 2/3rds of EM credit booms. Sudden Stops are observed in about ¼ of all credit

booms, in 14 percent of IC credit booms and 1/3rd of EM credit booms.

   It is also worth noting that, within the seven-year window of credit boom events, the

incidence of the three types of crises is at its highest after credit booms peak, and this

holds again for EMs, ICs and all countries combined. Moreover, the frequency with

which each type of crisis is observed after the peak of credit booms is also very similar

across EMs and ICs (23 v. 25 percent for banking crises, 20 v. 25 percent for currency

crises and a common 14 percent for Sudden Stops). Thus, clearly not all credit booms end

in crisis, but odds are about 1 out of 4 that once a country enters a credit boom it will end

with a currency or a banking crisis, and a little less that it will end in a Sudden Stop.




                                              16
   These findings are broadly consistent with those reported in Schularick and Taylor

(2012). They examined whether credit growth is a significant predictor of banking crises

for a sample of fourteen developed countries over the 1870 to 2008 period, and found that

indeed credit growth helps predict these crises. However, their analysis provides only

indirect evidence of the credit boom-bust cycle because using credit growth per-se as

explanatory variable does not identify whether this credit growth is the result of financial

deepening or a credit boom.

   Our findings are at odds with the conclusion in Gourinchas et al. (2001), which noted

that there is virtually no association between credit booms and financial crises in EMs,

They are also sharply different from the findings in Mendoza and Terrones (2008), where

lacking the data from 2007-2010 we found that credit booms in ICs were rarely

associated with banking and currency crises, and there was no association with Sudden

Stops.

   We also constructed seven-year event windows that compare the fluctuations in credit

and macro aggregates of countries that experienced a crisis (i.e. banking crisis, currency

crisis, or Sudden Stop) with those that did not. The results (available from the authors on

request) show clearly that the macro fluctuations in the countries that experienced crisis

are larger and display more abrupt declines than those of the non-crisis countries. In

particular, the dynamics of credit are more pronounced and with more drastic

downswings in the case of the crisis countries than in the non-crisis countries. In

addition, the behavior of capital inflows is different across the two groups of countries.

While capital inflows rise in the upswing of the crisis episodes and fall abruptly in the

downswing, they seem more stable in the case of the non-crisis episodes.




                                             17
   Consider now the frequency analysis of the association between credit booms and

large capital inflows, financial reforms, and TFP gains. Capital inflows are measured as

the total net inflows (i.e. net foreign direct investment, net portfolio flows, and other net

investments liabilities) in percent of GDP, using data from IFS (see Appendix 2). We

define a state of large capital inflows as of date t when the preceding three-year average

of net capital inflows ranked on the top quartile of its respective country group (i.e. EMs,

ICs, or both) over the 1975-2010 period. Domestic financial reforms are measured using

the index produced by Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2007). This index takes values

between 0 and 21 and includes information on reserve requirements and credit controls,

interest rate controls, barriers to entry, state ownership, policies on securities markets,

banking regulation, and capital account restrictions. We identify a country undertaking

significant financial reforms as of date t if the preceding three-year change in this index

ranks on the top quartile of its respective country group over the 1975-2005 period. Our

measure of TFP is based on standard growth accounting methods (see, for instance,

Klenow and Rodriguez (1997) and Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2008)), using labor and

investment data from PWT 7.0 and educational attainment levels from Barro and Lee

(2010). A country is identified to have experienced high TFP growth as of date t if the

preceding three-year average of TFP growth ranked on the top quartile of its respective

group over the 1975-2010 period.

   Table 6 shows the fraction of credit booms preceded by large capital inflows, large

TFP gains and domestic financial reforms. In the case of ICs, 42 percent of the credit

booms followed large TFP gains, 33 percent followed large capital inflows and 22

percent followed significant financial reforms. In contrast, in EMs we find that almost 1/2




                                              18
of credit booms were preceded by large capital inflows and 30 percent by financial

reforms, while TFP gains play a smaller role than in ICs, with a frequency of 20 percent.

These results indicate that surges in capital inflows are a good predictor of credit booms

in both ICs and EMs,12 while in ICs large TFP gains are also a good predictor but

financial reforms less so, and the opposite holds for EMs.

     Table 7 shows the results of a similar frequency analysis but now aimed at examining

the association between the peak of credit booms and the exchange rate regimes in place

the preceding three years. We use Reinhart and Rogoff’s (2004) classification of

exchange rate regimes to create the following four regime groupings: fixed and managed,

dirty floating, floating and mixed (see the footnote to Table 7 for details). The mixed

regime includes countries that switched across the other regimes in any of the three years

prior to the peak of the credit boom. The results shown in Table 7 are striking: about 70

percent of the credit booms occur in countries with managed or fixed exchange rate

regimes, and this holds for ICs, EMs, and all countries combined.13

     Finally, we use frequency analysis to determine the probability that a country will

experience a credit boom once it has crossed the starting threshold. This probability can

be a useful “early warning” indicator for surveillance of credit market conditions. We

considered starting thresholds of ½ and 1 standard deviations of the cyclical component

of our credit measure, and computed the probabilities for ICs, EMs and all countries

combined. Once a starting threshold of 1 (½) standard deviation of the cyclical position



12
   In terms of the composition of the inflows, net portfolio and debt inflows stand out as the most important
for ICs, while net foreign direct investment and net bank flows are the most significant for EMs.
13
   In a related paper, Magud, Reinhart and Vesperoni, 2011, study the effects of exchange rate flexibility on
credit expansions during episodes of large capital inflows in the emerging economies. They report evidence
suggesting that countries with less flexible exchange rates often experience significant credit expansions
during surges in capital inflows; thus, becoming more vulnerable to capital flow reversals.


                                                     19
of credit is crossed, the probability of a credit boom is 13 (8) percent for EMs, 23 (14)

percent for ICs, and 17 (10) percent for all countries combined. Naturally, these

probabilities are lower with the lower starting threshold, as it is less likely that the

cyclical expansion of credit turns into a credit boom. The probabilities are higher for ICs

than for EMs, indicating that having crossed the starting threshold is a more precise

predictor of credit booms in the former than in the latter.

4. Conclusions

    This paper used a thresholds method to identify and measure credit booms in

industrial and emerging economies, and conducted an event study analysis of the

dynamics of macro aggregates during credit booms. We identified 70 credit booms in a

sample of 61 countries with data for the 1960-2010 period, with half of the credit booms

in industrial countries and half in emerging economies. The upswing of these booms is

associated with economic expansions, rising equity and housing prices, real currency

appreciation, and widening external deficits, followed by the opposite dynamics in the

downswing. Moreover, credit booms tend to be synchronized internationally and centered

on “big events” like the 1980s debt crisis, Sudden Stops in emerging economies and the

2008 Global Financial Crisis.

    Credit booms display three striking similarities across industrial and emerging

economies: (1) credit booms normalized by the cyclical variability of credit are similar in

magnitude across both groups of countries; (2) banking crises, currency crises or Sudden

Stops often follow credit booms, and the frequencies with which they do are similar

across industrial and emerging economies; and (3) credit booms often follow surges in

capital inflows, TFP gains, and financial reforms, and are far more common with




                                              20
managed than flexible exchange rates. These results differ significantly from previous

findings in the literature on credit booms suggesting an ambiguous relationship between

credit booms and economic expansions, and little or no association between financial

crises and credit booms (see Gourinchas et al. (2001)). They are also different from the

findings of our previous work (Mendoza and Terrones (2008), which used data until 2006

and reported differences across industrial and emerging economy booms in the above

three characteristics that we now find them similar.

   The results of our study have important implications for the analysis of macro-finance

linkages, and for surveillance of financial systems and their macroeconomic effects.

From the policy perspective, the thresholds method we proposed provides a tractable

framework for measuring and identifying credit booms that are closely associated with

cyclical fluctuations in macro aggregates and key financial indicators of corporations and

banks. Our results show that credit booms can be identified by the size of a credit

expansion relative to trend, and that this information can be supplemented with other

indicators of excessive credit growth: such as booms in output and expenditures,

excessive real appreciation and/or expansion of the nontradables sector, large inflows of

foreign capital and fast TFP growth or domestic financial reforms,. Moreover, our results

also highlight the importance of using corrective policy actions to prevent credit booms,

because the declining phase of credit booms is associated with recessions and a higher

incidence of financial crises.

   From the perspective of research on macro-finance linkages, our results provide a set

of robust empirical regularities that can guide research on models of “credit transmission”

by providing the set of facts that these models should aim to explain. These empirical




                                            21
regularities are reflected in a strong association of credit booms with booms in output and

expenditures, rising asset prices, widening external deficits and sharp real appreciations.




                                             22
                                     REFERENCES

Abiad, Abdul, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel (2007). “A New Database of
       Financial Reforms.” Mimeo, Research Department, IMF.

Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee, (2010), “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in
       the World, 1950-2010,” NBER Working Paper No 15902.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler (1989). “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
      Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, Vol. 79, pp. 14-31.

Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The Financial Accelerator in
      and Quantitative Business Cycle Framework.” In Handbook of Macroeconomics,
      Vol. 1C, ed. by John Taylor and Michael Woodford (Amsterdam: North-Holland),
      pp. 1531-1614.

Borio, Claudio, C. Furfine, and P. Lowe (2001). “Procyclicality of Financial Systems
       and Financial Stability.” BIS Papers No.1, Bank for International Settlements.

Boz, Emine and Enrique G. Mendoza (2011), “Financial Innovation, the Discovery of
      Risk and the U.S. Credit Crisis,” NBER Working Paper, No. National Bureau of
      Economic Research.

Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy (1998). “Emerging Market Crises: An
       Asset Markets Perspective.” NBER Working Paper No. 6843. (Cambridge, MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research).

Calvo, Guillermo A. (1998). “Capital Flows and Capital-market Crises: The Simple
       Economics of Sudden Stops.” Journal of Applied Economics, Vol. I, pp. 35-54.

Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis Mejia (2004). “On the Empirics of
       Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects.” NBER Working Paper
       10520. (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Collyns, Charles and Abdelhak Senhadji (2002). “Lending Booms, Real Estate Bubbles,
       and the Asian Financial Crisis.” IMF Working Paper 02/20 (Washington:
       International Monetary Fund).

Corsetti Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini (1999). “What Caused the Asian
       Currency & Financial Crisis?” Japan & the World Economy, V. 11, pp 305-373,

Cottarelli, Carlo, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and I. Vladkova-Hollar (2003). “Early Birds,
       Late Risers, and Sleeping Beauties: Bank Credit Growth to the Private Sector in
       Central and Eastern Europe and the Balkans.” IMF Working Paper 03/213
       (Washington: International Monetary Fund).




                                           23
Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez (2006). “Lending Booms and Lending
       Standards.” The Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, No. 5, pp. 2511-2546.

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache (2005). “Cross-Country Empirical Studies
      of Systemic Bank Distress: A Survey.” IMF Working Paper 05/96. (Washington:
      International Monetary Fund).

Eichengreen, Barry and Michael D. Bordo (2002). “Crises Now and Then: What Lessons
      from the Last Era of Financial Globalization?” NBER Working Paper 8716.
      (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Eichengreen, Barry and Carlos Arteta (2002). “Banking Crises in Emerging Markets:
      Presumptions and Evidence,” in Mario Blejer and Marko Skreb (eds.) Financial
      Policies in Emerging Markets. MIT Press. (Cambridge, Massachusetts).

Fisher, Irving (1933). “The Debt-Deflation Theory of the Great Depressions.”
        Econometrica, Vol.1, pp. 337-357.

Gorton, Gary and Ping He (2005). “Bank Credit Cycles.” NBER Working Paper 11363.
       (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Rodrigo Valdes, and Oscar Landerretche (2001). “Lending
      Booms: Latin America and the World.” Economia, Spring, pp. 47-99.

Hilbers, Paul, Inci Otker-Robe, Ceyla Pazarbasioglu, and Gudrun Johnsen (2005).
       “Assessing and Managing Rapid Credit Growth and the Role of Supervisory and
       Prudential Policies.” IMF Working Paper 05/151. (Washington: International
       Monetary Fund).

International Monetary Fund (2004). “Are Credit Booms in Emerging Markets a
        Concern?.” World Economic Outlook, pp. 148-166.

Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen Reinhart, and Carlos Vegh (2005). “When it Rains it
      Pours: Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies,” in Mark Gertler
      and Kenneth Rogoff (eds.) NBER Macroeconomic Annual, pp. 11-53.

Kindleberger, Charles (2000). Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial
       Crises. (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company).

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore (1997). “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political
       Economy, Vol. 105, pp. 211-248.

Klenow, Peter and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (1997). “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
      Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?” in B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg (eds.)
      Macroeconomics Annual 1997, pp. 73-102.




                                          24
Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco Terrones (2003). “Financial Integration and
       Macroeconomic Volatility.” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 50, pp. 119-143.

Kose, Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco Terrones (2008). “Does Financial Globalization
       Contribute to Productivity Growth?” Mimeo, Research Department, IMF.

Kraft, Evan and Ljubinko Jankov (2005). “Does Speed Kill? Lending Booms and their
        Consequences in Croatia,” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol 29, pp. 105-121.

Laeven, Luc and Fabian Valencia (2011), "The Real Effects of Financial Sector
      Interventions During Crises," IMF Working Paper No. 11/45, International
      Monetary Fund, Washington DC.

Lorenzoni, Guido (2005). “Inefficient Credit Booms.” Manuscript. Department of
      Economics, MIT.

Magud, Nicolas E., Carmen M. Reinhart, and Esteban Vesperoni (2011). “Capital
      Inflows, Exchange Rate Flexibility, and Credit Booms.” NBER Working Paper
      No 17670.

Mendoza, Enrique G. (1995). “The Terms of Trade, the Real Exchange Rate, and
     Economic Fluctuations.” International Economic Review. Vol. 36, pp. 101-137.

——— (2005). “Real Exchange Volatility and the Price of Nontradables in Sudden-Stop
   Prone Economies.” Economia, Fall, pp.103-148.

——— and Marco E. Terrones (2008), “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from
   Macro Aggregates and Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 14049.

——— (2010). “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage,” American Economic
   Review, December.

Montiel, Peter (2000). “What Drives Consumption Booms?.” The World Bank Review,
      Vol. 14, No. 3 , pp. 457-480.

Neumeyer, Pablo and Fabrizio Perri (2005). “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies:
     The Role of Interest Rate.” Journal of Monetary Economics, V. 52, pp. 345-380.

Ottens, Daniel, Edwin Lambregts, and Steven Poelhekke (2005). “Credit Booms in
        Emerging Market Economies: A Recipe for Banking Crises?.” Manuscript, De
        Nederlandsche Bank.

Rajan, Raghuram G. (1994). “Why Bank Credit Policies Fluctuate: A Theory and Some
       Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109, pp. 399-441.




                                         25
Rajan, Raghuram G. (2005). “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” In
       The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, pp. 313-369. Federal Reserve Bank
       of Kansas City

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2004), “The Modern History of Exchange
      Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, v
      119(1), pp. 1-48.

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Vincent Reinhart (2009), “Capital Flow Bonanzas: An
      Encompassing View of the Past and Present,” in NBER International Seminar on
      Macroeconomics 2008, ed. by Jeffrey Frankel and Christopher Pissarides,
      University of Chicago Press.

Scheneider, Martin and Aaron Tornell (2004). “Bailout Guarantees, Balance Sheet
      Effects and Financial Crises.” Review of Economic Studies.

Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor (2012). “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
       Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008,” in American
       Economic Review, Vol. 102(2):pp.1029-1061.

Tornell, Aaron, and Frank Westermann (2005). Boom-Bust Cycles and Financial
       Liberalization. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.




                                         26
                                      Appendix 1
                                SAMPLE OF COUNTRIES


The sample of countries we studied includes the 21 industrial countries and 40 emerging
economies listed below. The dates of the peaks of credit booms identified for each
country are shown in parenthesis.


Industrial countries

Australia (AUS, 1973 and 1988), Austria (AUT, 1972 and 1979), Belgium (BEL, 1979,
1989, and 2007), Canada (CAN), Denmark (DNK, 1987), Finland (FIN, 1990), France
(FRA, 1990), Germany (DEU, 1972 and 2000), Greece (GRC, 1972 and 2007), Ireland
(IRL, 1979 and 2007), Italy (ITA, 1973 and 1992), Japan (JPN, 1972 and 1990),
Netherlands (NLD, 1979), New Zealand (NZL, 1974), Norway (NOR, 1987 and 2007),
Portugal (PRT, 1973 and 2000), Spain (ESP, 2007), Sweden (SWE, 1989 and 2007),
Switzerland (CHE, 1989 and 2007), United Kingdom (GBR, 1973 and 1989), and United
States (USA,1988 and 2007).


Emerging Market Economies

Algeria (DZA), Argentina (ARG), Brazil (BRA, 1989), Bulgaria (BGR), Chile (CHL,
1980), China (CHN), Colombia (COL, 1998), Costa Rica (CRI, 1979), Côte d'Ivoire
(CIV, 1977), Czech Republic (CZE), Ecuador (ECU, 1997), Egypt (EGY,1981), Estonia
(EST, 2007), Hong Kong (HKG, 1997 and *), Hungary (HUN), India (IND,1989),
Indonesia (IDN, 1997), Israel (ISR, 1978), Jordan (JOR), Korea (KOR, 1998), Latvia
(LVA), Lithuania (LTU), Malaysia (MYS, 1997), Mexico (MEX, 1994), Morocco
(MAR), Nigeria (NGA, 1982 and 2008), Pakistan (PAK, 1986), Peru (PER, 1987),
Philippines (PHL, 1983 and 1997), Poland (POL, 2008), Romania (ROM, 1998), Russia
(RUS, 2007), Singapore (SGP, 1983), Slovak Republic (SVK), Slovenia (SVN, 2007),
South Africa (ZAF, 2007), Thailand (THA, 1978 and 1997), Turkey (TUR, 1976 and
1997), Uruguay (URY, 2002), and Venezuela, Rep. Bol. (VEN, 2007).

(*) Ongoing credit booms.




                                           27
                                                        Appendix 2: Description and Definition of Main Variables.


                  Variable                                                  Variable Definition                                                              Source



A. Macroeconomic and financial data.
Credit to the non-financial            Sum of claims on the private sector by deposit money banks (IFS line 22d) plus,                  IFS. In some industrial country cases data were
private sector                         whenever available for the entire sample period by other financial institutions                  completed using data from the OECD,
                                       (IFS line 42d and sub-items).                                                                    Datastream, and Heaver.
M2                                     Sum of money and quasimoney.                                                                     WDI and IFS.
Consumer price index                   Consumer price index (both average and end-of-period).                                           IFS
Nominal GDP                            GDP in current prices, local currency.                                                           WDI
Population                             Population                                                                                       WDI
Real GDP                               Real GDP per-capita, in international prices                                                     PWT 7.0
Private consumption                    Real private consumption per-capita, in international prices                                     PWT 7.0
Government consumption                 Real government consumption per-captia, in international prices                                  PWT 7.0
Investment                             Real investment per-capita, in international prices                                              PWT 7.0
Non-tradable GDP                       Sum of the value added in services plus the value added in industry minus manufacture.           WDI
Current account balance                Current account balance as percent of GDP                                                        WDI
Real exchange rate                     Real effective exchange rate, index                                                              INS (IM F)
Net capital inflows                    Net capital inflows (proxied as the difference between the flow of total external liabilities an IFS
Real stock prices                      Equity price indices deflated using consumer price indeces.                                      Authors' calculation with data from IFS.
Real house prices                      House price indices deflated using consumer price indeces.                                       Authors' calculation with data from several
                                                                                                                                        country sources, Haever Analytics, and
                                                                                                                                        OECD.
Total factor productivity              Total factor productivity calculated using the PWT 7 dataset and the new dataset on              Authors calculations following Kose, Prasad, and
                                       Educational Attainment (Barro and Lee (2010)).                                                   Terrones (2008).



B. Crises definitions
Banking Crises                         A situation in which at least one of the following conditions holds: (1) the ratio of non-    Demirguic-Kunt and Detragiache (2006).
                                       performing assets to total asses of the banking sector exceeds 10 percent; (2) the cost       Data for 2007 on has been taken from Laeven and
                                       of banking system bailouts exceeds 2 percent of GDP; (3) there is a large scale bank          Valencia (2011).
                                       nationalization as result of banking sector problems; and (4) there are bank runs or new
                                       important depositor protection measures.
Currency Crises                        A situation in which a country experiences a forced change in parity, abandons a              Eichengreen and Bordo (2002)
                                       currency peg or receives a bailout from an international organization, and at the same
                                       time an index of exchange rae market pressure (a weighted average of the depreciation
                                       rate, change in short-term interest rate, and percentage change in reserves) rises
                                       1.5 standard deviations above its mean.
Sudden Stops                           A situation in which a country experiences a year-on-year fall in capital flows that          Calvo, Izquierdo, and M ejia (2004)
                                       exceeds 2 standard deviations relative to the mean.                                           Data for 2005 on has been calculated by the authors.

C. Other variables
Financial reform index                 The index captures changes in seven financial policy dimensions:                              Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2007)
                                       (1) credit controls and reserve requirements; (2) Interest rate controls; (3) Entry
                                       barriers; (4) State ownership in the banking sector; (5) Capital account restrictions;
                                       (6) Prudential regulations and supervision of the banking sector; and (7) Securities
                                       market policy. The index is just the sum of these seven dimensions(each of wich can
                                       take values between 0 and 3) and takes values between 0 (the lowest) and 21
                                       (the highest).




                                                                               28
                                        Figure 1. Credit Booms: Seven-Year Event Windows
                                       (Deviations from HP-trend in Real Credit Per-Capita)
35                                                                 35
           Industrial Countries                                               Emerging Economies
30

                                                                   25
25


20
                                                                   15

15

                      Mean
10                                                                  5

                                                                                                                  Median
                              Median
 5

                                                                   -5
 0

                                                                                                           Mean
 -5
                                                                  -15

-10


-15                                                               -25
      -3         -2      -1        0        1       2       3            -3        -2     -1       0   1     2        3
                                   Figure 2. Relative Credit Booms
            (Deviation from trend at peak of credit boom as a ratio of the std deviation of credit)

3.50
                                           INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES


3.25


3.00


2.75


2.50


2.25


2.00


1.75


1.50




3.50
                                     EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES1/

3.25


3.00


2.75


2.50


2.25


2.00


1.75


1.50




 1/   Ongoing credit booms are shown in green.
                                        Figure 3. Frequency of Credit Booms1/

14

              IND      EMEs
                                                                                Global Financial
                                                                                     Crisis
12




10
                                                                       Sudden
                                                                        Stops
                                                        ERM and
 8                                                       Nordic
                                                         Crises
                               Petro-dollar Recycling
                                  and Debt Crises

 6        Bretton Woods
             Collapse



 4




 2




 0



     1/ Ongoing   credit booms are shown in green.
                                    Figure 4. Credit Booms and Economic Activity
                             (Cross-country means and medians of cyclical component of real GDP)
     Industrial Countries                                              Emerging Economies
6                                                                6
     Output (Y)                                                        Output (Y)

5                                                                5


4                                                                4
                                                                                Mean

3                                                                3


2                                                                2

                                 Mean                                                                      Median
1                                                                1


0                                                                0
                                                   Median
-1                                                              -1


-2                                                              -2


-3                                                              -3


-4                                                              -4


-5                                                              -5
       -3         -2    -1   0          1      2            3           -3       -2       -1       0   1      2     3
                                         Figure 5. Credit Booms and Domestic Demand
                                       (Cross-country means and medians of cyclical components)
          Industrial Countries                                                   Emerging Economies
 5                                                                      5
                                                Consumption (C)                                               Consumption (C)
 4                                                                      4
                                         Mean
 3                                                                      3

 2                                                                      2

 1                                    Median                            1

 0                                                                      0                                                   Median

-1                                                                     -1

-2                                                                     -2

-3                                                                     -3                                            Mean

-4                                                                     -4

-5                                                                     -5
            -3       -2      -1            0       1      2        3               -3      -2      -1     0    1         2           3


 5                                                                      5
                           Government Consumption (G)                                              Government Consumption (G)
 4                                                                      4

 3                                                                      3           Mean
 2                                                                      2
                                                                                                 Median
 1                                                                      1
             Mean
 0                                                                      0

-1                                                                     -1
                  Median
-2                                                                     -2

-33                                                                    -33

-4                                                                     -4

-5                                                                     -5
            -3       -2      -1            0       1      2        3               -3      -2      -1     0    1         2           3


 25                                                                     25
                                                  Investment (I)                                                     Investment (I)
 20                                                                     20

 15                                        Mean                         15

 10                                                                     10

      5                           Median                                     5

      0                                                                      0

  -5                                                                     -5                                            Median

-10                                                                    -10

-15                                                                    -15
                                                                                                              Mean
-20                                                                    -20
             -3       -2         -1        0        1     2        3                -3      -2     -1     0     1        2           3
                             Figure 6. Credit Booms and the Non-tradables Sector
                               (Cross-country means and medians of cyclical components)
     Industrial Countries                                        Emerging Economies
8                                                            8
                                                                 Non-tradables Output (YN)
       Non-tradables Output (YN)

6                                                            6



4                                                            4

                     Median
2                                                            2

                     Mean

0                                                            0



                                                                                                                Median
-2                                                          -2


                                                                                                     Mean
-4                                                          -4



-6                                                          -6
       -3       -2      -1          0   1      2      3           -3     -2     -1          0    1          2       3


                                                             8
 8
            Real Exchange Rate (RER)                              Real Exchange Rate (RER)

                                                             6
 6                                                                                              Median


                                                             4

 4

                                                             2                       Mean

 2
                             Mean                            0


 0
                                                            -2
                       Median


-2                                                          -4



                                                            -6
-4
                                                                  -3     -2     -1          0    1          2       3
       -3       -2      -1          0   1      2      3
               Figure 7. Credit Booms: Current Account, Capital Inflows and Money
                               (Cross-country means and medians of cyclical component)
       Industrial Countries                                          Emerging Economies
 2.0                                                         2.0

         Current Account-GDP ratio (CAY)                                  Current Account-GDP ratio (CAY)

 1.0                                                         1.0


                                                                               Mean

 0.0                                                         0.0


                               Median
-1.0                                                        -1.0


                        Mean
-2.0                                                        -2.0
                                                                                               Median


-3.0                                                        -3.0
         -3       -2     -1       0     1       2    3                    -3     -2    -1       0       1   2        3
 5                                                          5
       Capital Inflows-GDP ratio (KI)                                 Capital Inflows-GDP ratio (KI)
 4                                                          4

 3                                                          3

 2                                       Mean
                                                            2
              Median
 1                                                          1

 0                                                          0
                                                                                                            Median
 -1                                                         -1
                                                                                                                Mean
 -2                                                         -2

 -3                                                         -3
       -3        -2     -1        0     1       2     3              -3         -2    -1       0        1   2        3

30                                                           30
       Real Money (M2)                                                    Real Money (M2)
25                                                           25
                                                                                                    Mean
20                                                           20

15                                                           15

10                                                           10
                                         Mean
              Median
 5                                                               5
                                                                                      Median
 0                                                               0

 -5                                                          -5

-10                                                         -10
       -3        -2     -1        0     1       2     3               -3         -2   -1        0       1   2        3
                                                             Figure 8. Credit Booms and Prices
                                         (Cross-country means and medians of cyclical components)
         Industrial Countries                                                            Emerging Markets
8                                                                                 8
                                                                                       Inflation rate
         Inflation rate
6                                                                                 6

                                                                                                                  Mean
4                                                                                 4
                                                  Mean
2                                                                                 2

0                                                  Median                         0
                                                                                                                                         Median
-2                                                                               -2

-4                                                                               -4

-6
                                                                                 -6
            -3        -2         -1       0              1         2        3
                                                                                         -3        -2        -1      0      1        2          3

 40                                                                              40
             Real stock prices                                                         Real stock prices
 30                                                                              30
                                                     Median
 20                                                                              20                                         Median

 10                                    Mean                                      10

     0                                                                             0
                                                                                                                     Mean
-10                                                                              -10

-20                                                                              -20

-30
 30                                                                              -30
                                                                                  30
             -3           -2      -1          0              1      2        3            -3        -2       -1      0      1        2          3


 20                                                                              20
            Real house prices                                                          Real house prices
 15                                                                              15
                                                                                                    Median                               Mean
 10                                                                              10

     5                                                                  Median    5

     0                                                                            0
                                                                 Mean
 -5                                                                               -5

-10                                                                              -10

-15                                                                              -15
             -3           -2      -1      0              1         2         3           -3        -2        -1      0      1        2          3
                            Table 1. Credit Booms: Duration

  Starting and      Emerging Market Economies                 Industrial Countries
    Ending                     Fraction spent in                       Fraction spent in
  Thresholds     Duration    Upswing     Downturn     Duration     Upswing       Downturn

A. Mean
     0.00         5.60        0.45        0.37          5.64         0.39         0.43
     0.25         4.86        0.46        0.34          4.92         0.38         0.42
     0.50         4.40        0.41        0.36          4.36         0.35         0.42
     0.75         3.63        0.35        0.37          3.89         0.34         0.41
     1.00         5.60        0.45        0.37          3.44         0.30         0.41

B. Median
     0.00         6.00        0.50        0.33          5.50         0.36         0.45
     0.25         5.00        0.40        0.20          5.00         0.40         0.40
     0.50         5.00        0.20        0.20          4.00         0.25         0.50
     0.75         4.00        0.25        0.25          4.00         0.25         0.50
     1.00         3.00        0.33        0.33          3.00         0.33         0.33
                         Table 2. Coincidence of Credit Booms with
                                 Output and Demand Booms1/
                                         (Frequency)


                                              Industrial     Emerging Market
                                                                                   All
                                              Countries        Economies


Output                                           0.49              0.46            0.46
Non-tradable Output                              0.31              0.46            0.40

Consumption                                      0.49              0.46            0.47
Investment                                       0.60              0.34            0.47
Government Expenditures                          0.29              0.34            0.30


1/
  The figures reported in this Table are fractions of credit booms that coincide
with output/demand boom, within the seven-year window of the credit boom.
The output/demand boom has been determined using a similar method to the one
employed to determine credit booms, with a boom threshold factor of 1.65.
                                                                                 Table 3. Credit Booms: Statistical Significance of Event-Window Coefficients.


                                                                                Industrial Countries                                                                              Emerging Market Economies
                                             t-3           t-2            t-1            t-0         t+1            t+2            t+3               t-3           t-2            t-1        t-0        t+1            t+2         t+3


1. Mean Values

Real credit                               -0.031**         0.011      0.079***       0.137***      0.085***        0.031**       -0.020             0.029          0.071      0.167***       0.332***     0.139***      -0.068   -0.164***
                                           (0.009)       (0.011)        (0.01)         (0.01)       (0.011)         (0.01)      (0.013)            (0.027)       (0.037)       (0.041)         (0.03)       (0.03)     (0.039)     (0.042)
Output                                      0.002       0.012***      0.023***       0.036***      0.025***        -0.011*     -0.023***            0.009       0.020**       0.037***       0.044***        0.016    -0.025**    -0.030**
                                           (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.004)            (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.008)        (0.011)      (0.012)     (0.008)     (0.009)
Non-tradable Output                          0.001        -0.002         0.009       0.027***      0.026***         -0.001       -0.010            0.017*       0.030***      0.042***       0.052***        0.017      -0.021    -0.033**
                                           (0.007)       (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.005)            (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.008)        (0.011)      (0.014)     (0.013)     (0.011)
Consumption                                 0.000        0.010**      0.021***       0.029***      0.019***         -0.004     -0.015***            0.002          0.005      0.035***        0.033*         0.018      -0.016    -0.030**
                                           (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.004)            (0.007)       (0.013)       (0.009)        (0.013)      (0.012)     (0.009)      (0.01)
Government Consumption                      -0.001        -0.001        -0.001         0.005         0.007           0.007       -0.001             0.017          0.022      0.032**          0.022         0.003       0.000      -0.013
                                           (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.005)            (0.012)       (0.012)        (0.01)        (0.016)      (0.011)     (0.013)     (0.011)
Investment                                   0.007      0.038***      0.083***       0.130***      0.081***       -0.052**     -0.094***           0.050*        0.100**      0.151***       0.164***        0.037   -0.144***   -0.126***
                                            (0.01)       (0.009)       (0.013)        (0.014)       (0.013)        (0.018)      (0.018)            (0.022)       (0.028)       (0.028)        (0.035)      (0.042)     (0.031)     (0.031)
REER                                        -0.016        -0.007        -0.005         0.001         0.011           0.005        0.000             0.005         -0.002        0.021         0.036*         0.011       0.035       0.024
                                           (0.026)       (0.015)       (0.012)         (0.01)       (0.009)        (0.009)      (0.012)            (0.015)       (0.024)       (0.021)        (0.017)      (0.028)     (0.032)     (0.036)
Current Account Balance                    0.560*          0.249        -0.421       -1.582***     -1.741***        -0.264        0.571             0.328          0.081       -1.066*        -1.764*       -0.333       1.047       1.027
                                           (0.259)       (0.334)       (0.376)        (0.385)       (0.398)        (0.285)       (0.33)            (0.776)       (0.714)       (0.511)        (0.662)      (0.762)     (0.681)     (0.579)

2. Median Values

Real credit                                 -0.020      0.027**       0.078***       0.125***      0.084***      0.037***         -0.004            0.028         0.044       0.164***       0.289***     0.128***      -0.044    -0.127*
                                            (0.01)       (0.009)       (0.013)        (0.015)       (0.008)       (0.009)        (0.011)           (0.017)       (0.036)        (0.04)        (0.047)      (0.013)     (0.023)    (0.058)
Output                                      0.002        0.010*       0.021***       0.030***      0.024***       -0.009*      -0.019***            0.011         0.015       0.032***       0.050***       0.008     -0.023**     -0.029
                                           (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.003)           (0.011)        (0.01)       (0.008)         (0.01)       (0.02)     (0.006)    (0.014)
Non-tradable Output                          0.002         0.007       0.014**        0.021**      0.022***        -0.001         -0.004             0.018         0.023         0.025        0.044*         0.018      -0.021     -0.032
                                           (0.003)       (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.006)        (0.004)           (0.012)       (0.013)       (0.014)        (0.017)      (0.019)     (0.015)    (0.016)
Consumption                                 0.000         0.010        0.014**       0.024***      0.013***        -0.002       -0.012**            0.006        0.019*       0.035**         0.025*        0.011      -0.019*    -0.029*
                                           (0.003)       (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.004)           (0.013)       (0.008)       (0.012)        (0.011)      (0.012)     (0.009)    (0.013)
Government Consumption                      -0.001        -0.004        -0.001         0.006       0.007***       0.007*           0.001            0.004         0.019         0.023        0.022**        0.008       0.008     -0.015*
                                           (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)       (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.003)            (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.012)        (0.006)      (0.008)      (0.01)    (0.006)
Investment                                   0.006      0.034***      0.070***       0.121***      0.083***       -0.045*      -0.078***           0.077*        0.088*        0.096*        0.187***        0.055   -0.144***    -0.129*
                                           (0.009)       (0.007)       (0.016)        (0.013)       (0.017)       (0.021)        (0.011)           (0.029)       (0.033)       (0.042)        (0.027)      (0.041)     (0.034)     (0.05)
REER                                        0.009         0.009         0.000          0.002         0.015         0.005         -0.003             0.007         0.008         0.039         0.066*        0.013       0.031      -0.028
                                           (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.009)        (0.013)       (0.012)       (0.007)        (0.009)           (0.024)        (0.03)       (0.025)        (0.025)      (0.031)     (0.026)    (0.023)
Current Account Balance                      0.354        -0.074        -0.473        -1.186*      -1.802***        0.228          0.525            -0.380        -0.312        -0.773       -1.937**       -0.342       1.028      1.110
                                            (0.31)       (0.291)       (0.529)        (0.515)       (0.485)       (0.276)        (0.394)           (0.545)       (0.583)       (0.557)        (0.563)      (0.949)       (0.6)    (0.546)

Note: Standard errors are in brackets. The coefficients are obtained by regressing each macroeconomic aggregate on a constant. The symbols *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                                                 Table 4. Credit Booms: Regional Features
                                                (Cross-country median of cyclical components)


                    Variable             Region                                                 Date
                                                              t-3           t-2          t-1     t-0      t+1      t+2       t+3


                                            1. Industrial Countries: G7 vs Nordic Countries

                                   G7                       0.132         2.827        7.029    8.421    6.515    1.750     0.163
Real credit
                                   Nordic                   -4.839        1.185        12.221   19.280   12.035   10.358    4.603
                                   G7                       0.028         1.177        1.846    2.886    1.799    -0.435    -1.773
Output (Y )
                                   Nordic                   0.044         2.086        3.850    3.679    1.289    -1.739    -2.227
                                   G7                       0.194         0.662        1.436    2.011    1.882    0.626     -0.723
Non-tradable Output (YN )
                                   Nordic                   0.792         1.293        1.885    2.533    1.128    -1.362    -1.070
                                   G7                       0.393         1.402        1.430    2.380    1.756    0.253     -1.069
Consumption ( C )
                                   Nordic                   0.033         2.034        4.479    3.306    0.828    -1.362    -1.765
                                   G7                       1.750         4.125        7.695    9.988    5.743    -7.319    -6.516
Investment (I )
                                   Nordic                   0.159         5.174        15.572   16.522   10.458   -3.644    -8.669
                                   G7                       0.420         1.281        0.004    -3.049   -3.314   -0.190    -1.292
Real Exchange Rate (RER )
                                   Nordic                   0.639         0.944        0.736    3.600    1.933    -0.315    1.327
                                   G7                       0.138         -0.314       -0.871   -1.161   -0.655   0.310     0.053
Current Account-GDP ratio (CAY )
                                   Nordic                   0.477         0.665        -0.730   -0.598   -0.642   -0.829    -1.729

                                   2. Emerging Economies: Latin America (LA) vs Asia vs Transition

                                   LA                       15.741        22.270       36.815   51.891   27.723    -6.820   -21.593
Real credit                        Asia                     3.705         5.789        14.747   24.175   12.379    -3.907    -4.425
                                   Transition               -4.764        -1.356       5.570    23.218   10.393    -6.697   -25.947
                                   LA                       0.430         2.906        5.841    7.729    5.892     -2.737    -6.010
Output (Y )                        Asia                     3.839         4.092        4.088    5.727    -3.547    -3.108    -0.945
                                   Transition               2.126         4.807        3.224    7.081    4.672     -5.464    -6.303
                                   LA                       1.027         2.320        5.650    10.031   2.702     -5.020    -5.144
Non-tradable Output (YN )          Asia                     3.780         4.897        4.714    4.387    0.444     -2.741    -1.487
                                   Transition               3.210         4.016        1.982    4.632    5.668     -4.388    -5.755
                                   LA                       -1.876        0.974        4.398    8.541    5.862     -2.292    -6.391
Consumption ( C )                  Asia                     3.596         2.904        2.780    2.230    -2.214    -2.821    -2.065
                                   Transition               0.543         3.080        2.227    2.381    2.713     -2.306    -6.604
                                   LA                       8.836         8.773        13.374   20.947   15.871   -18.896   -18.177
Investment (I )                    Asia                     10.040        14.465       9.830    18.064   -7.154   -11.401    -3.363
                                   Transition               1.254         1.581        15.281   20.471   18.703   -16.581   -23.255
                                   LA                       0.519         -1.900       1.855    9.238    8.883     2.437     -5.766
Real Exchange Rate (RER )          Asia                     4.774         6.040        8.654    6.725    -3.976    -0.348    -4.624
                                   Transition               -1.997        -0.567       -1.168   6.582    1.270     1.248     -1.469
                                   LA                       -0.889        -0.253       0.211    -2.299   -0.585    0.631     1.159
Current Account-GDP ratio (CAY )   Asia                     -1.497        -3.338       -3.316   -2.233   1.566     1.367     0.065
                                   Transition               -0.293        0.619        -0.464   -1.789   -0.832    1.605     1.611
                                                                                   Table 5. Credit Booms and Crises 1/
                                                                                                  (Frequency)



                                                         Banking crises2/                                        Currency crises3/                     Sudden Stops4/
                                           Before       Peak        After          Total               Before   Peak         After   Total   Before   Peak       After   Total
                                                        Boom                                                    Boom                                  Boom


All countries                               0.11         0.08         0.24         0.44                 0.23    0.08         0.23    0.54     0.04    0.06       0.14    0.24

Industrial Countries                        0.06         0.06         0.25         0.36                 0.17    0.03         0.25    0.44     0.00    0.00       0.14    0.14

Emerging Market Economies                   0.17         0.11         0.23         0.51                 0.29    0.14         0.20    0.63     0.09    0.11       0.14    0.34




1/
     Coincidence of credit booms and financial crises in the seven-year window around the boom.
2/
     Banking crises as defined by Demirguic-Kunt and Detragiache (2006). See Appendix 2 for details.
3/
     Currency crises as defined by Eichengreen and Bordo (2002). See Appendix 2 for details.
4/
     Sudden Stops as defined by Calvo, Izquierdo and Mejia (2004). See Appendix 2 for details.
                               Table 6. Credit Booms: Potential Triggering Factors1/.
                                                         (Frequency distribution)


                                                                               Industrial          Emerging Market
                                                                                                                      All
                                                                               Countries             Economies


Large Capital Inflows (A) 2/                                                        0.33                0.47          0.36
Significant Productivity Gains (B) 3/                                               0.42                0.20          0.18
                                         4/
Large Financial Sector Changes (C )                                                 0.22                0.30          0.27

Memo items:
(A) & (B)                                                                           0.17                0.10          0.07
(A) & (C )                                                                          0.06                0.15          0.09
(B) & (C )                                                                          0.17                0.04          0.04


1/
  Because of data availability we have used the 1975-2010 period only. Frequencies have been adjusted
for non-available data.
2/
  The three-year average of net capital inflow before the peak of the boom ranks in the top quartile of
their corresponding country group.
3/
  The three-year average of the annual growth rate of TFP before the peak of the boom ranks in the
top quartile of their corresponding country group.
4/
 The three-year change before the peak of the boom in the financial reform index ranks in the top
quartile of their corresponding country group. The financial reform index is available till 2005.


                                              Table 7. Credit Booms and exchange rate regimes
                                                          (Frequency distribution)


                                                                               Industrial          Emerging Market
                                                                                                                      All
                                                                               Countries             Economies


Fixed and managed1/                                                                         0.71               0.62          0.67
Dirty Floating2/                                                                            0.11               0.21          0.16
Floating3/                                                                                  0.06               0.03          0.06
Mixed                                                                                       0.11               0.15          0.12




1/
   Fixed and managed includes the following regimes from the Reinhart-Rogoff (2004) classification: no separate legal tender,
pre-announced peg or currency board arrangement, pre-announced horizontal band that is narrower than or equal to +/- 2%, de
facto peg, pre-announced crawling peg, pre-announced crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%, de facto
crawling peg, and de facto crawling band that is narrower than or equal to +/-2%.
2/
   Dirty floating includes the following regimes from the Reinhart-Rogoff (2004) classification: pre-announced crawling band
3/
     Freely floating regimes from the Reinhart-Rogoff (2004) classification.
