NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RUSSIAN INEQUALITY ON THE EVE OF REVOLUTION
Steven Nafziger
Peter H. Lindert
Working Paper 18383
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18383

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

This paper presents results from an open-source research project. Given the uncertainties of any inferences
from still fragmentary historical data, we invite others to add additional data, procedural revisions,
and alternative interpretations. As much as possible, the data are being posted on http://gpih.ucdavis.edu
(click on European Russia, either on the world map, on the Europe map, or in the data list folder –
as revisions come in, we are updating these files). This study forms part of a larger project on long-run
Russian inequality, with contributions from Tracy Dennison, Igor Fedukin, Peter H. Lindert, Andrei
Markevich, and Steven Nafziger. We thank the US National Science Foundation for support under
grant 0922531, and acknowledge the helpful comments of participants in the March 2011 conference
on “Quantifying Long-run Economic Development” at The University of Warwick in Venice, and
at the World Economic History Congress in Stellenbosch, July 2012. Aaron Seong, Stefan Ward-Wheten,
and Nikolas Zolas provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Steven Nafziger and Peter H. Lindert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Russian Inequality on the Eve of Revolution
Steven Nafziger and Peter H. Lindert
NBER Working Paper No. 18383
September 2012
JEL No. N30,N33,O15
ABSTRACT
Just how unequal were the incomes of different classes of Russians on the eve of Revolution, relative
to other countries, to Russia’s earlier history, and to Russia’s income distribution today? Careful weighing
of an eclectic data set provides provisional answers. We provide detailed income estimates for economic
and social classes in each of the 50 provinces of European Russia. In 1904, on the eve of military defeat
and the 1905 Revolution, Russian income inequality was middling by the standards of that era, and
less severe than inequality has become today in such countries as China, the United States, and Russia
itself. We also note how the interplay of some distinctive fiscal and relative-price features of Imperial
Russia might have shaped the now-revealed level of inequality.

Steven Nafziger
Department of Economics, Williams College
Shapiro Hall, 24 Hopkins Hall Dr.
Williamstown, MA 01267
steven.nafziger@williams.edu
Peter H. Lindert
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
phlindert@ucdavis.edu

3
I. ISSUES AND OVERVIEW
For all the debate over class differentiation in Russia before the world’s first
successful Marxist Revolution, scholars have still not been able to develop a clear picture
of the country’s overall inequality. This has not been due to a lack of attempts. A number
of writers and researchers, especially those motivated by Marxist notions of class
differentiation, have endeavored to describe how income and wealth were allocated in
Tsarist society.1 For some, the old feudal distribution of wealth and power was under
pressure from the emergence of an urban working class, the decline of the landed gentry,
and the rise of middle-class professions. Perhaps even more prominently, Vladimir Lenin
(1974) argued that the Russian peasantry – comprising roughly 85 percent of the
population – experienced growing polarization into wealthy and powerful kulaki elite and
a large, poor landless proletariat. He based this conclusion on an analysis of the
distribution of livestock and land holdings among rural households, which he derived
from survey data collected by local government bodies in the last 19th century. To Lenin
and subsequent authors, the perception that there was growing rural and national
inequality could be directly linked to the revolutions of 1905 and 1917.
Lenin’s and other proto-Marxist studies were the starting points for Soviet and
Western scholarship that drew on such simple measures of asset ownership to document
inequality through the lens of “class differentiation.” However, indicators such as the
number of horses, the amount of land, or the number of wage earners cover only a subset
of all assets, are only indirect measures of income, often relate to a just a part of the
population, and were typically drawn from a limited geographic area. Therefore, studies
that relied on such measures did not necessarily approximate the true distribution of
income or wealth in the Tsarist Russia. As a result, although Paul Gregory (1982), Peter
Gatrell (1986), and others have identified a fairly high rate of economic growth in the last
decades of the Tsarist regime, we know very little about how such gains were distributed
among the population. The lack of a clear depiction of the level of Russian inequality not
only limits our understanding of the roots of the 1905 and 1917 revolutions, but it also
impairs our accounting of the evolution of the Russian economy over the period.
1

We discuss many of these in Section III below.

4
The explosion of recent empirical work on long-run economic growth in
peripheral areas, such as Latin America, Africa, and East Asia, has mostly bypassed
Russia.2 Although recent work on living standards by Boris Mironov (2010) and others
has brought to bear new data on heights, wages, and consumption patterns in the 19th and
early 20th centuries, many of these studies are often limited in focus or suffer from
methodological concerns (Dennison and Nafziger, forthcoming). To better understand
Russia’s economic record during the Great Divergence, we need to expand our aggregate
empirical picture beyond that provided by Paul Gregory’s (1982) national income series
for the period 1885 to 1913.3
This paper seeks to help fill this gap by drawing on newly compiled provincial
data on high income earners (those earning more than 1000 rubles), wages in a variety of
occupations, and both communal and private land holdings for a small window around
the year 1904. We use this information to derive estimates of income inequality in the
late-Tsarist period at the provincial level and for European Russia as a whole. Our
findings – which we subject to a variety of robustness exercises – suggest that just prior
to the revolutions of the early 20th century, Russia was not exceptionally unequal, either
in comparison to contemporary societies or when stacked up against estimates for the
post-Soviet period. At the same time, inequality was higher in the capital city provinces,
the Baltics, and the Black sea region – i.e. some of the more dynamic and urban parts of
the Empire. As the revolutions of 1905 and 1917 were urban in origin, this would suggest
some support for economic factors as underlying causes. However, our picture is just a
snapshot. Additional research on the dynamics of inequality is necessary before more
definitive accounts of the role played by economic processes in the two revolutionary
surges can be drawn.
II. Russian Growth and Development from Emancipation to Revolution
At the time of serf emancipation in 1861, Russia had just lost the expensive Crimean
War, the economy was among the least developed in Europe, and the country was facing
2

See Mironov (2010) on Imperial Russia, Arroyo Abad (2009) on Latin America, Fenske (2012) and Nunn
(2008) on Africa, and Allen et al. (2011) on East Asia.
3
Gregory (1982, 146), himself, notes the lack of adequate research on inequality in Tsarist Russia.

5
a complicated and uncertain rural reform process. Current best estimates suggest that per
capita income in Imperial Russia was around 70 constant 1913 rubles in 1861, rising to
approximately 120 by World War I. The 1861 level was less than ¼ the per capita
incomes of the United Kingdom and the United States and less than ½ of France’s or
Germany’s. By 1913, despite Russia’s modest growth in income per capita, these
international ratios had worsened: Russian per capita income was less than 20% of the
UK’s, just over 10% of the US’s, and between 30 and 40% of France’s and Germany’s
levels (Gregory, 1982, 155-7).
As Allen (2004) notes, much of Imperial Russia’s agricultural growth was of the
extensive type, as production shifted into Ukrainian and southern provinces where agroclimatic conditions were more favorable. The expansion of the railroad network into
these and peripheral regions deepened domestic grain market integration and linked
Russian producers to international markets (Metzger, 1974). The flipside was that
agriculture experienced relative decline in the central and northern provinces of the
Russian heartland.4 These areas – especially in provinces around Moscow and St.
Petersburg – had long possessed significant handicraft, proto-industrial, and factorybased sectors, and these activities only increased in relative importance in the last
decades of the Imperial period. Therefore, by the early 20th century, European Russia
exhibited significant regional differences in economic activity, differences that may have
contributed towards the overall level of income inequality.
In the classic formulation of Gerschenkron (1965), the institutional structure of
the Russian peasant commune limited agricultural productivity, intersectoral labor
mobility, and, ultimately, economic growth. In addition, property and indirect
consumption taxes were seen as siphoning resources away from the peasantry to support
the state-sponsored industrial effort centered the larger cities (Robinson, 1972 [1932];
Von Laue, 1969). At the same time, radical thinkers such as Lenin (see below) and nonradical policymakers perceived a growing gulf between a disaffected rural poor, on the
one hand, and a modernizing landowner class and growing urban bourgeoisie, on the
other. These factors were viewed as fueling an “agrarian crisis” (a phrase evoked by both

4

Some northern and central districts did experience growth in specialized agricultural production, such as
dairying or truck farming.

6
contemporaries and subsequent generations of scholars) and fostering rural unrest in the
Revolution of 1905.5
While the dislocations created by the processes of regional specialization,
industrialization, and migration / urbanization provided the social context in which the
first Russian Revolution occurred, direct evidence on a relationship between economic
conditions and unrest is lacking. Indeed, although conditions of economic “crisis” have
been blamed for growing political radicalization, rural unrest, and labor strife, the pace of
agricultural and industrial growth (and the relatively limited tax burdens) suggests that
living conditions were broadly improving in the 1890s and 1900s. Scholars of the
Revolution of 1905 have generally concluded that the government and military failures
surrounding the Russo-Japanese War and the Bloody Sunday massacre of January 1905
were the more proximate causes of the social unrest that gripped the country (e.g. Ascher,
1988).
What is missing from the literature on this period is a sense of the distributive
consequences of the structural changes the Russian economy was experiencing. Lenin
and other observers concluded that rural “differentiation” and urban “proletarianization”
were unleashing social unrest across Russia by the 1890s, but, as we discuss below, their
evidence was limited in critical ways. Therefore, a clearer understanding of the level and
regional variation in Russian inequality just prior to 1905 may shed light on whether
economic conditions helped fuel the Revolution.
Our calculations of income inequality draw on new estimates of the distribution of
agricultural property (including communal holdings) and incomes for 1905, just before
the reforms took hold. Although we do not connect these findings directly to the impact
of the Stolypin reforms in this paper, our new facts provide insights into the initial
conditions that may inform future analyses.
By providing quantitative evidence on the nature of inequality in early 20th
century Russia, our study may also speak to the forces behind the Revolution of 1917.
Although the downfall of the monarchy and the Bolshevik seizure of power are rarely
5

The crisis view was given particular voice in the district and provincial meetings of the Special
Conference on the Needs of Agriculture in 1902-4. Delegates to these meetings typically viewed Russian,
and especially peasant, agriculture as facing the institutional and fiscal constraints that Gerschenkron,
Robinson, Von Laue, and others later focused on (Macey, 1987).

7
interpreted as specific reactions to long-run structural conditions in the Russian economy
(except, perhaps, through possible roots of military collapse during World War I), our
evidence suggests that the unrest in the capital provinces may have had roots in the
relatively high levels of inequality they exhibited. On the other hand, if the unrest of 1905
was unrelated to inequality, then, as is consistent with the thrust of the historical
literature, the broader swell of events in 1917 were likely driven by other forces as well.
III. PRE-REVOLUTIONARY INEQUALITY: SOURCES AND INTERPRETATIONS
As typically measured, inequality in Tsarist Russia has received remarkably little
attention.6 This has mainly been due to data constraints. No representative income or
wealth surveys were undertaken across different sectors at any point in time. Even more
critically, the measurement of inequality has often been subject to ideological influences.
Leninist views of Russian economic development asserted that the countryside had to
experience class differentiation and rural proletarianization on the country’s way to
revolution. Contemporary populist writers also saw variation in rural household wealth
and incomes, although they credited this to geographic and life cycle factors, rather than
Marxist historical forces. In both cases – and among later scholars – the actual
measurement of inequality or differentiation took the form of livestock, land, or other
asset distributions across exclusively peasant households, often only in small geographic
areas.7
While observers in the immediate post-emancipation decades claimed that there
was a growing gap between an impoverished peasantry and the urban classes in cities
such as Moscow, St. Petersburg, and Odessa, their empirical base was generally limited
to comparing mean values of a small set of indirect welfare indicators, such as taxes per
capita (e.g. Ianson, 1881). Moreover, they tended to focus on perceived differences
between legally defined social classes, such as peasantry, nobility, and townspeople,
rather than actual income or wealth inequality. These social classes, or soslovia, were
6

Indeed, a full-text search for the terms “income” or “wealth,” “inequality” or “unequal,” and “Russia” or
“Soviet” in the database Historical Abstracts turned up practically no relevant entries and exactly none that
pertained directly to the late-Tsarist period. On inequality in the Soviet Union, see Bergson (1984).
7
Harrison (1977) and Merl (1990) provide excellent accounts of these methods and of how later scholars
continued to draw on populist and Leninist models in documenting peasant differentiation.

8
defined at birth (although one could change one’s class at a cost) and came with specific
civil and legal rights that were often associated with differences in wealth or incomegenerating opportunities. While we do rely, in part, on social class to define different
income groups within late-Tsarist society, in practice, such class-based distinctions were
increasingly problematic over time. When it comes to defining inequality, the steady
growth in the number of peasants engaged in non-agricultural activities, and the slow
decline of the nobility as the dominant holders of landed wealth led to the blurring of
class distinctions.
After 1861, academics and policymakers were increasingly aware of their limited
knowledge of the countryside, and of economic conditions in the Empire more broadly.
This led the Central Statistical Committee of the Ministry of the Interior and other
ministerial bodies to engage in more statistical research projects, an effort that culminated
in the first national census in 1897. This census not only documented the ethnic,
religious, and geographic diversity of the Empire, but it also collected detailed data on the
occupational structure of the population. This census and other similarly impressive
statistical research efforts after 1900 (such as the 1905 Land Statistics) provide some of
the necessary building blocks for estimating the level of inequality in European Russia
around the turn of the century. But few scholars have endeavoured to evaluate just how
unequal Russia was by 1900, and those that did so have generally relied on approaches
that do not translate into modern estimates.
Most central government research efforts focused on aggregate levels of
information, either at the province or the district levels. In contrast, a new institution of
local self-government – the zemstvo – frequently engaged in village or household-level
data collection efforts (Nafziger, 2011). Founded in the wake of serf emancipation, these
bodies were responsible for monitoring the taxable resources under their jurisdiction. In
doing so, they often collected information on household incomes, asset holdings, and the
distribution of land. In analyzing and presenting their findings, zemstvo statisticians
frequently classified the peasant population according to the size of landholding, the
number of livestock, or the number of adult workers in the household. But, as noted, their
research tended to be limited to individual districts or provinces. Little was done to make

9
more comparative inroads towards the study of inequality outside of the peasantry or
across zemstva.8
Two literatures emerged at the end of the 19th century that indirectly spoke to the
nature of inequality in late Tsarist society. The first was the rise of a school of populist
peasant studies that utilized and then extended zemstvo research by undertaking detailed
budget studies of “representative” peasant households. Arising first in the province of
Voronezh under the leadership of Feodor Scherbina in the 1880s (e.g. Scherbina, 1897),
this movement later came to be associated with the work of Alexander Chaianov,
especially his influential The Theory of the Peasant Economy (1986). According to this
line of scholarship, inequality of rural households was driven more by life-cycle events
such as aging or household divisions than by broader social forces.
The focus on analyzing household budget data and zemstvo classifications of rural
households also played a key part in Leninist/Soviet interpretations of peasant
differentiation, or rassloenie (or “polarization” – see Field, 1989). Beginning with
Vladimir Lenin’s massive volume The Development of Capitalism in Russia, such writers
expended considerable effort on slicing and dicing the pre-revolution peasantry according
to the asset categories laid out in these data. The ideological motivation behind many of
these efforts was to link changes in the Russian countryside to social class divisions that
were supposed to accompany the transition from feudalism to capitalism under the
Marxist model of development. Rich peasants with slightly larger communal allotments
or a few more horses became rural bourgeoisie (or kulaki – whose property could be
expropriated), while poor peasants were increasingly landless and “proletariatized.”
Lenin dedicated much of his volume to laying out these processes as he interpreted them
in a variety of zemstvo data, while later Soviet scholars focussed on documenting such
changes in particular localities, types of agricultural production, or certain time periods
(pushing the origins of peasant differentiation back to the pre-1861 period).9
8

Almost every zemstvo study decomposes households in these ways – Field (1989) reports examples drawn
from Poltava province that use land or livestock as the indicator of wealth. For summary statistics from the
original data, see Svavitskaia and Svavitskii, eds. (1926).
9
Research projects in the 1920s and 1930s tried to pin down the processes of social stratification among
the peasantry by following a given stratum – defined by land or livestock holdings – over time in a
particular area. In a sense, these dynamic household censuses were attempts to bring Chaianov’s insights
into a Marxist framework. Prominent Soviet scholars of rural stratification include A. M. Anfimov (e.g.
1984) and Ivan Koval’chenko (e.g. 1967), who continued Leninist research into rural Russia by

10
Field’s (1989) fascinating analysis of turn-of-the-century wealth polarization
among the peasants of agricultural Poltava and other provinces builds on this Marxist
scholarship by estimating Gini coefficients (and their change over time) for different
agricultural assets.10 We present a number of these in Table 1 to illustrate the types of
assets and range of geographies covered in zemstvo-based studies. As Lenin noted,
agricultural assets were held relatively unequally, even among the supposedly
homogenous peasantry. These numbers also suggested to observers that “differentiation”
was growing over time. Field frames his findings in quasi-Marxist terms, emphasizing the
emergence of “rural capitalism” among the peasant population by 1900. However, he also
acknowledges that such zemstvo data make it difficult to accurately estimate true income
or wealth inequality, because the asset categories, definitions of a household, and types of
peasant economic activity changed over time and across surveys.11
[Insert Table 1 about here]
Overall, populist and Marxist analyses of peasant stratification provide some
evidence of an increasing amount of wealth or occupational heterogeneity within the rural
population in the late Tsarist period. But they typically relied on partial measures of only
a few assets, were geographically limited, and did not tackle overall income inequality in
any broader sense. As such, they cannot really shed light on the “big” questions that lies
behind much of Russian economic history in the late Tsarist period. For instance, such
studies do a poor job of placing what is happening in rural Russia in the context of
contemporaneous urban and industrial developments. Given their ideological persuasion,
Soviet scholars did pay close attention to who was in or out of the “worker” (rabochie)
class and often included large numbers of the “rural proletariat” in such calculations (e.g.
Rashin, 1958). As emphasized by numerous scholars from Tugan-Baranovsky (1970)

incorporating a much wider set of evidence from archival materials and other quantitative sources and
expanding the analysis to consider changes within the landed nobility.
10
Chapter 2 of Lenin (1974) – and subsequent Soviet works – provides a series of tables that classify
peasant households into strata depending on land, livestock ownership, and some limited budgetary
information for a small number of districts for which he had access to zemstvo surveys. In some cases,
Lenin just took the classifications from the underlying zemstvo statistics, while in others he derived the
grouping himself. Field (1989) uses similar data, but takes the existing zemstvo categorizations and derives
Gini coefficients.
11
In a more recent work, Johnson (1997) analyses income stratification by household size, as reported in a
1909 budget survey from Kostroma province. He emphasizes the existence of Chaianovian life-cycle
differences in household wealth and inequality.

11
onward (including the census takers of 1897), the Russian peasantry was becoming
increasingly involved in migratory, proto-industrial, or industrial occupations in cities or
quasi-urban areas, but they were often doing so while continuing to work in agricultural
production. This led to rather convoluted categorizations by Soviet authors as they tried
to explain the forces behind the primarily urban Revolution of 1917. Moreover, the
failures of this methodology also point to the importance of moving beyond asset- and
class-based analyses towards other methods of calculating total income inequality.12
It is worth touching on two other areas of scholarship that relate to our method of
calculating income inequality. The first is the growing literature on living standards in
Tsarist Russia. Soviet scholars such as Kirianov (1979) tended to focus on either rural or
urban (i.e. “worker”) living standards by considering work conditions, diets, and some
very limited information on wages and salaries. These studies were written through a
Marxist filter and, therefore, did not pay much attention to the income generated from
asset ownership.13 As we have noted, Soviet work on rural living standards tended to
report simple Leninist measures of peasant differentiation. In his recent impressive study
of living standards from Peter the Great to the Revolution, Mironov (2010) essentially
sets aside direct calculations of incomes (and their distribution) in favor of an
anthropometric approach. His reliance on military and factory data on adult heights opens
an important area of research into Russian living standards, especially in rural areas and
over time, but it does not directly measure economic inequality. Moreover, the nonanthropometric data presented in his book and associated articles frequently relate to
Moscow or Petersburg and not necessarily to the rest of the Empire or even the European
provinces. In view of this, Dennison and Nafziger (forthcoming), in their case study of
two districts in the Central Industrial Region, argue that it is essential to take a more local
– and hence, often rural – approach towards studying living standards in order to
adequately understand the evident geographic heterogeneity across the Empire. We are

12

Indeed, Lenin’s tactical adoption of a “vanguard party” model for the Bolsheviks was partly based on the
peasant basis of much of the urban population.
13
By adopting a “labor theory of value,” these and other Marxist studies certainly missed a key part of
income inequality, especially when it came to land. Moreover, this theoretical perspective might explain
why there is a surprisingly small amount of business or estate-level histories that employ modern
accounting ideas to assign “corporate” incomes to individual owners.

12
sensitive to the need to take both sectoral and geographic variation into account when
calculating inequality.
Finally, the various studies of living standards, peasant stratification, the
emergence of a working class, and household budgets have tended to be micro in their
use of evidence. We argue elsewhere that micro studies of living standards are especially
valuable for understanding the nature of heterogeneity in Russian living standards (ibid.).
However, evaluating the level of inequality in a particular society requires taking a more
aggregate approach, whether geographic or otherwise. Gregory’s (1982) important
revision of Russian national income – which documents a relatively high growth rate
from the 1880s to 1913 – provides a baseline measure of the size of the economic “pie”
that was divided among agents in the economy. In building up his accounts, Gregory
draws almost exclusively on Empire or European Russia-wide aggregate data series on
final expenditures on goods and services, with only limited acknowledgement of
variation in consumption among different groups in society.14 Using a source on potential
taxable incomes that we employ below, Gregory estimates that the top one percent of
earners received about 15 percent of national income around 1904 (Table 1).
Our take-away message from this summary of the literature on inequality in preSoviet Russia is relatively simple – there has been little comprehensive work done to this
point. After the Revolution, more extensive data on earnings do enable broader measures
of the distribution of incomes, including 90 / 10 percentile ratios and Gini coefficients for
the entire USSR (Table 1). Populist and Leninist estimates of pre-1917 inequality
focussed on relatively small parts of total income and did so for small geographic areas.
Assignment to income strata was generally done by asset ownership, although returns
from owning these assets did not really enter into early calculations.15 In what follows,
we rely on a variety of sources and a new methodology that allow us to estimate overall
14

In a related work, Gregory (1980) estimates peasant grain consumption but does not look into the
consumption of foodstuffs of urban or non-peasant populations. Early Soviet studies of national income
prior to 1913 – particularly Prokopovich’s (1918) estimates for 1900 and 1913 – did emphasize some
geographic differences. Markevich and Harrison’s (2011) recent study of revolutionary era growth accepts
Gregory’s pre-1913 estimates, while arguing for a sharper decline to 1917.
15
That communal allotment land (nadel’naia zemlia) comprised the bulk of property held by most peasants
has led many scholars to assume more homogeneity among peasant households than was true in practice.
Soviet class-based analyses did not necessarily employ this simplification, but many did tend to assume
that the possession of little property was equivalent to poverty, without acknowledging the possibility of
occupational specialization across households.

13
inequality around 1904 in a way that is comparable to methods used for a number of
other societies at different points in time.
IV. PUTTING HOUSEHOLDS INTO SOCIO-ECONOMIC GROUPS
A. Choosing Households as the Population Unit
To determine just how unequally incomes are distributed among humans, we must
first clarify what human units we have in mind. This paper will focus on the household
as the relevant population unit for income distribution. We do so for two reasons, one
theoretical and one practical.
The theoretical argument for focusing on households was emphasized by Simon
Kuznets in his work in the 1960s and 1970s. Kuznets warned repeatedly that studies of
inequality fail to define the unit of population clearly.16 The usual candidates are:
• inequality of total income among households
• inequality of income per household member (or per adult male equivalent)
• inequality of individual incomes per economically active person (e.g. taxpayer,
or member of the labor force)
Kuznets emphasized the superiority of the household focus on theoretical grounds.
Caring about economic inequality means caring about how unequally people consume
resources over their lives. Even if data constraints force us to study annual inequality
rather than life-cycle inequality, Kuznets pleaded for measuring annual household
income per consumer in the household. The basic reason is that households do share
their resources. The income numerator must capture the incomes of all economically
active household members, and the population denominator should capture the number of
adult-equivalent consumers. He warned against measuring inequality among individual
earners.
For the purpose of mapping Russian inequality, Kuznets’s theoretical argument is
reinforced by practical empirical considerations. We must focus on households (dvory or
khoziaistva) as income recipient units in order to conform to the prevailing practices of

16

See especially Kuznets (1976).

14
those who generated our data.17 Our Imperial Russian sources also favored studying the
household as a unit, especially for the peasantry. So did those who investigated the
income structure of other countries in centuries past, since they too confronted the simple
fact that taxable property, such as real estate, is used by all household members, even if
only one is the owner and taxpayer. Their thirst for measuring nations’ potential for
paying taxes and supplying soldiers has proven enormously helpful to social science
historians.
B. Estates and Sectors
Imperial Russian laws and social inquiries helpfully classified households into
groupings useful for our pursuit of income differences. First, across the four centuries
leading up to the 1917 Revolution, Imperial officials defined classes in a way that
differentiated them relatively clearly by legally distinct social estates (soslovia), which
tended to correspond to income level, with modifications for urban/rural residence. This
makes it easier for our data to divide national income along the same class lines that
others have considered important. True, the classes overlapped in their income
distributions to some extent, but there is considerable evidence that the social tables
based on socio-occupational classes come close to being size distributions of income.18
[Insert Table 2 about here]
Boris Mironov has already reaped the rich harvest of data on membership in
estate classes since 1678. Some of his findings are summarized in Table 2. Despite signs
of urbanization and churning at the top, with the replacement of old aristocracies with
new, changes were slow. The shares of the aristocracy that contemporaries chose to
define by landed titles were not high, hovering at less than two percent of the population
of recognized households. That was perhaps comparable with the early modern share in
France and England. Ancien regime France in 1780 had a similar share of its population
distinguished by nobility or clergy: 1.93 percent. For England and Wales, the share
17

Both khoziaistvo and dvor are terms used to refer to households in our time period. The latter is slightly
more specific (typically referring to a farm household) than the former. Our analysis does not depend on
the term employed.
18
Milanovic, Lindert, and Williamson (2011) note how historical tables of class average incomes seem to
approximate size distributions in many countries. Wirtschafter (1997) provides a valuable discussion of
sosloviia, including how their characteristics overlapped by the end of the 19th century.

15
distinguished by landowner status was similar, but a bit higher: 2.11 percent around the
year 1290, 3.15 percent in 1688, and 3.47 percent in 1801-03.19 While these are only
rough counts, it is noteworthy that a far more rural Russia had such a small share of its
population in the landed elite.20 Also noteworthy is the thinness of Russia’s government
bureaucracy. In 1750, for example, Russia had only one official per 10,000 of
population, similar to China’s thin bureaucracy of one official per 11,350 in the same
year. By contrast, in sixteenth-century England each official covered only 4,000 persons
on the average, and in France under Louis XIV each corresponded to only 7,700 of
population.21 Overall, Russia’s top social ranks looked thin, in relative terms.
To this relatively stable and skewed social structure we can add household counts
by economic sector for 1897 and for the statistical updates that followed. It will be easier
to attach data on human earnings to different shares of the population if we know which
sector the household head worked in, since wage and other data are often specific to an
output sector, as well as to an occupation. Table 3 defines the main output sectors,
starting with the 1897 census estimates and inflating the counts to 1904 using population
data from the 1904 statistical year book. Combining the occupational-sectoral (zanyatie)
household counts with the social estate (soslovie) household counts (all by province in
European Russia) sharpens our view of the income distribution further. Knowing the
sector helps, for example, to identify the greater earnings of peasants working in industry
or local government than those in agriculture or domestic service. Knowing the estate
helps, for example, to delineate those in “industry and commerce” who were peasants
from those in “industry and commerce” who were of the merchant estate. Appendix A
describes our assumptions about which estates tended to combine with which output
sectors, with further separation by rural versus urban residence. In the end we are able to
delineate 2,300 income-earning groups (23 estate-sector combinations times 50 provinces
times urban versus rural), even before later stratifying by income level on the basis of
additional data.
19

See Morrisson and Snyder (2000) on France in 1780, Campbell (2007) on England 1290, and Lindert and
Williamson (1982) on England 1688-1803. We should note one dip in the English landed share: Joseph
Massie's table for England and Wales in 1759 had only 1.2% in the titled landowning classes.
20
From Peter the Great until the end of the regime, Imperial Russia was also distinguished by its Table of
Ranks, which translated civil and military service into noble status. Above a certain rank, nobility was
hereditable, as suggested in Table 2.
21
See Pintner (1980) and Sng (2011).

16
[Insert Table 3 about here]
In output sectors as in social classes, Russia’s distribution of households was
quite skewed, with rural agriculture dominating the entire population. By itself, the
dominance of agriculture and the peasantry might have obscured our view of differences
in income. Fortunately, however, we can turn to sources that documented high-income
earners by sector and social class, the inequalities of agricultural landownership, and
detailed decompositions of peasant incomes. For our study, as for most other quantitative
studies dealing with the pre-Revolutionary period, data constraints limit our measures to
the 50 provinces of European Russia, omitting Finland, Poland, Transcaucasia, Central
Asia, and Siberia.
V. FOLLOWING THE INCOME CLUES FOR 1890s-1905
A. Incomes from Landownership
Our best opportunity to take a snapshot of the Russian income structure comes
from around the turn of the twentieth century, especially from a combination of large data
sets stretching from 1897 to 1905. To work these data sets into a single estimate for
“1904”, we start with the generous dataset on land ownership as of 1905, courtesy of the
same census bureaucracy that gave us Imperial Russia’s superb 1897 population counts.22
The 1905 survey measured landownership by the size of area owned, by county and
province, and by type of owner. The type-of-owner detail is also rich - as it needs to be,
given the complexity of Russian land institutions. The data delineate individual
household owners by six social estate classes – aristocracy, clergy, merchants and
esteemed (kuptsy i pochetnye) citizens, townsmen and women (meshchane), peasants,
and miscellaneous estates including foreign individuals. There are separate returns for
different types of collective landownership, including peasants’ shared (nadel’nye)

22

The “land” surveyed in 1905 appears to exclude urban real estate as strictly defined, or so we gather from
the juxtaposition of the two kinds of assets (urban and rural real estate) documented in Russia, Ministerstvo
(1906). This exclusion might not be evident from the 1905 land survey by itself, since it included both the
“urban” and “rural” divisions of each province in some categories. Yet, as other scholars have noted, the
officially urban parts of each province contained agricultural lands. We collected our data from the fifty
provincial-level volumes of Russia, Tsentral’nyi (1906).

17
allotments growing out of the 1861 emancipation, state lands, clergy lands, and other
categories.
The rich detail of the 1905 land survey is subject to two drawbacks for our
purposes, drawbacks that we can partly offset with other data. First, the survey
consolidated the different holdings of each individual landowner only within each
district, without connecting the properties of the same landowner in different districts (or
provinces). Fortunately, the data impose enough information to demonstrate that the
merging of individual landed properties across provinces cannot have affected income
inequality very much.23
A second drawback of the impressive 1905 land survey is that it presents data
only on the land areas owned, and not their annual rental value. Fortunately, the Finance
Ministry’s 1906 study Opyt’ priblizitel’novo ischislenia narodnovo dokhoda po
raslichnym evo istochnikam i po razmeram v Rossii [hereafter Opyt’] presents alternative
average rentals in rubles per desiatina (approximately 2.7 acres) per year for each
province. We use their average rental rate, which assumes a six-percent return on
purchase value and that all lands in each province had the same value. We thus capture
only the differences in value per desiatina across provinces, not those within provinces.
[Insert Table 4 about here]
The distribution of private landownership, as shown in Table 4, departs from any
simple separation of landed from landless social estates. Only one-third of the nobility
(dvorianstvo) consisted of landowners, and over a fifth of all merchants and esteemed
citizens owned land outside the cities. Of course, of those closest to the land, the
peasantry, fewer than four percent of household heads had individual privately owned
land. This distribution of rural private landownership, by itself, makes Russia look very
unequal in international perspective. Table 4’s data show that only 4.7 percent of
households owned private land other than the plots under urban buildings. This
ownership share is smaller than that of other data-supplying countries in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries, with the possible exception of Mexico.24
[Insert Figure 1 about here]

23
24

See Appendix D.
For the other countries, see Lindert (1987, p. 39, Table 1).

18
This high level of landed inequality – and its limited geographic variation – is
indicated in Panel A of Figure 1.25 Not only is the overall Gini coefficient of purely
individual holdings high (0.88), but the range is rather narrow across provinces: aside
from Archangel’ province’s Gini of 0.05 (due to the small number of only peasant
owners), the next highest coefficient was 0.55 in the Don Cossack Lands, and the
remainder were above 0.63. This level of land inequality is lower if we add peasants’
communal land holdings per household (Panel B of Figure 1), but the overall Gini
remains high at 0.60.26 Yet, as we shall see, Russia’s high land inequality does not
translate into internationally extreme levels of total income inequality.
B. Peasant Incomes
We are fortunate that pre-Revolutionary officials and scholars took seriously the
task of learning not only the averages, but also the distribution, of peasant incomes. As
noted above, the zemstva succeeded in surveying the rough structure of peasant income
and wealth for several provinces between the 1880s and the early 1900s. To more fully
document the income distribution of the roughly 80 percent of the population who were
peasants, we make use of these survey results, supplemented by parts of the 1905 land
returns (as outlined above) and by independent data on local wage rates.
The heterogeneity of our source materials calls for some elaborate procedures to
differentiate – in a non-Marxist sense – the peasantry within one province, and then
extrapolate across provinces. These procedures are spelled out in Appendix B on
Stratifying the Peasantry, with detailed calculations in the internet files cited there. Here
we simply note the general procedural steps. The starting point is the large survey of
peasant household strata in Voronezh in 1897, which we extrapolated to 1904 ruble
values using the general trend in nominal incomes. Our extrapolation from Voronezh to
other provinces then used relative wage rates in agriculture and industry, plus those
detailed 1905 landownership returns for the small share of (private) landowning peasants.
The resulting estimates, aggregated to the level of European Russia, appear in Table 5.
[Insert Table 5 about here]
25

Appendix C provides a map denoting the provinces of European Russia.
Particularly high levels of land inequality are evident in St. Petersburg, right-bank Ukraine, the Urals,
and the southern New Russian provinces.

26

19
A feature of Russia’s peasantry that stands in contrast to most other countries’
agricultural or rural households before 1914 is that most of the Russian peasantry were
“tenant” farm operators and their dependents. Fewer than five percent of peasant
households were laborers who lacked their own farm, just as fewer than five percent
owned land only individually. What we call “tenants” were those peasants who received
agricultural income primarily from production on their share of communal holdings.27
This broad group was also fairly compressed in its income levels, with the top 5 percent
(the “top farmer operators, not private owners” in Table 5) having only a bit more than
triple the average incomes among the bottom quarter (“lower farm operators”). Part of
the reason, of course, is that their collectively owned lands, whose value has been
included in these measures, are believed to have been shared fairly evenly (e. g.
Robinson, 1972 [1932]).28 Thus far we have two opposing tendencies (suggested by
comparing panels A and B of Figure 1): highly unequal ownership of land among
individuals, and relatively equal incomes within the peasantry. To complete the picture
of overall inequality, we need to add other types of income, and then to work out the
implications of the gaps between the estate classes’ average incomes.
C. Top Incomes (The Opyt’ Study)
Using the census as a springboard the Ministry of Finance launched a detailed
inquiry into the structure of top incomes, in order to estimate how much tax revenue the
state could raise, and from whom. One fruit of this endeavor was the Ministry’s detailed
estimates of high incomes over the period 1900-1904 – Opyt’ (Russia, Ministerstvo,
1906). Apparently targeting only the top of society for potential income taxation, the
Ministry’s estimates covered those annual incomes exceeding 1,000 rubles. The total
household count came to only 2.0 percent of all households. A follow-up study in 1910
gave further elaboration of the forecasted possible revenues. Yet in the end, the project
27

This is slightly non-standard nomenclature, but we feel that is reflects the way collective ownership and
obligations functioned in practice.
28
As noted by Chaianov (1986), the size of Russian peasant communal allotments was often closely linked
to the amount of household labor, and so land inequality within the commune was related to the distribution
of household size. The 1905 data on allotment land does not provide within-commune information, but the
aggregate distributions we derive across communes closely resemble the variation reported in zemstvo
studies such as Scherbina (1900). Also see Svavitskaia and Svavitskii, eds. (1926) for other land
distributions from zemstvo research.

20
for a comprehensive income tax was blocked and remained unimplemented before the
1917 Revolution.29
To exploit this unique data source, we must immediately confront a large problem
shared by all the income data from Imperial Russia: total incomes were never measured
by official fiscal authorities, unlike those micro-level (zemstvo and Ministerial) surveys
of worker and peasant households. What the Opyt’ data sets offer are only counts of
specific kinds of income, and the numbers of people receiving any one of them. Some
data sets in the source offer the distribution of land area or land value, with no attention
to other incomes; others are confined to urban real estate rents; other data sets offer wage
and servant income in narrow formal sectors; others cover just industrial or commercial
profits; and so forth. The same problem often arises in other countries, e.g. in the
separate-schedule income tax data of Victorian Britain, or in early America, where the
data on property incomes are completely divorced from the data on a household’s own
human earnings.
[Insert Table 6 about here]
The size of this top group and its different sources of income are summarized in
Table 6. Such high incomes were especially concentrated in land ownership and
commercial enterprises, but they were also evident in state service and from returns to
financial investments. To understand the distribution of incomes at the very top, we
utilize the fact that Opyt’ breaks down these high-income categories into six different
ranges, from the 1,000-2,000 range up to incomes above 50,000 rubles. Also useful are
the breakdowns of all real estate and profits by individual province. Again, the original
data treat each income source as separate, although it is very likely the case that the
highest earning households received more than 1,000 rubles from multiple sources. The
details in Opyt’ illuminate the top of the income structure, once we have made plausible
assumptions about how the different sources of income were combined into the same
households.
VI. RUSSIAN INCOME INEQUALITY c. 1904: RESULTS

29

The fiscal fight over tax reform after 1905 is summarized by Gorlin (1977).

21
We combine information on the number of households by class and sector, the
distribution of land, the sources of peasant incomes, wage data, and top incomes from the
Opyt’ study to map out the distribution of incomes in European Russia around 1904. The
underlying sources provide these data at the provincial level, and we take advantage of
this to construct geographically disaggregate estimates. Our procedure in constructing
measures of income inequality follows that of Milanovic, Lindert, and Williamson
(2011). In short, we estimate mean incomes accruing to each class/sector “cell,” order the
cells, and aggregate up to define the relevant income shares or Gini coefficients (this is
done at the provincial level and for all of European Russia). Below, we focus on our
intermediate, “preferred” inequality estimates, which assume that each household in a
cell has the same mean income.30 Additional details of these and the alternative estimates
are spelled out in the Russia files of http://gpih.ucdavis.edu/.
[Insert Figure 2 about here]
Figure 2 reports one intermediate result of this exercise: the estimates of mean
incomes across all types of households in each province.31 The highest incomes are
evident in the Baltic and northwestern provinces (including Petersburg, at 1317 rubles),
Moscow (1147 rubles), and the Black Sea provinces (Kherson, with Odessa, at 829). The
Eastern provinces had lower incomes, as did a number of central agricultural provinces.
These estimates are consistent with existing studies of Russian living standards (i.e.
Mironov, 2010), especially those that emphasize the heterogeneity of economic
development by the early 20th century (Dennison and Nafziger, forthcoming; Wheatcroft,
1991). The overall mean income of 612.5 rubles is very close to Gregory’s (1982)
aggregate per capita income of 100 rubles, with average household size hovering around
six individuals.
[Insert Table 7 about here]
We present our preferred estimates of household income inequality in 1904 in
Table 7. Our estimate of the top income 1 percent income share (13.5 percent of total
income) happens to be close to Gregory’s calculation using the Opyt´ data for inequality

30

Our preferred estimates also make particular assumptions about the aggregation of incomes from
particular sectors / activities for each social class.
31
The underlying numbers are available in the 1904 inequality file at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu/.

22
within the elite (see Table 1).32 The top 20 percent of households received slightly less
than 50 percent of total income, and median incomes were 2/3 of the mean level. Based
on over 2300 class/sector/location cells, we estimate the overall Gini coefficient to be
approximately 0.36.
[Insert Figure 3 about here]
Figure 3 reports the geographic heterogeneity underlying this preferred estimate.
These data rely on the identical methods for calculating Gini coefficients as we employ in
the aggregate in Table 7 but are here executed separately using each province’s data from
the various sources described in Section V. In general, the mean income levels reported
in Figure 2 were positively correlated with the level of inequality (coefficient of 0.75).
The two capital provinces saw high levels of inequality, as Moscow and Petersburg were
the only two provinces with Ginis above 0.5. Other provinces with relatively high
inequality included the Baltics, southern Ukrainian and Black Sea provinces, and
Orenburg in the Urals. The lowest levels of income inequality were generally found in
the northern provinces and the upper Volga region.
We place these findings on the Russian income distribution in 1904 into context
in the next section. In the meanwhile, it is important to acknowledge several mechanical
ways that these “preferred” estimates may under or over-estimate the true level of
inequality. For example, the available land statistics treat owners in each district as
distinct, although we know that the largest landowners in Russia held numerous
properties scattered across provinces. As shown in Appendix D, however, it turns out that
the available data have imposed enough constraints so that their failure to merge
properties across provinces could not have underestimated inequality much.
Another possible bias may arise from our assumption about the distribution of
incomes within the class / sector cells. In our preferred estimates, all of the households in
a cell are assigned a mean income, and, by default, we do not assume that incomes
overlap across groups. Recent work by Modalsli (2011) suggests that this simplifying
assumption may lead to limited underestimates of inequality when within-group
32

When we aggregate over all households, we come to a total income for the fifty provinces of European
Russia of 11.2 billion rubles. We feel that this is comparable to Gregory’s (1982) estimate of roughly 16.2
billion for the entire Empire within the much larger USSR borders (therefore, excluding Poland and
Finland).

23
dispersion takes particular forms. Our alternative estimates (available at
http://gpih.ucdavis.edu) do relax this assumption in several ways; also see the discussion
of similar issues in Milanovic et al. (2011).
Finally, a last possible source of bias may arise from how we aggregate incomes
from other sectors to households whose primary earnings are located in one particular
sector. Although peasant, noble, and other types of households tended to cluster in one
sector, these households also earned income from other sources. We feel that our
preferred estimates (in Appendix A) make a number of reasonable assumptions regarding
this aggregation, especially for the peasantry and other lower income groups, and we do
relax several of these in our alternative estimates. However, from the information
reported in Russia, Ministerstvo (1906), we know little about the extent to which high
earning households were high earners in several different sectors. Such a scenario is
plausible, and since we cannot formulate a clear correction for this issue, we may be
slightly underestimating overall inequality as a result.
Overall, we are aware that our estimates of Russian income inequality in the early
20th century contain several unavoidable imperfections – the ones mentioned here and
possible others. The effects of several of these are explicitly explored in our robustness
work, which is available online.
VII. RUSSIAN INEQUALITY IN COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE
In the degree of its household income inequality in the early twentieth century,
Russia was not alone. So says Table 8’s comparisons of two kinds of summary measures
of inequality: the shares of all incomes received by the top ranks, and the Gini
coefficient. Even though one might have expected that a country on the eve of a large
Revolution and, subsequently, the first Communist Revolution would have provoked its
fate with some of the world’s widest gaps in income, Table 8 offers no confirmation of
this hunch. The clearest contrast consists of a set of experiences where inequality was
more severe than it was in Imperial Russia. One such bastion of inequality was Victorian
England, as represented by Baxter’s estimates for 1867 (two others were Peru and South

24
Africa, as Table 8 suggests). The gaps were wider in England, both between top incomes
and middle incomes and between middle incomes and the bottom.
[Insert Table 8 about here]
The other intriguing comparison is with inequality in Russia today. Some very
rough conclusions are possible, once one considers two data limitations. The first
limitation is that the comparison may be affected by changes in geography: relative to our
pre-revolutionary European Russia estimate, today’s Russian Federation has lost the
provinces that have become Belarus, Ukraine, and Moldova, but now includes the
Siberian and northern Caucasian parts of the Federation. The other is that the post-Soviet
measures of income distribution tell inconsistent stories because of changing definitions
of income and population.33 The most comparable with our estimates for Imperial Russia
are the 1995-1998 measures of the distribution of households’ gross (pre-tax and pretransfer) money income by Goskomstat, the predecessor of today’s RosStat. Taking the
estimates at face value, gross income inequality was already a bit higher in 1997 than in
1904. We suspect that these numbers understate the rise in inequality in the Yeltsin
decade by under-reporting top incomes.34
Clues about movements in Russia’s gross income inequality since the mid-1990s
can be gathered from other series, ones that are less directly comparable with our 1904
measure. These other measures suggest a rise in inequality to around the year 2000,
followed by equalization since then, not only in Russia but also in Ukraine and Moldova.
In Belarus, inequality had already peaked back in 1993, and has drifted down since

33

As the cited numbers in Table 1 suggest, estimates of the distribution of earnings or income showed
fluctuating but generally declining levels of inequality over the Soviet period.
34
We suspect this in part because the 1995-1998 estimates implausibly imply a higher middle-class share at
the expense of the top 20% and the bottom 40%, relative to Imperial Russia, as shown by these income
shares:
Eur. Russia
Russian Federation
Income share of
1904
1995
1996
1997
1998
top 20% of households
47.7
47.1
45.1
46.3
47.0
41-79%
31.0
37.4
38.0
36.7
36.0
bottom 40% of households
21.3
15.5
16.9
17.0
17.0
Gini coefficient
0.362
0.412 0.385 0.393 0.398
These figures from 1995-1998 are from the Deininger-Squire WIID 2c dataset available at
http://www.wider.unu.edu/research/Database/en_GB/wiid/. Our Table 4 cites the 1997 Gini to avoid
overstating the contrast with 1904, and to avoid highlighting data from the crisis year 1998.

25
then.35 Combining Table 8’s direct comparison of 1904 and 1997 with the post-Soviet
movements in other series suggests this tentative conclusion: Relative to European
Imperial Russia before the Revolutions, the income distribution in the Russian Federation
started out less unequal, then became more unequal by the mid-1990s, reached one of the
highest levels of inequality in all of post-1861 Russian history sometime around the year
2000, and has then become no more unequal than European Russian incomes were
around 1904.36
The other settings of extremely wide inequality, in which Gini coefficients often
exceed 0.42, consist of countries in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.
Among the many countries where incomes are clearly more unequal today than they were
at the sunset of Imperial Russia are today’s Brazil, China, the United States – and
probably Russia itself. All four of these countries have experienced a long-run rise in
inequality, the United States across the nineteenth and twentieth centuries and the other
three during the twentieth. Yet for many other countries, such as Britain and Sweden, the
gaps are now narrower – households are more equal – than they were in the nineteenth
century and early twentieth.37 This contrast in long-run movements is a puzzle worth
pondering anew.
Such conventional comparisons of inequalities in nominal income need to be
enriched in at least two dimensions, namely the redistributive role of the state in
inequality, and the subtlety that class-specific differences in the cost of living might make
something called relative “real inequality” quite different from the usual comparison of
nominal inequalities like those in Tables 7 and 8. In both of these two dimensions, we
see signs that a fuller comparison of Russia with countries to the West may reveal some
intriguing twists.
35

See the downloadable estimates from several sources in
http://www.wider.unu.edu/research/Database/en_GB/wiid/ and the 1989-2009 annual TransmonEE
measures in http://www.transmonee.org/.
36
We cannot say much about pre-1904 inequality at this point, although it is certainly possible that the
trend was downward following emancipation. We hope to investigate this earlier period in future work.
Furthermore, the contrast between pre-revolutionary and post-Soviet inequalities may have looked quite
different, however, if we were to consider the inequality of disposable income, after taking account of taxes
and transfer payments. See below for tentative thoughts in this direction. The interaction between fiscal
policies and inequality of disposable income will be considered in future research.
37
By 1904 the share of income received by the top one percent of U.S. households was probably already
down as low as it was in Russia, as was the top one-percent share in Germany (Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez
2011, Figure 7B).

26
The possible redistribution from poor to rich, alias “fiscal regressivity,” lurks in
the background here. It is hidden by the fact that for Russia, as for other countries, the
data offer more information on “pre-fisc” income inequality than on the “post-fisc”
distribution after taxes and transfers. Relative to other European countries, Russia
showed more signs of fiscal regressivity in declining to redistribute from rich to poor.
One sign of regressivity in the government’s policies is the fact that the net rental values
on state and church lands could have been worth as much as 8.1 percent of national
income.38 If one views these as incomes that an elite withheld from the people who
worked those lands, then top-income shares should be raised by this amount. Another
sign of regressivity was that failure to pass an income tax when other governments were
doing so in the early twentieth century. This was compounded by the central
government’s growing reliance on revenues from the indirect taxation of basic
consumption goods, especially alcohol.39 Regressive policies were also evident in the
central government’s unwillingness to spend on mass education, leaving primary school
finance at the mercy of political debate within zemstva and other impoverished local
governments.40
The other intriguing extension of the international inequality comparisons relates
to subtleties about class-specific differences in the typical “cost of living” bundle of
goods and services. Since different income classes consume different bundles of goods
and services, it could matter a great deal if basic staples such as grains were cheaper
relative to luxury goods in one country than in another, as Hoffman et al. (2002) have
pointed out. Indeed, Imperial Russia stood out as a cheap-grain country, raising the
possibility that the gaps in class-specific purchasing power were narrower than the usual
comparisons of nominal income inequality imply (although possibly offset by various
forms of consumption taxation). That does indeed appear to have been the case. As Boris
Mironov has pointed out, anthropometric indicators and income clues suggest that the

38

This applies the rental rates of Table 4 to the landholdings of the state and Church in 1905, as
documented in Russia, Tsentral’nyi (1905).
39
For discussions of the shift from direct towards indirect taxation by the central government, see Gorlin
(1977) and Kotsonis (2004). Although the zemstvo did rely on local property taxation for revenues, rates
were relatively high on peasant land compared to non-peasant property (Nafziger, 2011).
40
See the discussions of early 20th century local school progress in Russia and other impoverished settings
in Chaudhary et al. (2011).

27
lower ranks of the peasantry enjoyed living standards far enough above subsistence to
fuel the well-documented rapid rate of natural increase.41
VIII. CONCLUSION
The intermediate level of inequality, and the slight skewness that left the middle-income
ranks closer to the bottom than to the top, might be viewed as the net result of two
fundamental influences on Russian economic fortunes prior to the Revolutions. The
fundamental egalitarian force was geographic: Russia has always stood out as abundant
in productive land and staple grains. The land/labor logic that other scholars have used to
link the Black Death to the freedom and wellbeing of the English yeoman should
theoretically have compressed the income structure – and probably continued to do so,
other things equal, even on the eve of Revolution. Although the peasantry was not the
homogenous group that is often assumed – a fact that Lenin and his followers identified
in their limited ways – the predominance of communal property among such a large part
of the population likely held down property inequality. Yet the country’s preRevolutionary history was also dominated by the inegalitarian force of the state. Imperial
autocracy dependent on elites for its power continued to be reflected in the income
inequality among estates and classes. Even if extraordinary political inequality did not
manage to create extraordinary inequality by global standards, it did leave those signs of
regressive redistribution we have already noted. Furthermore, income inequality in
contemporary Russia likely exceeds the pre-Revolutionary level, and the fiscal structure
is perhaps equally skewed towards politically connected elite at the expense of those
lower on the income distribution (Gelbach, 2008). Can any historical lessons be drawn
for Russia’s future?
The limited, albeit geographically varied, inequality we find is consistent with
economic growth and a positive trend in living standards, especially in rural areas. Even
if peasants were increasingly “differentiated,” rising agricultural productivity and
growing opportunities for non-agricultural earnings were likely improving conditions at
the lower end of the income distribution. Moreover, the fact that inequality appears to
41

See Mironov (2010, 655-659). On similar points, see Hoch (1994) and Simms (1977).

28
have been particularly concentrated in the booming capital cities hints at a possible
tenuous link to the Revolutions of 1905 and 1917, which both began in these urban
settings. The limited, snapshot nature of our analysis requires extreme caution in making
general or ahistorical conclusions, but the political protests accompanying the 2011-2012
Russian elections do suggest that the evident positive improvements in Russian living
conditions since the 1990s may not preclude growing (urban) unease at the level of
income inequality.
The research task that now dominates our agenda is how the level of economic
inequality reached in the early twentieth century came about over the course of earlier
Russian history. Was it always that way? Or did the classes’ relative fortunes change
across the post-Emancipation era, say from 1877 to 1913, and across the Emancipation
Era between the relatively well-documented benchmark years 1858 and 1877? What
earlier movements were likely? Boris Mironov and others have led the way with
important new work on real wages and other indicators of living standards, but significant
empirical materials remain relatively untapped throughout the post-Petrine era. The task
is not an easy one for the pre-Emancipation era, mainly because it is hard to capture the
income effects of the ownership of serfs.42 Further archival and original source research
will hopefully allow us to make progress in identifying the dynamics of Russian income
inequality, both before and after 1904.

42

Again see Mironov (2000, 2005, 2010, and his data series at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu). For the
seventeenth century, see the materials collected in Richard Hellie’s vast data set on the same web site. The
issues regarding the incomes extracted by serfs are well framed and illuminated by Dennison (2006).

29

REFERENCES
Allen, Robert C. 2003. Farm to Factory: A Reinterpretation of the Soviet Industrial
Revolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Allen, Robert C., Jean-Pascal Bassino, Debin Ma, Christine Moll-Murata, and Jan Luiten
van Zanden. 2011. “Wages, Prices, and Living Standards in China, 1739-1925: in
comparison with Europe, Japan, and India” Economic History Review 64.1: 8-38.
Anfimov, A. M. 1984. Ekonomicheskoe polozhenie i klassovaia bor’ba krest’ian
Evropeiskoi Rossii v 1881–1904 gg. Moscow, Nauka.
Alvaredo, Facundo and Anthony B. Atkinson. 2010. “Colonial Rule, Apartheid and
Natural Resources: Top Incomes in South Africa 1903-2005”. OxCarre Research
Paper No. 46.
Arroyo Abad, A. L. 2009. “Inequality in Republican Latin America: Assessing the
Effects of Factor Endowments and Trade,” Global Prices and Income History
Group Working Paper No. 12.
Ascher, Abraham. 1988. The Revolution of 1905: Russia in Disarray. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. 2011. “Top Incomes in the
Long Run of History”. Journal of Economic Literature 49.1: 3-71.
Bergson, Abram. 1984. “Income Inequality under Soviet Socialism,” Journal of
Economic Literature 22.3: 1052-1099.
Bergson, Abram. 1944. The Structure of Soviet Wages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Campbell, Bruce. 2007. “Benchmarking medieval economic development: England,
Wales, Scotland and Ireland c. 1290,” Economic History Review, 60: 1-50
Chaudhary, Latika, Aldo Musacchio, Steven Nafziger, and Se Yan. 2012. “Big BRICs,
Weak Foundations: The Beginnings of Public Elementary Education in Brazil,
Russia, India, and China,” Explorations in Economic History 49.2: 221-240
Chaianov, Alexander. 1986. The Theory of the Peasant Economy. Edited by David
Thorner, Basile Kerblay and R.E.F. Smith. Madison, WI: The University of
Wisconsin Press.
Dennison, Tracy. 2006. “Did Serfdom Matter? Russian Rural Society, 1750-1860”.
Historical Research, 79.203: 74-89.
Dennison, Tracy, and Steven Nafziger. (forthcoming) “Micro-Perspectives on Russian
Living Standards.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History.
Field, Daniel. 1989. “The Polarization of Peasant Households in Prerevolutionary Russia:
Zemstvo Censuses and Problem of Measurement,” Research in Economic History
Supplement 5: 477-505.
Fenske, James. 2012. “Land Abundance and Economic Institutions: Egba Land and
Slavery, 1830-1914.” Economic History Review 65.2: 527-555.
Gatrell, Peter. The Tsarist Economy: 1850-1917. London: Batsford, 1986.
Gorlin, Robert H. 1977. “Problems of Tax Reform in Imperial Russia.” Journal of
Modern History 49: 246-265.
Goodwin, Barry K., and Thomas Grennes. 1998. “Tsarist Russia and the World Wheat
Market.” Explorations in Economic History 35: 405-430.

30
Gregory, Paul R. 1980. “Grain Marketings and Peasant Consumption, Russia, 18851913." Explorations in Economic History 17.2: 135-164.
Gregory, Paul R. 1982. Russian National Income, 1885-1913. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Harrison, Mark. 1977. “Resource Allocation and Agrarian Class Formation: The Problem
of Social Mobility among Russian Peasant Households, 1880-1930,” The Journal
of Peasant Studies 4: 127-161.
Hellie, Richard. 1999. The Economy and Material Culture of Russia 1600-1725.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hoch, Steven. 1994. “On Good Numbers and Bad: Malthus, Population Trends and
Peasant Standard of Living in Late Imperial Russia,” Slavic Review 53.1: 41-75.
Hoffman, Philip T., David Jacks, Patricia Levin, and Peter H. Lindert. 2002. “Real
Inequality in Western Europe since 1500,” Journal of Economic History 62.2:
322-355.
Ianson, Iu. 1881. Opyt statisticheskago izsledovaniia o krest'ianskikh nadelakh i
platezhakh. St. Petersburg: M. Stasiulevich.
Johnson, Robert E. 1997. “Family Life-Cycles and Economic Statification: A Case-Study
in Rural Russia,” Journal of Social History 30.3: 705-731.
Kotsonis, Yanni. 2004. “‘Face to Face’: The State, the Individual, and the Citizen in
Russian Taxation, 1863-1917,” Slavic Review 63.2: 221-46.
Koval’chenko, Ivan D. 1967. Russkoe krepostnoe krestianstvo v pervoi polovine XIX
veka. Moscow.
Kuznets, Simon. 1976. “Demographic Aspects of the Size Distribution of Income: An
Exploratory Essay,” Economic Development and Cultural Change 25: 1-94.
Lenin, Vladimir I. 1974. The Development of Capitalism in Russia. Moscow: Progress
Publishers.
Lindert, Peter H. 1987. “Who Owned Victorian England? The Debate over Landed
Wealth and Inequality,” Agricultural History 61.4: 25-51.
Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1982. “Revising England’s Social Tables,
1688-1812,” Explorations in Economic History 19.4: 385-408.
Markevich, Andrei, and Mark Harrison. 2011. “Great War, Civil War, and Recovery:
Russia's National Income, 1913-1928,” Journal of Economic History 71, no. 3:
672-703.
McAuley, Alastair. 1979. Economic Welfare in the Soviet Union. Madison, WI:
University of Wisconsin Press.
Merl, Stephan. 1990. “Socio-Economic Differentiation of the Peasantry.” In R. W.
Davies (ed.), From Tsarism to the New Economic Policy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Milanovic, Branko, Peter H. Lindert, and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2011. “Pre-Industrial
Inequality,” Economic Journal 121: 255–272.
Minarik, L. P. 1971. Ekonomicheskaia kharakteristika krupneishikh zemel'nykh
sobstvennikov Rossii kontsa XIX - nachala XX v. Zemlevladenie,
zemlepol'zovanie, sistema khoziaistva. Moscow: n. p.
Mironov, Boris N. 2005. “The Burden of Grandeur: Physical and Economic Well-Being
of the Russian Population in the Eighteenth Century.” In Robert C. Allen, Tommy

31
Bengtsson, and Martin Dribe (eds.), Living Standards in the Past: New
Perspectives on Well-Being in Asia and Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mironov, Boris N., with Ben Eklof. 2000. A Social History of Imperial Russia, 17001917. Two vols. Boulder: Westview Press.
Mironov, Boris N. 2010. Blagosostoyanie naselenia i revoliutsii v imperskoi Rossii.
Moskva: Novyi khronograf.
Modalsli, Jørgen. 2011. “Inequality and Growth in the Very Long Run: Inferring
Inequality from Data on Social Groups,” Working paper, University of Oslo.
Morrisson, Christian and Wayne Snyder. 2000. “The Income Inequality of France in
Historical Perspective,” European Review of Economic History 4: 59-83.
Nafziger, Steven. 2010. “Peasant Communes and Factor Markets in Late NineteenthCentury Russia,” Explorations in Economic History 47.4: 381-402.
Nafziger, Steven. 2011. “Did Ivan’s Vote Matter? The Political Economy of Local
Democracy in Tsarist Russia,” European Review of Economic History 15: 393441.
Nunn, Nathan. 2008. “The Long Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 123.1: 139-176.
Pintner, Walter M. 1980. “The Evolution of Civil Officialdom, 1755-1855.” In W. M.
Pintner and D. K. Rowney (Eds.), Russian Officialdom: The Bureaucratization of
Russian Society from the Seventeenth to the Twentieth Century. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
Prokopovich, Sergei. 1918. Opyt Izucheniia narodnogo dokhoda 50 gub. Evropeiskoi
Rossii. Moscow.
Rashin, A.G. 1958. Formirovanie rabochego klassa Rossii. Moscow.
Robinson, Geroid. 1972 [1932]. Rural Russia under the Old Regime. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Russia, Departament okladnykh sborov, Ministervo Finantsov. 1903. Materialy
vysochaishe uchrezhdennoi 16 noiabria 1901 g. kommissii po izsledovaniiu
voprosa o dvizhenii s 1861 g. po 1900 g. blagosostoianiia sel'skago naseleniia
srednezemledel'cheskikh gubernii, sravnitel'no s drugimi mestnostiami
Evropeiskoi Rossii. 3 vols. St. Petersburg, Russia: P.P. Soikin.
Russia, Ministerstvo Finantsov. 1906. Opyt’ priblizitel’novo ischislenia narodnovo
dokhoda po raslichnym evo istochnikam I po razmeram v Rossii. St. Petersburg,
Russia: P.P. Soikin.
Russia, Ministerstvo Finantsov. 1910. Podokhodnyi nalog: Ozhidaemoe chislo
platel’shchikov, ikh dokhod i summa naloga, po isledovaniu proisvedennomu
podatnymi inspectorami i kazennymi palatami v 1909-10 g. St. Petersburg,
Russia: N. Ia. Stoikov.
Russia, Tsentral'nyi statisticheskii komitet, Ministerstvo vnutrennykh del. 1906. Statistika
zemliavladeniia 1905 g. multiple vols. St. Petersburg, Russia.
Russia. Tsentral'nyi statisticheskii komitet, Ministerstvo vnutrennykh del. 1905.
Ezhegodnik Rossii 1904 g. St. Petersburg, Russia.
Shcherbina, F. A. 1900. Krest'ianskie biudzhety. Voronezh, Russia: Imperatorskoe
vol'noe ekonomicheskoe obshchestvo.
Shcherbina, F. A. 1897. “Krest'ianskie biudzhety i zavisimost' ikh ot urozhaev i tsen na
khleba”. In A.I. Chuprov and A.S. Posnikov (eds.), Vliianie urozhaev i khlebnykh

32
tsen na nekotoryia storony Russkago narodnago khoziaistva. St. Petersburg,
Russia: V. Kirshbaum.
Simms, James Y. Jr. 1977. “The Crisis in Russian Agriculture at the End of the
Nineteenth Century: A Different View,” Slavic Review 36.3: 377-98.
Sng, Tuan-Hwee. 2011. “Size and Dynastic Decline: The Principal-Agent Problem in
Late Imperial China 1700-1850.” Paper presented at the All-UC APEBH
conference, Berkeley, February.
Svavitskaia, Z. M., and N. A. Svavitskii, eds. 1926. Zemskie podvornye perepisi: 18801913. Moscow: n. p.
Troinitskii, N.A., ed. 1905. Multiple vols. Pervaia vseobshchaia perepis' naseleniia
Rossiiskoi imperii, 1897 g. Multiple vols. St. Petersburg, Russia: Central
Statistical Committee, Ministry of the Interior (TsSK, MVD).
Tugan-Baranovsky, M.I. 1970. The Russian Factory in the 19th Century. Translated by
Arthur Levin and Claora Levin. 3 ed. Homewood, IL: Richard T. Irwin.
Wheatcroft, Stephen G. 1991. “Crises and the Condition of the Peasantry in Late Imperial
Russia." In Esther Kingston-Mann and Timothy Mixter (eds.), Peasant Economy,
Culture, and Politics of European Russia, 1800-1921. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1991.
Wirtschafter, Elise. 1997. Social Identity in Imperial Russia. DeKalb, IL: Northern
Illinois University Press.

33
Table 1: Previous Partial Estimates of Russian / Soviet Income or Wealth
Distributions, 1880 - 1981
Year
1894
1897
1900
1900
1888
1900
1910
1888
1900
1910
1967
1905
1914
1928
1946
1956
1961
1981

Type of
Inequality
Gini
Gini
Gini
Gini
Gini
Gini
Gini
Gini
Gini
Gini
Gini
Top income
P90 / P10
P90 / P10
P90 / P10
P90 / P10
P90 / P10
P90 / P10

Inequality of
What?
Horse ownership, peasant households
Horse ownership, peasant households
Horse ownership, peasant households
Arable land holdings, peasant households
Arable land holdings, peasant households
Arable land holdings, peasant households
Arable land holdings, peasant households
Draft animals, peasant households
Draft animals, peasant households
Draft animals, peasant households
Incomes, non-farm households, pre-tax
Income share of top 1% of households
Wages, industrial sectors
Wages, industrial sectors
Wage and salary earnings, all sectors
Wage and salary earnings, all sectors
Wage and salary earnings, all sectors
Wage and salary earnings, all sectors

Inequality
Where?
Orel d., Orel province
Murom d., Vladimir province
Zadonsk d., Voronezh province
Poltava province
Konstantinograd d., Poltava p.
Konstantinograd d., Poltava p.
Konstantinograd d., Poltava p.
Konstantinograd d., Poltava p.
Konstantinograd d., Poltava p.
Konstantinograd d., Poltava p.
USSR
Russian Empire
USSR
USSR
USSR
USSR
USSR
USSR

Measure
0.497
0.572
0.473
0.608
0.484
0.576
0.606
0.434
0.467
0.39
0.229
0.15
5.55
3.49
7.24
4.44
4
3

Source
Field (1989), from zemstvo studies
Field (1989), from zemstvo studies
Field (1989), from zemstvo studies
Field (1989), from zemstvo studies
Field (1989), from zemstvo studies
Field (1989), from zemstvo studies
Field (1989), from zemstvo studies
Field (1989), from zemstvo studies
Field (1989), from zemstvo studies
Field (1989), from zemstvo studies
McAuley (1979)
Gregory (1982)
Bergson (1944)
Bergson (1944)
Bergson (1984, from Soviet source)
Bergson (1984, from Soviet source)
Bergson (1984, from Soviet source)
Bergson (1984, from Soviet source)

Note: These measures represent a select sample of inequality indicators collected from
the English-language secondary literature.

34
Table 2: Social Structure of Household Heads in European Russia, 1858-1913
Estate (Thousands of Households)
Nobility
Hereditary
Non-hereditary
Clergy (Christian)
Military
Army
Honored, titled
Merchants
Urban
Peasantry
Raznochintsy (“different ranks”)
Total households

1858
889
612
277
567
3,767
927
21
400
4,300
49,000
730
59,300

1870
861
544
317
609
3,981
704

Nobility
Clergy (Christian)
Army
Urban
Peasantry
Other
Totals

% Shares of Total Households
1.6
1.4
1.5
1.5
1.0
1.0
0.5
0.5
1.6
1.1
1.2
1.0
7.6
9.8
11.1
17.4
86.9
86.1
84.9
79.3
1.3
0.6
0.8
0.2
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0

6,091
53,600
383
65,500

1897
1,373
886
487
501

1913
1,936
1,249
687
697

1,095
308
240
10,493
80,100
738
93,200

1,320
611
22,716
103,300
258
128,900

Note: These data are compiled in Mironov (2000, 254) and revised in Mironov (2011,
645). The number of households in 1913 is reconstructed from church administrative data
(1895-1914) and the agricultural census of 1916. The totals for other years are from
population censuses. The number of “Honored, Titled” households in 1870 are
unavailable, while the number in 1913 includes merchants. Data on the full number of
military households are incomplete for 1897 and 1913.

35
Table 3: Household Heads by Economic Sector in European Russia, c. 1904

Agriculture (sel’skoe khoziaistvo)
Mining
Manufacturing
Construction
Trade, transport, communications
Administration (government)
Clergy
Free professions
Private service, servants &c
Other
Total households

Thousands of Households
Urban
Rural
Total
198.9 13,522.5 13,721.4
4.5
75.6
80.1
572.9
868.5
1,441.4
97.8
184.6
282.4
504.6
492.1
996.8
81.0
57.7
138.7
30.9
95.1
126.0
67.5
54.8
122.3
321.2
453.1
774.3
318.1
283.5
601.6
2,197.3 16,087.6 18,284.9

%
75.0
0.4
7.9
1.5
5.5
0.8
0.7
0.7
4.2
3.3
100.0

Note: These data are from Troinitskii, ed. (1905, vol. 8) and Russia, Tsentral’nyi (1905).
Table 4: Land Rental Incomes of Individual Owners in European Russia, c. 1904
Estate
Nobility
Clergy
Merchants &c
Townspeople
Peasants
Misc., foreign
Total

Households
(1000s)
264.8
98.7
106.0
1,950.4
15,435.2
429.8
18,284.9

Owners
(1000s)
87.9
8.5
22.5
84.9
622.2
37.6
863.5

Percent
owning
33.2
8.6
21.2
4.4
4.0
8.7
4.7

Land rents
(1000s r.)
247,679
3,999
58,616
42,463
42,634
11,775
615,316.6

Percentages of all
owners
rents
11.2
60.8
1.1
1.0
2.9
14.4
10.8
10.4
69.2
10.5
4.8
2.9
100.0
100.0

Rent per
owner
2,817
473
2,609
500
78
313
519

Note: The figures exclude urban realty. In addition to their individual private holdings,
these same estates held some land as shares in collective property holdings (property
owned by collective or partnership entities), amounting to about 12.3 percent of all
private land area. Most of this was held by the peasantry. The vast majority of the
peasantry also held shares of communal allotment land (nadel'nye zemli), generating an
estimated 447,858,172 rubles in rental incomes, excluded from this table. Merchants &c
= merchants and esteemed citizens (kuptsy i pochetnye). The sources of these data are the
owners and land areas from the 1905 land census (Russia, Tsentral’nyi, 1906); and rent
information from Russia, Ministerstvo (1906). For the derivation of these estimates, see
the file “Ownership of rural lands 1904 (Nafziger-Lindert)” at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu,
under Russia in the main data list.

36
Table 5: Estimated Peasant Household Incomes in European Russia, c. 1904
Households Total Incomes Income per
(1000s)
(1000 r)
Household
Households with Shares of Communal or Other Collective Holdings
Poor farmless laborers (land = 0)
687.9
152,096
221
Lower farm operators
3,770.8
1,199,049
318
Middle farm operators
7,117.8
2,894,742
407
Upper farm operators
2,569.3
1,442,951
562
Top farmers, not private owners
737.8
712,283
965
Households with Privately Owned Property
0 <1k
543.2
591,033
1,088
1k-2k
4.6
11,186
2,413
2k-5k
2.6
10,840
4,135
5k-10k
0.7
6,017
8,087
10k-20k
0.3
4,053
14,794
20k-50k
0.1
2,445
29,939
50k-up
0.008
897
116,456
Totals
15,435.3
7,027,591
455
Notes: “Poor farmless peasant laborers” is our estimate of households residing in
communal villages but without a share of allotment land. The 622.2 thousand individual
peasant land owners of Table 4 included 551.7 thousand private land owners described
here and the 70.5 thousand non-communal but collective land properties noted in Table 4.
The source for the 1897 population and household counts by sector is Troinitskii, N.A.,
ed. (1905, vol. 8), with population adjustments according to growth rates calculated with
the aid of Russia, Tsentral’nyi (1905, 40-53). Underlying data on wage incomes in the
1890s are from zemstvo budget studies reported in Russia, Departament (1903, 199 and
234-237). Zemstvo studies tended to average incomes per peasant household for
particular areas. Such studies yielded usable average household incomes for six provinces
from the 1890s and start of the twentieth century. See that Appendix B, plus the
derivations in the Excel File “Peasant incomes 1904 23mar12.xlsx” at
http://gpih.ucdavis.edu, under the Russia files.

37
Table 6: Opyt’ Estimates of Households with Incomes > 1000 Rubles, c. 1904

Land rents
Urban real estate
Commercial-industrial enterprise
profits
From financial investments
State service salaries (1905)
Urban government
Zemstvo officials
Personal productive enterprises
“Professions”
Doctors
Lawyers
Notaries
Writers
Totals [see notes]

Totals for households with incomes
above 1,000 rubles in the given category
Number of
Total income Income per
households (rubles, 1000s) household
52,764
318,442
6,035
46,143
214,270
4,644

(a)
(b)

67,170
55,235
91,204
4,521
7,830
30,144

531,335
239,066
180,745
8,113
12,576
86,994

7,910
4,328
1,982
1,795
1,606
2,886

(a)
(c)
(c)
(c)
(c)
(c)

8,237
4,705
1,267
435
369,655

30,954
17,564
3,850
1,769
1,645,680

3,758
3,733
3,039
4,066
4,452

(c)
(c)
(c)
(c)

Note: These data were derived from Russia, Ministerstvo (1906). Each row's counts of
persons and incomes refer only to its type of income source. As noted in the text, the
officials were unable to combine the different types of incomes for any given household.
The comments refer to: (a) = 50 provinces of European Russia, (b) = 49 provinces =
European Russia minus Arkhangel'sk, and (c) = unclear geographic coverage, probably
the 50 European provinces plus the returns from a few reporting provinces in the North
Caucuses and Transcaucasia, but excluding Finland, Poland, Central Asia and Siberia.
Russia, Ministerstvo (1906), itself, summarized the overall returns at the broader (c)
geographic basis. The totals reported in its Table XXIII were thus larger: 404,703
households, with incomes totalling 1,723,779,477 rubles. For details, see the file “High
incomes c1904, from the Opyt' (1906) study (Nafziger-Lindert),” under Russia in the
main data list at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu.

38
Table 7: Preferred Income Inequality Estimates for European Russia, c. 1904

Top 1 % of households
Top 5 % of households
Top 10 % of households
Top 20 % of households
Next 40 % of households
Bottom 40% of households
Gini coefficient

Income Shares
(% of total income)
13.5
22.7
31.9
47.7
31.0
21.3
0.362
Overall Mean
Overall Median

Mean Incomes
(rubles)
8,241.7
2,785.4
1,953.7
1,461.8
473.8
326.2
612.5
408.5

Note: These numbers reflect our preferred estimate as described in the text. Data and
further details may be found in the 1904 inequality file at http://gpih.ucdavis.edu.

39
Table 8: Income Inequality in Imperial Russia and Select Other Settings
Percent of all
income received by
Top 1%
Top 5 %
European Russia 1904
13.5
22.7
European and Offshoot Societies
England-Wales 1867
28.6
41.2
Sweden 1903
27.0
35.3
Finland 1922
14.9
32.0
USA 1917
17.6
30.3
Non-Western Societies
Japan 1907
18.3
32.3
China 1880s
19.7
Brazil 1872
11.2
Peru 1876
20.8
South Africa 1914
20.5
Colonial settings
Maghreb 1880
Kenya 1914
Kenya 1927
India 1922
12.7
Java 1880
Java 1924
14.4
More recently
Russia 1997
USA 2003
14.9
29.9
China 2003
Brazil 2001

Gini
coefficients
0.362
0.490

0.239
0.387
0.413

0.570
0.331
0.416
0.389
0.318
0.393
0.464
0.449
0.612

Note: The Russian estimates are the preferred estimates from Table 7. The main tertiary
sources are Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez (2011); Milanovic, Lindert, and Williamson
(2011); files available at the Global Price and Income History Group
(http://gpih.ucdavis.edu, “early income distributions”); and the World Bank’s DeiningerSquire inequality database at http://www.wider.unu.edu/research/Database/en_GB/wiid/.

40
Figure 1: The Geography of Landholding Inequality, c. 1905
Panel A.

Panel B.

Note: The underlying land data are taken from Russia, Tsentral’nyi (1906). Panel A
indicates inequality across only private holdings. In Panel B, the Gini are calculated
across all types of land holdings, including peasant shares of communal land.
“Ownership” in both measures is limited to the district – i.e. estates that spill across more
than one district would be counted as separate properties for these province-level
calculations.

41
Figure 2: The Geography of Household Income Levels, c. 1904

Note: For sources and the methodology behind the income calculations, see the text.

42
Figure 3: The Geography of Income Inequality, c. 1904

Note: The underlying sources and methodology for calculating income inequality are
discussed in the text.

43
Appendix A: Assumed Combinations of Estates and Sectors
As noted in the text, the available clues can be combined more efficiently if we
recognize that the output sectors (agriculture, mining, domestic service, government, etc.)
yielding average wage or salary data tend to be interplay with a household’s estate
(soslovie) status, which shapes household non-human wealth. The likely combinations
also differed between cities and the countryside.
This appendix lays out the assumptions we have made about these estate-sector
combinations, so that other scholars can judge whether or not our assumptions need to be
changed for a more accurate view of Imperial Russia’s levels and distributions of income.
We give a few illustrative assumptions here, and relegate the fuller details to the Excel
file “Households by estate (soslovie), sector (zanyatie), and province 1904 (NafzigerLindert)” in http://gpih.ucdavis.edu, under Russia in the main data list.
Table A.1 lays out the results of our assumptions, aggregated up to the 50province level. Our accounting system proceeded through the output (economic) sectors,
beginning with agriculture, and ending with industry-commerce as a residual. For each
output sector in turn, we made our best guesses about the social estates whose households
were employed in it. The residual numbers of households in each estate were then
carried over to the next estate, where further assumptions were made, and so forth. What
follow are a few of the main assumptions about the estate members that each sector
employed.
Agriculture. It is not hard to figure out which estates responded that their
professional was agricultural (in the 1897 census). They were overwhelmingly peasants,
with some nobility and miscellaneous (e.g. military) estates sprinkled on the side.
Luckily, the sum of households in these three estate groups exceeds the number of
agricultural households by a margin that might not be bad for deriving a residual share of
these estates that were devoted to the non-agricultural labor force. Granted, the allocation
of time is not the same as the allocation of persons' responses to the "what do you do"
question. But the shares should be similar. Assume that the shares of persons in these
estates not declaring themselves as agriculturalists equal the respective shares of these
estates’ labor spent outside of agriculture.
Clergy. The census gives more clergy as an occupation than it gives clergy as a
social estate. This is presumably because the occupational-sector question on the census
allowed the non-Russian-orthodox more leeway to declare clergy as their profession than
did the question on estate.
Free professions. These were presumably divided among households in many
different social estates. We were guided by the inter-province correlations between
estates percentage shares or all estates with free-profession shares of total household
employment.
Government. The Russia, Ministerstvo Finantsov (1906) study offered a
breakdown of the higher-paid strata of government between state, municipal-provincial,
and zemstvo administrators.

44
Table A.1: Assumed Household Numbers by Output Sector and Social Estate, c.
1904
Output sector
(zanyatie)
Agriculture
( " )
( " )
( " )
Servants
( " )
( " )
Clergy zanyatie
( " )
( " )
Free professions
( " )
( " )
Government admin.
( " )
( " )
( " )
Industry & commerce
( " )
( " )
( " )
( " )
( " )

Social estate
(soslovie)
Peasants
Nobility
Misc estates
Meshchane
Peasants
Misc estates
Meshchane
Clergy
Misc estates
Meshchane
Nobility
Merchants
Meshchane
Nobility
Merchants
Peasants
Meshchane
Nobility
Clergy
Merchants
Meshchane
Peasants
Misc estates
Totals

Numbers of households
Urban
Rural
Total
192,451
13,070,931 13,263,381
2,541
112,721
115,261
1,663
330,235
331,899
2,267
8,604
10,871
300,077
399,159
699,236
9,642
1,992
11,633
11,473
51,957
63,430
24,965
72,432
97,397
5,033
5,331
10,364
881
17,325
18,205
46,039
8,005
54,044
0
13,240
13,240
21,429
33,581
55,010
11,325
582
11,907
9,232
5,317
14,549
24,221
20,087
44,308
36,179
31,758
67,937
80,889
2,717
83,605
1,023
258
1,281
54,183
23,981
78,164
909,016
825,911
1,734,926
403,940
1,024,381
1,428,321
46,228
29,711
75,939
2,194,696
16,090,213 18,284,909

Note: The main sources of these data are from the 1897 census as published in
Troinitskii, ed. (1905), inflated to 1904 by population growth rates in from Russia,
Tsentral’nyi (1905). For details of the assumptions and estimates, see the file
“Households by estate and sector 1904” in http://gpih.ucdavis.edu, under Russia in the
main data list.

45
Appendix B: Stratifying Peasant Incomes
Gregory’s (1982) estimate of 15 percent of national income owned by the top one percent
of households (Table 1) relies on the data on high earners collected in Russia,
Ministerstvo (1906). A key contribution of our paper is to go beyond that source to
include the vast majority of households making less than 1000 rubles in 1904. Since these
were primarily peasants (roughly 85 percent of all households), constructing a plausible
estimate of Russian inequality requires grappling with the distribution of incomes within
this social estate. The result of this exercise is reported in Table 5 above.
Peasant households derived most of their income from land, which, by 1904, they
accessed via their membership in rural societies (sel’skie obshchestva – with the
associated “allotment land”) or through private ownership (either individually or as
members of quasi-corporate bodies). At the same time, peasants households also earned
income from a variety of other sources, especially in the Central Industrial Region
surrounding Moscow and St. Petersburg. We rely on a variety of zemstvo budget surveys
(especially Shcherbina, 1900; on Voronezh province) to document the contributions of
these other types of earnings to overall household incomes by the type and amount of
landownership. We vary the relative size of these contributions across provinces based on
provincial level industrial and agricultural wage data. Based on their primary source of
income, these peasant households can be allocated to different sectors as in Table A.1
(the sum of peasant households in this table equals the sum in Table 5).
To arrive at the distribution of peasant households in Table 5, we first draw on our
decomposition of private land ownership by social class (summarized in Table 4),
complemented by high agricultural earnings assigned to peasantry from Russia,
Ministerstvo (1906), to allocate non-communal peasant households to different income
strata. For households who receive land through their communal memberships, we take
into account the provincial-level variation in the size of these allotments (and their rental
values) in assigning households to different strata in the upper part of Table 5. This
assumes that land was allocated equally within a given commune. Chaianov (1986) and
others have argued that Russian peasants communal allotment holdings were closely
related to household size and structure – i.e. absolute equalization across households was
rarely observed. Although this would suggest some additional within-commune
inequality, our estimates of the distribution of allotment land across households closely
resemble available (micro) zemstvo accounts. The amount of allotment and non-allotment
land held by peasant households is taken from Russia, Tsentral’nyi (1906). Finally, based
on zemstvo data, we assume that 4.5 percent of peasant households were landless.
A complete accounting of all the assumptions underlying the distribution of incomes
among the peasantry may be found in the file “Peasant Incomes 1904” at
http://gpih.ucdavis.edu. This file contains citations to the relevant sources on wage data,
earnings by sector, and land holdings.

46
Appendix C: The Geography of Our Inequality Estimates
Our estimates draw on sources that are only available for European Russia, excluding
Finland and the Polish provinces. In 1904, this included the 50 provinces noted in Figure
C.1. By the 20th century, the Russian Empire also included Transcaucasia, Central Asia,
and Siberia. These regions had little in the way of large-scale industry (other than oil in
Baku), although a relatively small number of local and Russian elites did possess large
land and resource holdings (mines in Georgia; cotton fields in Bukhara and Samarkand;
etc.). It is unlikely that including these regions, with their relatively poor empirical
evidence, would affect our aggregate estimates.
Figure C.1: The Provinces of European Russia

47
Appendix D: Constraining the Importance of Across-Province Land Ownership for
Income Inequality
This appendix addresses the danger that the available data may have understated income
inequality by counting as separate landowners the separately recorded properties of one
landowner in different provinces. Minarik (1971) and other scholars utilizing the 1905
land data have voiced this concern.43
To address this possibility, one should begin by making an assumption about how people
answered the 1905 land census question about how much land they owned privately. Did
they respond by stating the land area only of the one property on which they resided, or
by stating the area they owned within their uezd or gubernia, or by stating the area they
owned throughout European Russia (or even the whole Empire)? Our tentative
assumption is that they answered by giving their holdings at the province (gubernia)
level. That is, we assume that the data collectors managed to consolidate most of each
owner's (non-urban-realty) land values within the same province into a single land total
for him. We need to worry only about inter-province mergers.
One might easily imagine that adding multi-province lands at the top of the distribution
might widen the inequality of income a great deal. Yet on close inspection, the 1905 land
census data place severe limits on how much greater the land inequality could have been
for the 50-province distribution of income as a whole. Here are some constraining facts
about the data:
(a.) The amount of land rental income is already fixed by the data sources, so that
giving more land to somebody at the top must take the same amount of land income from
others who are already landowners.
(b.) We already know how many properties there were in each rental value range
(e.g. those over 50,000 rubles, or 20,000-50,000, and so on down to landless), and their
total value. So consolidating them across classes means that every ruble we give to a
smaller number of owners has to be taken from other owners we have been putting in the
same ownership value range. In the over-50,000 range, giving extra lands from other
provinces to one owner reduces the other over-50,000 owners’ properties down toward
50,000 rubles each near the top of the income spectrum. While such a merger will
definitely raise inequality at the top, it does so only among rich landowners who are
within the top 0.0036 percent of the overall distribution.

43

Relying on an incredible amount of archival research, Minarik (1971) documented the 102 families that
owned more than 50,000 desiatina of land in total in the period 1890-1904. These households included 96
from the noble estate, 3 merchant families, 2 mining magnates, and one urban citizen. The 102 families
owned more than 650 separate properties scattered across all 50 provinces of European Russia.
Collectively, these households, which constituted less than 0.1% of noble estate households in 1897, owned
16.2 million desiatiny, or about ¼ of land owned privately by the noble and merchant estates together.
While these data would suggest some significant concentration of land at the high end of the property
distribution, taking such cross-province holdings into account in our inequality estimates, as we note below,
would likely have little effect on overall inequality.

48
(c.) Further, for each province and each value range, we know the social estate of
the owner. A merger of reported nobility-owned properties can only give extra land to
nobility at the expense of other top-land-owning nobility in other provinces. For
properties of nobles in the over-50,000-ruble range, concentrating lands from different
provinces into the hands of a few super-wealthy nobles, and driving other nobles’
landownership down toward 50,000 rubles would raise income inequality only among the
top 0.0030 percent of households.
(d.) Within each rental value range (again, over 50,000 rubles, or 20,000-50,000,
and so on down to landless), the fewest number of landowners there could be for
European Russia is the number of reported owners in the province having the largest
number of separately identified landowning households in that rental value range and that
social estate. The numbers of such minimum landowners (maximum separate owners in
a single province, for this value range and social estate = minimum possible number of
true owners for all 50 provinces) are as follows:
Numbers of
Rental
minimum
value range landowners
50k-up
51
20k-50k
116
10k-20k
222
5k-10k
316
2k-5k
545
1k-2k
1,383
under 1K, >0 3,911

Hypothetically
based in which
province?
Kherson
Podol’sk
Podol’sk
Podol’sk
Tula
Donskogo B. oblast’
Minsk

Merging how
many total
properties?
545
1,411
2,560
4,978
11,283
12,011
49,086

Consider this exercise, one implausibly overstating the inequality effect of an imagined
merger of lands across provinces. Support that, as much as possible, all rental properties
owned by nobles in the over-50,000-ruble class in each province were merged into the
hands of a single owner. Now the number of owners in any given class cannot be
reduced to zero, since we know there are at least as many owners in any province as the
data report. So for the over-50,000-ruble range there must have been at least as many as
51 owners of those 545 total properties, given that a maximum of 51 separate owners
were recorded for a single province, here Kherson. Giving as much of European Russia’s
properties worth over 50,000 rubles to one great owner must still leave at least 50,000
rubles of rental value for each of the others. Thus the hypothetically richest noble
landowner would have had 60.1 million rubles of land rents each year. If we did the
same for each other rental-value class, we would again create outstandingly rich
individuals receiving amounts of rents ranging from 15.3 million rubles (merging
properties in the 1,000-2,000-ruble range) up to that value of 60.1million rubles. Such
sizes of top estates are implausible, given the work of Minarik (1971) and others.
Such a hypothetical merger of properties, however, would only redistribute 9.4 million
rubles, or 0.084 percent of the 11,199 million rubles of national household income. It
would raise the gini coefficient only negligibly, from 0.362 to 0.363.

49

Furthermore, these hypothetical top rental estates of up to 60.1 million for the most
landed individual, would greatly exceed the total all-Russia incomes recorded in the
literature for any extended family. For example, scholars have estimated, or implied,
incomes of
1,302,000 for
1,244,013 for
1,050,000 for
954,000 for
730,588 for
695,568 for
350,000 for

Prince Iusupov 1900, at 6% income return;
Abamalek-Lazarev family 1904;
Bobrinskii, Graf, 1897, at 6% income return;
Orlov-Davydov, 1900, at 6% income return;
the average of 102 top owners (Minarik 1971);
Meklenburg-Stremlitskii, and
N.D. Anushkin.

Thus even this clearly implausible extreme redistribution among landowners of the same
social estates would have had only negligible impact on overall income inequality.

