NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND THE PRIVATE SUPPLY OF GREEN BUILDINGS
Timothy Simcoe
Michael W. Toffel
Working Paper 18385
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18385

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the AIC Lee-Chin Institute for Corporate Citizenship
at the University of Toronto’s Rotman School of Management and the Division of Research and Faculty
Development at the Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Timothy Simcoe and Michael W. Toffel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Public Procurement and the Private Supply of Green Buildings
Timothy Simcoe and Michael W. Toffel
NBER Working Paper No. 18385
September 2012
JEL No. L15,O33,Q55,Q58
ABSTRACT
We measure the impact of municipal policies requiring governments to construct green buildings on
private-sector adoption of the U.S. Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design (LEED) standard. Using matching methods, panel data, and instrumental variables, we find
that government procurement rules produce spillover effects that stimulate both private-sector adoption
of the LEED standard and supplier investments in green building expertise. Our findings suggest that
government procurement policies can accelerate the diffusion of new environmental standards that
require coordinated complementary investments by various types of private adopter.

Timothy Simcoe
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
tsimcoe@bu.edu
Michael W. Toffel
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
mtoffel@hbs.edu

Governments often use their formidable purchasing power to promote environmental policy
objectives. In the U.S., federal and many state agencies have incorporated environmental
attributes in their procurement policies for decades, and government green procurement policies
are especially prevalent in Europe where they are promoted by the European Commission.1 The
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the European Union, for example, have
developed environmentally preferable purchasing guidelines for goods ranging from paint, paper,
and cleaning supplies to lumber and electricity; many state and local governments have taken
similar steps (e.g., Clinton 1998; National Association of State Procurement Officials 2010;
Commission of the European Communities 2008). Some government green procurement policies
have focused on government buildings, spurred in part by their substantial aggregate energy
consumption (Coggburn and Rahm 2005, Commission of the European Communities 2008).
Several U.S. states and a growing number of municipalities have also implemented green
building procurement policies, most of which refer to the LEED standard (Environmental Law
Institute 2008; Rainwater 2009). Because government purchases account for 10-15 percent of
GDP in developed countries, government procurement policies can substantially bolster demand
for targeted goods and services.
Beyond directly increasing government-sector demand, some public procurement policies seek
to spur private demand (Marron 2003) or to spark cost-reducing innovation among suppliers
(Brander et al. 2003). The European Union, for example, justifies its environmental procurement
policy not only on the basis of leveraging government demand to “create or enlarge markets for
environmentally friendly products and services” but also on the basis of stimulating “the use of
green standards in private procurement” (Commission of the European Communities 2008: 2).
Similarly, an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) conference on
greener public purchasing noted that government green procurement policies can not only bring
about direct environmental benefits through government purchases, but “perhaps more
significantly” could encourage “the private sector to improve the environmental characteristics
of their own procurement strategies” and thereby indirectly elicit “the development,
commercialization and diffusion of less environmentally-damaging products and services.”2 This
1

For more on government procurement as a policy instrument, see Coggburn and Rahm (2005), Commission of the European
Communities (2008), McCrudden (2008); Michelsen and de Boer (2009), and National Association of State Procurement
Officials and Responsible Purchasing Network (2010).
2
Quoted from a “Summary of Proceedings of Workshop on ‘Budget, Financial & Accounting Issues in Greener Public

1

study is, to our knowledge, the first to investigate whether or not public procurement policies
actually generate these spillover effects.
We examine whether municipal green building procurement policies that apply only to municipal
buildings accelerate the use of green building practices by private-sector developers, as
manifested by more rapid diffusion of the U.S. Green Building Council’s (USGBC) Leadership
in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) standard for sustainable building practices. We
find that the LEED standard diffuses nearly twice as quickly among private-sector developers in
municipalities that adopt government-oriented green building procurement policies, when
compared to a matched control sample of cities of similar size, demographics, and environmental
preferences (e.g., citizen support for environmental ballot initiatives, Toyota Prius vehicle
ownership rates). We also show that the impact of these green building procurement policies
does not stop at the city line. In particular, we find more LEED adoption among “neighbor
cities”—those bordering a city that adopted a green building policy—compared to these
neighboring cities’ own set of matched controls. This neighboring-city effect suggests that our
estimates capture actual spillovers, rather than unobserved regulatory or political factors that
might drive both public and private procurement within a city.
To explain the link between public green procurement policies and the diffusion of the LEED
standard among private developers, we consider three mechanisms that could explain our main
results. First, government procurement policies might stimulate local private-sector demand for
green buildings by raising awareness, potentially legitimating a particular standard. Second,
government procurement might encourage the development of complementary input markets.
For example, if more architects, contractors, and consultants invest in green building skills and
credentials, a combination of learning-curve effects and increased competition could drive down
the cost of developing a LEED-certified building. Thirdly, there might be a coordination failure
in the market for green buildings, whereby developers are waiting for key suppliers to invest in
LEED expertise while those same suppliers are waiting for evidence of ample demand from
developers. In the case of green buildings, municipal government procurement policies might

Purchasing,’” organized by the OECD Environment Directorate and the Austrian Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Environment
and Water Management, Vienna, October 29-30, 2001 (Johnstone 2003: 225-235).

2

jump-start the development of specialized input markets by providing a guaranteed demand for
LEED-accredited professionals and other suppliers, thereby reducing their risk of investing in
LEED-specific capabilities.
We find no empirical support for the first two mechanisms described above, but do find some
evidence that supports the third option (i.e., overcoming “excess inertia” in the creation of a
LEED standard). First, we compare the effects of procurement policies across cities with varying
taste for green products. We find no evidence that procurement policies had a greater impact in
greener cities, which suggests that our estimates are not driven by an interaction between general
awareness of the LEED standard and latent demand for green buildings. Second, we allow the
effects of green building procurement policies to vary with city size. If procurement policies
mainly lower the price of private LEED certification by helping local suppliers reach efficient
scale (and consequently promoting price competition), these policies should have a greater
impact in small cities where specialized input markets should be less mature. In practice, we find
stronger policy effects in larger cities, suggesting that procurement policies do more than just
stimulate entry into the green building labor market. Finally, we use instrumental variables to
measure the causal impact of LEED Accredited Professionals3 on private developers’ LEED
adoption rates and vice versa. There can only be coordination failures in LEED adoption if both
effects are positive, which we find to be the case.4
Overall, our findings suggest that government purchasing policies can break deadlocks that
emerge when coordinated investments are required to adopt a common standard and that this
stimulates the private-sector market for the goods and services targeted by government green
procurement policies.
Related literature.—Our study contributes to three broad literature streams. First, we add to a
nascent literature that characterizes how governments are increasingly incorporating

3

Architects, contractors, consultants, suppliers, and others can learn about LEED and pass a test to earn the title of “LEED
Accredited Professional.”
4
To estimate the impact of an increase in LEED Accredited Professionals on private developers’ LEED adoption rates, we use
green building policy adoption in distant cities as an instrument for LEED Accredited Professionals in nearby cities. To show that
private developers’ LEED adoption rates cause an increase in the supply of LEED Accredited Professionals, we use new
construction starts (conditional on city size) to instrument for the level of LEED adoption.

3

environmental criteria into their procurement policies. Much of this work is descriptive. For
example, Coggburn and Rahm (2005) and May and Koski (2007) describe the emergence of
green building procurement policies within the U.S. federal and state governments. McCrudden
(2004) provides an historical context by recounting how governments have used procurement
policies to promote a host of social objectives. Michelsen and de Boer (2009) and Sourani and
Sohail (2011) identify barriers to implementing green building procurement policies and
capabilities that can overcome them. Marron (1997) and Marron (2003) describe the potential
impacts of government green procurement policies.
We also contribute to a second literature that examines the adoption and impact of green building
practices. Eichholtz, Kok, and Quigley (2010) provide the first large-scale evidence of private
benefits from green building, using building-level data to show that green-certified properties
have higher rents and occupancy rates than comparable properties in the same neighborhood.
Kok and Jennen (2012) report similar results. Kahn and Vaughn (2009) show that LEED
certification and Toyota Prius ownership were highly concentrated in wealthy coastal areas. Kok,
McGraw, and Quigley (2011) find that the LEED and Energy Star green building certification
programs have diffused rapidly across U.S. cities; their study revealed a positive association
between the supply of LEED Accredited Professionals and the growth rate of LEED
certification.
Unlike prior studies of LEED diffusion, ours focuses on spillovers from public procurement rules
to private adoption. Choi (2010) finds greater commercial LEED adoption in cities with
municipal policies that provide formal administrative benefits, such as quicker review cycles for
green building proposals, or that mandate commercial buildings to incorporate green features.
We provide evidence of spillover effects on private real estate development even when
municipal green building procurement policies do not provide explicit rules or incentives to
encourage private adoption.
Our study also contributes to the broad literature on quality certification. While this literature
typically emphasizes information problems (see Dranove and Jin (2010) for a review), we focus
on the role of network effects in the diffusion of a new standard. When the success of a new
4

quality standard depends on many different actors (such as producers, wholesalers, retailers, and
customers), certification programs will resemble a multi-sided platform, with adoption by one
group conferring an externality on the others. Farrell and Saloner (1986) model technology
adoption in the presence of network effects and coin the term “excess inertia” to describe the
familiar chicken-and-egg coordination problem whereby each side waits for the others to adopt.
Corts (2010) applies a two-sided platform perspective to study the diffusion of alternative fuels
and shows that government procurement of “flex fuel” vehicles that run on both gasoline and
ethanol led to increased supply of ethanol at local filling stations. We follow Corts by measuring
the impact of government procurement policies on the supply of complements, which in our
setting is the number of LEED-accredited real estate professionals (e.g., architects and general
contractors). We extend his analysis by measuring the impact of government procurement
policies on private adoption of the same goods and services and by evaluating a broader range of
potential mechanisms. Our results suggest that government procurement rules helped the LEED
standard overcome excess inertia in local real estate markets.
Finally, by examining the efficacy of government procurement, we contribute to a growing
literature evaluating alternative regulatory approaches such as voluntary programs and
agreements (e.g., Delmas and Montes-Sancho 2010; Toffel and Short 2011) and mandatory
information disclosure programs (e.g., Jin and Leslie 2003; Weil et al. 2006; Bennear and
Olmstead 2008; Kim and Lyon 2011; Doshi, Dowell, and Toffel 2012). With procurement
becoming an increasingly popular policy instrument (National Association of State Procurement
Officials and Responsible Purchasing Network 2010; Commission of the European Communities
2008), our research confirms the promise of this approach, at least in the context of green
building. More research is needed to reveal the conditions under which such policies are most
likely to be effective and to understand potential unintended consequences.
The balance of the paper is organized as follows: Section I outlines a simple framework for
analyzing the impact of green building procurement policies on the private sector and describes
the LEED standard. Section II describes our data, measures, and empirical methods. Section III
describes the empirical results. Section IV offers concluding remarks.

5

I. Public Procurement and Environmental Standards: Theory and Institutions
A. Procurement Spillovers in Theory
Government purchasing guidelines often use price preferences or quantity targets (typically
called set-asides) to reward products that meet environmental criteria such as incorporating
recycled content, exhibiting pollution levels well below regulatory limits, or exceeding voluntary
energy efficiency standards. These policies can significantly boost demand for the targeted
products and services through the government’s own procurement decisions, especially when the
government is a major customer. However, the impact of these procurement policies may extend
beyond this direct effect, depending on how government purchasing interacts with private-sector
procurement.5 In practice, governments often try to capitalize on this potential by designing
policies that they hope will “influence the behavior of other socio-economic actors by setting the
example, and by sending clear signals to the market-place” (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 2000: 20).6
In principle, government procurement policies can influence private-sector purchasing through
supply channels, demand channels, or both. Moreover, the private-sector response to a
government green purchasing policy might either reinforce or counteract that policy’s direct
impacts.7
Supply Channels.—On the supply side, government green procurement policies can stimulate
private-sector demand for the targeted products and services when increased government
purchases reduce suppliers’ average costs, such as when there are significant scale economies or
learning-curve effects in key input markets.8 When fixed costs are large relative to the size of the
5

Marron (2003) estimates that government purchases account for less than 20 percent of expenditures in all nondefense product
categories.
6
For example, a stated objective of the Massachusetts environmental purchasing policy governing the state’s agencies was to
“encourage manufacturers and service providers to incorporate environmental and sustainability considerations into their
products and operations locally, nationally, and even globally” (Patrick 2009). Similarly, one of the priorities of the United
Kingdom government’s “sustainable procurement” initiative is “stimulating the market to develop more sustainable solutions”
(United Kingdom Office of Government Commerce 2010).
7
Donald Marron (2003) provides a general analysis and discussion of green public purchasing.
8
For instance, many military technologies require substantial up-front R&D expenditures and rely on the scale economies
produced by military procurement programs to reach cost levels that are suitable for civilian application. This theory is closely
related to the “induced innovation” hypothesis that procurement preferences lead to increased competition and innovation on the
targeted product or service attributes. For example, Siemens (2003) suggests that a preference for the Energy Star label in

6

market, government purchases might also spur entry, leading to more competition and lower
prices (Bresnahan and Reiss 1991).
An alternative theory of positive procurement spillovers is that explicit government preference
for a particular product or standard will help private market participants overcome excess inertia
in the adoption process. By stimulating the supply of goods that meet a particular standard,
government demand can provide a focal point for private demand. This theory assumes that
private suppliers and customers cannot independently internalize the benefits of a more
coordinated supply chain, perhaps because of the risk that prior investments in specific standards
and systems will be stranded or underutilized.9 For example, the U.S. Department of
Agriculture’s (USDA) organic certification program was developed partly in response to
concerns that farmers and consumers were confused by a proliferation of competing private
organic labels and could not coordinate on a common standard (Fetter and Caswell 2002).
In principle, government procurement policies could also have negative spillovers that stifle
private consumption. When supply is inelastic, for example, government procurement rules
might reduce private purchases of the targeted goods through the well-known mechanism of
“crowding out” (Marron 1997).10 Alternatively, if procurement rules define a sharp cutoff
between green and brown products, the private supply of environmental goods might become
concentrated just above the green-compliance threshold. If some suppliers would have produced
greener products in the absence of a sharp cutoff, then environmental procurement rules could
actually reduce the supply of green goods, even as they increase compliance by some firms.11
Demand Channels.—Government procurement policies might also produce a shift in the private
demand curve, as opposed to movement along it. For example, procurement policies could
government computer purchasing led to increased innovation in energy-efficient electronics.
9
Rochet and Tirole (2006) show that a similar coordination failure as the central assumption in the literature on multi-sided
platforms.
10
While we could find no clear examples of crowding out in green procurement, there is some evidence that the supply of green
power is inelastic, so government subsidies for green electricity are primarily spent on marketing and advertising these higherpriced services to end consumers, as opposed to investing in new generation facilities (Rader 1998).
11
This seems especially likely when procurement policies are based on voluntary standards developed by firms with strong
incentives to preempt more stringent regulation (Lyon and Maxwell 1999; King and Lenox 2000; Reid and Toffel 2009).
Interestingly, this suggests that government purchasing policies should sometimes avoid specifying particular private standards,
especially when there are questions about the motives of the developers of those standards or about the stringency of the private
certification.

7

increase the visibility or credibility of a green product (or label) to private consumers, especially
when consumers are unable to evaluate claimed environmental benefits on their own. Put
differently, procurement policies might unleash latent demand for green goods simply by raising
consumer awareness. We expect these information-based demand-side effects to be most salient
when the green product or label has minimal market share, so awareness is relatively low.
Government procurement rules could also influence private demand by altering the weight that
consumers attach to specific policy priorities. For instance, a government could exercise moral
suasion, leading private firms and consumers to follow its purchasing guidelines, if those parties
are already favorably disposed towards the underlying policy goals. On the other hand, public
procurement might crowd out private demand if consumers come to perceive that the public
sector is already “doing enough” to support those same goals.
Government Green Building Procurement Policies.— In practice, the importance of any supplyand demand-side channel depends on specific features of that product’s market. There are several
reasons to expect that, in our analysis, private demand will respond positively to government
green building procurement policies. First, government is an especially large customer in the real
estate market. With 26.3 percent of all spending on “maintenance and repair construction”
coming from federal, state, and local government (Marron 2003), this industry’s share of total
government purchases is second only to that of munitions. Second, builders can realize direct
benefits from green investments that produce energy savings or that increase tenants’ willingness
to pay (Eichholtz, Kok, and Quigley 2010). Third, our analysis covers a period when LEED was
just emerging as the dominant standard for green building certification (see Figure 1), so
government procurement policies could plausibly jump-start key input markets if suppliers were
waiting on private developers to commit to a standard. While each of these factors suggests that
we should observe a positive correlation between government green building procurement
policies and private-sector green building certification, they also suggest that we should be
cautious about extrapolating our findings to settings with mature standards and technologies, few
direct benefits, or a small share of government purchases.

8

B. LEED Certification and Accreditation
LEED is a green building certification program developed and administered by the nonprofit
USGBC. Started in 1998, LEED initially focused on rating the environmental attributes of new
construction and has since added rating schemes for commercial and retail interior design,
residences, neighborhoods, and building renovation.
LEED awards points for incorporating specific design elements or meeting environmental
performance targets in eight categories: location and planning, sustainable sites, water efficiency,
energy and atmosphere, materials and resources, indoor environmental quality, innovation and
design, and regional priority. All certified projects must achieve a minimum number of points in
each category; more total points qualify projects for increasingly prestigious certification levels:
certified, silver, gold, and platinum.
The LEED certification process begins with the developer registering a project with USGBC,
which “serves as a declaration of intent to certify” the building, provides the developer access to
LEED information and tools, and lists the project in the publicly available online LEED project
database (Green Building Certification Institute 2011). Once the construction or renovations
have been completed and the certification application is submitted, reviewed, and approved, the
applicant is sent a plaque (often displayed in the lobby in commercial buildings) and the project
is included in the online LEED database of certified projects.
The cost of adopting the building practices necessary to obtain LEED certification varies by the
type and scale of project and by the certification level. Costs accrue by coordinating the required
design elements and using more expensive materials and technologies. The activities required to
achieve LEED points range from relatively cheap (such as installing bike racks) to quite
expensive (remediating a brown-field site). The administrative costs of LEED certification are
small by comparison, amounting to roughly $450-600 to register a project with USGBC and an
additional $2,000 certification fee. Some developers hire a consultant to provide guidance on the
LEED-eligibility of particular design choices and procurement decisions and to prepare the
LEED application.
9

The benefits of LEED can accrue from increased rents and occupancy rates and from reduced
operating costs. Several studies have found that LEED-certified buildings charge a 3-5 percent
rent premium and have higher sale prices and occupancy rates (Chegut, Eichholtz, and Kok
2012; Eichholtz, Kok, and Quigley 2010, forthcoming; Fuerst and McAllister 2011a, 2011b).
Evidence of reduced operating costs is mixed, in part because LEED certification emphasizes
design elements rather than energy consumption. Engineering studies suggest that LEED
certification is correlated with increased energy efficiency (Turner and Frankel 2008; Newsham,
Mancini, and Birt 2009; Sabapathy et al. 2010). For example, engineering estimates from a study
of 121 LEED-certified projects that volunteered data on energy use suggest that these buildings
consume 25-30 percent less energy than the national average for comparable projects (Turner
and Frankel 2008), though others have raised concerns that some LEED-certified buildings do
not deliver energy savings (Navarro 2009).
The LEED certification system debuted in 1998 but did not achieve significant scale until the
second half of the 2000s. Figure 1 shows the number of new LEED registrations per year from
2000 to 2007. This figure reached 1,000 in 2005 and jumped to 4,000 in 2007 (the peak of the
real estate cycle).12 LEED’s growth reflects several factors, including increased awareness of the
program, a growing installed base of LEED Accredited Professionals, and the creation of new
LEED certification programs for building categories such as homes and renovations. Figure 1
also shows that federal, state, and local governments have been significant LEED adopters since
the program began.
C. Empirical Roadmap
Our analysis of LEED diffusion builds on the idea that the standard resembles a multi-sided
platform that facilitates interactions among real-estate developers and suppliers of green-building
inputs (e.g., professional services or building materials). Thus, our first set of empirical results
measures the strength of “same side” spillovers in LEED adoption between government and
private developers.13 Specifically, we find a positive relationship between the adoption of
12
The LEED-registered project directory (www.usgbc.org/LEED/Project/RegisteredProjectList.aspx) shows that registrations
continued to accelerate in 2008 and 2009 even as the overall market for commercial real estate markets cooled off.
13
We borrow the “same side” terminology from the literature on multi-sided platforms to denote an externality between two

10

government green building procurement policies and the number of LEED-registered privatesector buildings. This relationship could exist for a variety of reasons, including demonstration
effects, moral suasion, scale economies, learning effects, anticipated regulatory changes, and a
correlation between municipal green building policies and preferential treatment in the municipal
permitting process for developers offering green buildings. We attempt to rule out several of
these explanations by examining whether or not green building procurement policies have a
greater impact in larger or greener cities and by measuring the policies’ impact on private
developers in neighboring cities, who would benefit from spillovers produced by a focal city’s
green building policy but would not, for example, receive preferential treatment in its permitting
process.
Our second set of empirical results measures the strength of “cross-side” spillovers in LEED
adoption between developers and building-industry professionals.14 As with any platform, a
larger installed base on one side should generate an increased supply of complements on the
other. We show that government green building procurement policies stimulate investment in
green building expertise among local real estate professionals (measured as the number of LEED
Accredited Professionals). In principle, real estate professionals might invest in this green
building know-how without any government encouragement or formal certification program if
they expected this human capital to be rewarded in the marketplace. However, uncertainty about
whether and how the market will observe, measure, and reward green building creates a
possibility of stranded investment and thus an opportunity for government procurement
spillovers.
While our analysis of “cross-side” spillovers examines the impact on LEED-accredited real
estate professionals, we expect government green building procurement policies to jump-start a
host of complementary input markets. For instance, producers and local distributors of building
materials might be more likely to carry products that meet LEED criteria after a green building
procurement policy is adopted. Viewing the number of LEED Accredited Professionals as a
proxy for a host of specialized green inputs helps clarify why developers might be slow to adopt
groups of users that do not transact with one another but typically use a standard or platform in a similar way.
14
In the literature on multi-sided platforms, a “cross-side effect” is a positive externality between two groups that use a platform
to interact with one another, such as video game players and video game developers.

11

LEED even if they believed there is latent demand for green buildings: the cumulative expense
of being a green first-mover could be large, even if contractors and architects constitute a small
share of total construction costs.
In our final set of analyses, we switch from measuring the reduced form impacts of government
green procurement policies to measuring the structural links between each side of the LEED
platform. In particular, we estimate the causal impact of LEED Accredited Professionals on
private-sector LEED registrations by using “distant” green procurement policies as an
instrumental variable. The key maintained assumption in this analysis is that municipal green
procurement policies in far-away cities increase the supply of LEED Accredited Professionals in
nearby markets, but are otherwise excluded from the LEED adoption decisions of private
developers in a focal market. To estimate the causal impact of LEED Registrations on LEED
Accredited Professionals, we use the number of new buildings constructed between 2003 and
2007 (conditional on city size) as an instrument for Registrations. We find that both of these
structural relationships are positive, which supports the theory that government procurement
policies may promote LEED diffusion by helping real-estate developers and building-industry
professionals overcome “excess inertia” in the early stages of the adoption process.
II. Data and Measures
To assess the impact of municipal green building procurement policies on private-sector
adoption of LEED-certified green building practices, we collected data on 735 California cities
from 2001 to 2008. We selected California primarily because it is the state with the largest
number of municipal green building policies. Our dataset combines information from a variety of
sources. We obtained LEED diffusion data from the USGBC, nonresidential construction starts
data from McGraw Hill, and city-level demographic data from the U.S. Census; we handcollected data on the municipal adoption of green building policies. Summary statistics are
presented in Table 1.
We use two main outcome variables to measure the diffusion of LEED within the private sector
and one variable to measure government LEED adoption. All of our outcomes are based on data
obtained from the USGBC. Our unit of analysis is the city (or city-year), where we define cities
12

in terms of a Census Place, the geographical unit with available Census demographics and voting
records data that most closely resembles the political unit of a municipality.
LEED Registrations—Annual Private LEED Registrations is an annual count of new privately
owned nonresidential or multi-unit residential buildings that registered for LEED certification.
This number reflects private-sector developers’ intention to use green building practices.15 Total
Private LEED Registrations is the total (cumulative) number of Annual Private LEED
Registrations for each city during our sample period of 2001 to 2008. This total ranged from 0 to
99 across all the cities in our estimation sample (which excludes Los Angeles, San Francisco,
San Diego, and San Jose).16 On average, there were two new LEED-registered buildings in a city
in our sample over this time period.
We also created a count of Annual Government LEED Registrations to verify that municipal
government green procurement policies actually lead to an increase in government LEED
procurement. This variable is a count of new nonresidential structures that are owned by a local
government and that were registered for LEED certification. Total Government LEED
Registrations is each city’s total number of Annual Government LEED Registrations from 2001
to 2008. The cities in our sample registered a total of 0 and 12 new government buildings, with
an average of 0.3 LEED-registered buildings per city between 2001 and 2008.
LEED Accredited Professionals—Our second outcome measure captures LEED-specific human
capital investments by local real estate professionals. Annual LEED Accredited Professionals is
the annual number of building industry professionals (such as architects, contractors, and
consultants) who passed the USGBC’s LEED accreditation exam between 2001 and 2008. This
exam certifies that such professionals have knowledge of green building practices in general and

15

LEED registration is only the first step towards certification. The USGBC encourages projects to register early, since many
decisions that will influence certification levels must be taken at early stages of the development process. Because the lag from
registration to certification can be several years and the LEED standard was diffusing rapidly toward the end of our sample
period, a count of certified buildings would have excluded a large number of projects in our data set. For the buildings for which
we have certification data, the average lag between registration and certification is between two and three years. Anecdotal
evidence suggests that few registered buildings fail to certify at some level. A drawback of relying on the number of LEED
registrations or of LEED certifications is that they do not contain any information on the environmental impact of certification, a
topic we leave to future research.
16
We exclude the four largest cities in California when calculating these summary statistics, since they (a) could not be matched
for the analysis below and (b) tend to distort the sample averages due to their extreme size.

13

the LEED standard in particular. In 2004, it cost roughly $350 to take this test. Total LEED
Accredited Professionals is the total number of Annual LEED Accredited Professionals from
2001 to 2008. We obtained the city locations of LEED Accredited Professionals from their
business addresses maintained in the USGBC directory of LEED Accredited Professionals. By
2008, there were between 0 and 416 such professionals in each city in our estimation sample,
with an average of 7.5 per city.
Government Procurement Policies—Our main explanatory variables indicate whether or not a
focal city (or a city that borders a focal city) had adopted a municipal green building policy
targeting only government buildings by the current calendar year. We gathered this policy
information by hand, starting from lists compiled by the USGBC and the U.S. Department of
Energy-funded Database of State Incentives for Renewables and Efficiency (DSIRE).17 We
identified 155 U.S. cities that had adopted some type of green building ordinance by 2008. Forty
were in California, though we exclude from our analysis seven cities whose regulations impose
green building mandates on private-sector development. (The municipal green building
procurement policy adopter cities in California are listed in the Appendix.)
Municipal green building policies vary along several dimensions, including the types of structure
affected (by size, owner, and use); whether they cover only new buildings or also renovations;
and how they measure environmental performance. We gathered details on each policy from city
websites and the online library of municipal codes.18 Our research indicates that 87 percent of all
green building polices contained a purchasing rule—that is, a requirement that new public
projects adhere to some type of environmental standard—and that 90 percent of these rules
specified the LEED standard.
For cross-sectional models, we create a time-invariant indicator variable, Green Policy Adopter,
that equals 1 if a city had adopted a green procurement policy by 2008 and equals 0 otherwise.
For panel data models, we create a time-varying indicator variable, Green Policy Adopted, coded

17

We acknowledge the excellent research assistance provided by Mark Stout. The DSIRE list of state and local incentives is
available
at
http://www.dsireusa.org/
and
the
USGBC
list
can
be
found
at
http://www.usgbc.org/PublicPolicy/SearchPublicPolicies.aspx?PageID=1776 .
18
Available at www.municode.com.

14

1 starting the year a city adopted a green procurement policy and 0 before that. Similarly, for the
neighboring city analysis, we create (a) a time-invariant indicator, Green Policy Adopter
Neighbor, that equals 1 for cities that had not adopted a green procurement policy but bordered a
city that had done so by 2008, and equals 0 otherwise, and (b) a time-varying indictor variable,
Green Policy Adopted Neighbor, coded 1 for cities that had not adopted a green procurement
policy but bordered a city that had done so by the focal year, and coded 0 otherwise. Four
percent of the cities in our estimation sample had adopted a municipal green building policy by
2008 and 15 percent of the cities in our sample are green policy adopter neighbors. While our
matching procedure (described below) excludes Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Diego, and San
Jose from the analysis of procurement policy adopters, each of these cities does in fact adopt a
green building procurement policy, and therefore provides variation in the treatment condition
used in the neighbor city analysis.
Construction Activity—To control for variation in the underlying rate of new building activity,
we purchased data on new building starts from McGraw Hill’s Dodge Construction Reports. The
control variable Total New Buildings is a cumulative count of nonresidential construction starts
between 2003 and 2007 (the years we could afford to purchase). The mean number of new
nonresidential construction starts for a city in our estimation sample from 2003 to 2007 was
26.21. Since this variable is highly skewed and strongly correlated with city population (ρ =
0.88), we also calculated the number of new Buildings per Capita.
Demographics—For each city in the analysis, we obtained Population (measured in units of
10,000), Income (median household income in $10,000s), and College (the share of adults with
some college education) at the Census-Place level from the 2000 U.S. Census.
Environmental Preferences—We collected several measures of a city’s prevailing preference for
environmental sustainability. First, we gathered data on citizens’ political preferences by
calculating Green Ballot Share as the proportion of citizens’ votes in favor of statewide ballot
initiatives addressing environmental quality (Kahn 2002; Wu and Cutter 2011). Using data from
University of California’s Statewide Database (http://swdb.berkeley.edu/), we calculated the
proportion of votes in favor of various environmental ballot initiatives during 1996-2000 within
15

the Census Place that best corresponded to each city. These ballot initiatives received support
from an average of 61 percent of each city’s citizenry.
Second, we obtained data on green purchasing behaviors by calculating the proportion of
vehicles registered in 2008 that were Toyota Priuses, based on ZIP-code-level vehicle
registration data from RL Polk (Kahn and Vaughn 2009; Kahn 2011). We aggregate these
registration data to the city level to reflect the Prius market share in each city, creating the
variable Prius Share, which has a mean of 0.54 percent.19
Finally, using data from the League of Conservation Voters (LCV), we calculated the proportion
of pro-environment votes on environment-related bills cast by each city’s delegates to the
California State Senate and House of Representatives. These variables, LCV Senate Score and
LCV House Score, range from 0 (for cities whose delegates voted against all environmentalrelated bills) to 100 (for cities whose delegates voted in favor of all such bills), with an average
near 50 for both the House and Senate across all cities in our estimation sample.

III. Analysis and Results
A. Matching and Balance
To generate unbiased estimates of the causal impact of government green building procurement
policies on private-sector LEED registrations and LEED-accredited professionals, we construct a
matched sample using the Coarsened Exact Matching (CEM) procedure developed by Iacus,
King, and Porro (2012). This approach assumes that, after stratifying and reweighting the data to
account for the distribution of observed exogenous variables, the endogenous treatment variables
(Green Policy Adopter and Green Policy Adopter Neighbor) are as good as randomly assigned.
Intuitively, CEM is just a method of preprocessing a dataset before running a weighted leastsquares regression. One begins by “coarsening” (discretizing) the variables in order to construct
a multi-dimensional histogram. The next step is to discard observations from any cell that does
not contain both treated and control observations. Finally, the units are weighted such that a
19

The highest Prius registration rate is 3.74 percent in Portola Valley (just west of Palo Alto).

16

weight of 1 is assigned to each treated unit, and a weight of Ti/Ci is assigned to each control
observation in cell i (where Ti and Ci are the number of treatment and control observations,
respectively, in the i-th stratum of the multi-dimensional histogram). Weighted least-squares
estimation then yields an estimate of the treatment effect for treated cities.
Iacus, King, and Porro (2012) describe several advantages of CEM over the propensity score and
other matching techniques. Unlike conventional regression control methods, CEM does not
extrapolate counterfactual outcomes to regions of the parameter space where there are no data on
controls. Because CEM is non-parametric, there is no possibility that a mis-specified model of
selection will produce greater imbalance in variables that are omitted from the matching
procedure, which can happen with the propensity score. Moreover, CEM ensures that the
reweighted control sample matches all of the sample moments of the treated sample, not just the
means.20 Finally, Monte Carlo tests and comparisons to experimental data suggest that CEM
outperforms alternative matching estimators that rely on the same fundamental assumption of
exogenous treatment conditional on observables.
We use CEM to construct two matched samples: one consisting of green policy adopters and
their quasi-control group and another consisting of green policy adopter neighbors and their
quasi-control group. In both cases, our goal is to achieve balance—statistically indistinguishable
distributions between the treatments and controls—across a set of exogenous covariates that
might lead to policy adoption, including environmental preferences (measured with Prius Share,
Green Ballot Share, LCV Senate Score, and LCV House Score), market size and growth
(Population, Total New Buildings, and Buildings per Capita), and income and education (Income
and College).
For the green policy adopters, we match on Population and Prius Share, which yields a matched
sample consisting of 26 adopters and 180 controls. When coarsening Population, we create 10
strata.21 This results in a very close match on the size distribution, but leads to a curse of
dimensionality (that is, very small samples) if we include many additional variables in the match.
20

This property of CEM proved important in our application, where the city-size distribution is highly skewed
We set cut points at 10, 50, 70, 100, 120, 150, 250, 300, 350, and 470 thousand inhabitants, and omit cities above the top
threshold because there are no suitable controls.
21

17

So, for the policy adopter cities, we add only Prius Share, with cut points at the 25th, 50th, 75th,
90th, and 95th percentiles.22 Because the green policy neighbors sample is somewhat larger, we
also match on Income, Green Ballot Share, and LCV Senate Score. However, to prevent a
substantial drop in sample size, we use a very coarse match for these additional variables.23 Our
final estimation sample for the neighbor city contains 80 green policy neighbors and 291
matched control cities. Green Policy Adopter cities are not used as potential controls for the
sample of Green Policy Adopter Neighbors.
Table 2 illustrates how CEM dramatically improves the balance in the means of exogenous
covariates across the treatment and control samples. Each row in the table reports means for the
treatment and control cities in a particular sample and a t-statistic from regressing each covariate
on the treatment dummy (Green Policy Adopter or Green Policy Adopter Neighbor). Panel A of
Table 2 compares all cities that adopt a green building policy, excluding the four largest, to the
full set of potential controls (that is, to all other cities in California) using unweighted OLS
regressions.24 Not surprisingly, we find that cities adopting a green building policy are larger,
greener, wealthier, and better educated than the potential controls. There is a statistically
significant difference in the means of each variable except for the per-capita measure of new
construction activity.
Panel B of Table 2 compares CEM-weighted means for the matched sample of green policy
adopters and their controls. Note that matching on Population and Prius Share excludes three
cities (Oakland, Berkeley, and Ventura) from the treatment group, reducing it to just 25 green
building procurement policy adopters. Since we used the distributions of Population and Prius
Share to construct the match, by construction we should observe no difference in the means of
these variables across treatment and control cities. In fact, Panel B of Table 2 shows that
matching on just these two dimensions eliminates the statistical significance of differences in the

22

In terms of actual registration rates, the corresponding values are 0.5, 0.8, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.7 percent of all registered vehicles.
For the neighbor-city matching, we leave the Population cut points unchanged. We continue to use the 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th,
and 95th percentiles of Prius Share, which correspond to registration rates of 0.26, 0.56, 1.21, 1.78, and 2.36 percent of all
vehicles. Finally, we set cut points at the 25th and 75th percentiles of Income ($44 and $70 thousand) and at the medians of
Green Ballot Share (67 percent approval) and LCV Senate Score (44 points).
24
Each of the four largest cities in California (Los Angeles, San Diego, San Jose, and San Francisco) has adopted a green
building procurement policy. Including these cities in the analysis leads to a dramatic increase in imbalance and a similarly large
increase in the results presented below.
23

18

means of all observables across the matched adopters and non-adopters.
Panel C of Table 2 compares means for green policy neighboring cities and their matched
controls. Once again, CEM matching and reweighting removes differences in the means of the
exogenous covariates. Though we do not show raw comparisons for green policy neighbor cities,
they are also larger, greener, wealthier, and better educated than the potential controls. As in
Panel A, the raw means of all variables are statistically significantly different across green policy
neighbor cities and the potential controls. For this sample, matching removes 31 green policy
neighbor cities and 324 potential controls.
B. Preliminary Graphical Analysis
Figure 2 illustrates how the CEM-weighted means of our two main outcome variables (Private
LEED Registrations and LEED Accredited Professionals) evolved in green policy adopters and
their neighboring cities relative to their matched controls from 2002 to 2008. All four bar graphs
in Figure 2 illustrate the same rapid acceleration in LEED diffusion that we observed in Figure 1.
And in all four cases, the effect is more pronounced for green policy adopters (or their
neighbors) than for the relevant matched and weighted control samples.25 We also observe a
small “bump” in LEED Accredited Professionals for both treated and control cities in 2004,
which was likely driven by anticipated changes in the USGBC exam that increased the costs of
becoming a LEED Accredited Professional.
The following sections use cross-sectional and panel regression to explore whether the
differences in the patterns observed for treatment and control cities in Figure 2 are statistically
significant. After finding that they do differ significantly, we use instrumental variables to
estimate the causal relationships between Total Private LEED Registrations and Total LEED
Accredited Professionals and we use interaction effects to investigate particular mechanisms that
might drive the procurement policy effects.

25

These patterns are even more striking if we do not use the CEM weights, since there are relatively more small cities in the
matched control samples and the weighting procedure makes these small markets less important.

19

C. Cross-sectional Analysis
Cross-sectional Model—We begin our empirical analysis with a cross-sectional comparison of
cumulative LEED adoption in the matched green policy adopters and control cities.26 The
Coarsened Exact Matching procedure described above creates a matched group of treatment and
control cities that are balanced with respect to all of the observable covariates we associate with
policy adoption. Under the assumption that assignment to the treatment group is independent of
potential outcomes conditional on observables, a simple t-test is sufficient to estimate the causal
impact of the green building procurement policy. Since adding controls might lead to increased
precision, we use OLS regression instead of a t-test.27 Specifically, we estimate the following
linear regression:
(1)

Yi = αi + β · GreenPolicyi + γ · Xi + εi ,

where Yi is either Total Government LEED Registrations, Total Private LEED Registrations, or
Total LEED Accredited Professionals in city i as of 2008. Xi represents a set of controls for
factors potentially associated with LEED adoption: environmental preferences (Prius Share,
Green Ballot Share, LCV Senate Score, and LCV House Score), market size and economic
growth (Population, New Buildings, and Buildings per Capita), educational attainment (College),
and wealth (Income).
As described above, the city-size and demographic variables were obtained from the 2000
Census, Prius registration data are from 2008, and the green ballot share is averaged over 19962000. We are interested in the coefficient β, which measures the difference in LEED adoption
between Green Policy Adopter cities and their matched controls (or alternatively, between Green
Policy Adopter Neighbors and their matched control cities).
Cross-sectional Results—We estimate this cross-sectional model using CEM-weighted OLS
regressions.28 The results are presented in the Panel A of Table 3. Columns 1-3 report estimates
from weighted OLS regressions that compare CEM-matched green policy adopters to their
26

The cross section is based on data through 2008.
It should be emphasized, however, that we do not use the control variables to extrapolate potential outcomes to regions of the
parameter space where there are very few treated or untreated units.
28
As stressed in Angrist and Pischke (2009), OLS provides the best linear approximation to the conditional expectation function,
even though Yi is a count variable. Estimating a model with an exponential conditional expectation function (i.e., Poisson with a
robust covariance matrix) produces similar results.
27

20

control cities.
Our estimates of the spillover effects of government procurement on private-sector demand are
found in Column 1. We find a statistically significant increase of 7.5 private LEED registrations
in cities with a green building policy. Since the weighted mean of private LEED registrations is
8.3, this estimate is a 90-percent increase in LEED adoption. The results in Column 2 show that
government green procurement policies—as intended—spur greater municipal green building.
We find an average of 1.6 more government LEED registrations in cities adopting a green
building procurement policy. While this is not surprising given that 90 percent of these policies
use LEED as the relevant yardstick, it is nevertheless reassuring to see a large and statistically
significant direct impact. Column 3 shows an increase of 15.7 LEED Accredited Professionals in
green policy adopting cities relative to their matched controls. This is an increase of roughly 38
percent beyond the weighted mean of 40.8, but is not statistically significant. This result is
statistically weaker than the private LEED registration result (Column 1) partly because real
estate professionals are often based in surrounding communities, an issue we discuss in detail
below.
Panel B in Table 3 shows that our estimates change very little if the CEM weights are dropped
from the OLS regression. We also found that the CEM-weighted results are robust to dropping
various groups of control variables and that the estimated treatment effect increases significantly
if we drop both the CEM weights and the regression controls or if we ignore the matching
procedure (results not reported).
Columns 4-6 in Table 3 focus on cities that border a green policy adopter. These models estimate
the effect of a green building policy on green policy neighbors compared to the effect on their
matched controls. We examine the policy impact on neighboring cities for three reasons. First,
the neighboring city sample might address lingering concerns about omitted variables (for
example, tastes for green-ness) that could influence both policy adoption and private-sector
LEED building rates. Second, the neighbors provide a larger and more representative sample of
“treated” cities. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the presence or absence of neighboringcity effects tells us something about the underlying mechanism that links government green
21

procurement policies to private-sector adoption of LEED. In particular, if the effect of green
policies within adopting cities is mainly driven by unobserved (to the analyst) regulatory or
zoning preferences for LEED projects, we would expect much smaller effects in neighboring
non-adopting cities that presumably do not offer such preferences. Put differently, we are
looking for evidence of spillovers, which should not stop at the city line.
We find a statistically significant increase of 0.9 private LEED registrations among neighbors
relative to their matched controls (Column 4). When normalized by the baseline registration rate
of 1.5 buildings per year, this translates to a marginal effect of 61 percent, which is somewhat
smaller than the 90-percent marginal effect for green policy adopters (Column 1). Again, these
results are robust to the omission of CEM weights and controls, as illustrated in Panel B. From
these findings, we conclude that the link between government green building procurement
policies and the private-sector adoption of green building practices is not solely due to
preferential treatment of green buildings by city-level zoning or permitting officials. Instead, our
results imply that these procurement policy effects reflect a spillover from green policy adopter
cities to private developers in neighboring cities. This interpretation of the neighbor-city effects
is also consistent with our finding (Column 5) that the number of government LEED
registrations is significantly higher in neighboring cities that do not themselves adopt a green
building procurement policy—but that might respond to the emergence of a LEED-based green
building infrastructure—than in these neighboring cities’ matched controls.
Finally, Column 6 in Table 3 presents weighted OLS estimates of the impact of being a green
policy neighbor on the number of LEED Accredited Professionals. We find a statistically
significant increase of 4.1 LEED Accredited Professionals, or roughly 56 percent of the weighted
mean for controls. This suggests that the market for architects, contractors, consultants, and
others with green building capabilities is regional, with spillover from policy adopters to
neighboring cities helping to explain the statistically weaker impact of policy adoption on LEED
Accredited Professionals in the policy-adopting cities themselves (Column 3). Put another way,
the expected effect was there, but we had to look further afield to see it.

22

D. Difference-in-Differences
We now exploit the panel nature of our policy-adoption and outcome measures to estimate
models that compare LEED diffusion in treatment and control cities before and after the adoption
of a green procurement policy. Specifically, we estimate the following two-way fixed-effects
model:
(2)

Yit = αi + λt + β GreenPolicyAdoptedit + γ · Xit + εit,

where αi is a set of city fixed effects that absorb all other time-invariant city-level covariates, λt is
a set of year dummies, and Xit measures annual nonresidential construction starts in city i in year
t. The coefficient β measures the impact of adopting a green building procurement policy on
treated cities. We estimate the model by OLS (without weights), assuming that, within our
matched sample, policy adoption is as good as randomly assigned after conditioning on city
fixed effects (Heckman and Hotz 1989).
The results of these difference-in-difference models are reported in Table 4. The large, positive,
and statistically significant estimates of β indicate a robust treatment effect for our main LEED
adoption outcomes in both samples. We estimate an increase of 2.3 private LEED registrations
per year in green policy adopters and 0.15 private LEED registrations per year in green policy
adopter neighbors. We also find a statistically significantly increase of 11.0 LEED Accredited
Professionals per year in the adopter cities and 1.2 per year in the neighboring cities.
In the bottom two rows of Table 4, we report F-tests of the null hypothesis that there is no
difference in the trends of the outcome variable between treatment and control cities prior to the
adoption of the green building procurement policy. To implement this test, we drop all
observations where GreenPolicyAdoptedit equals 1 from the estimation sample, add a new set of
indicator variables that equal 1 t years before a city i adopts a policy (where t equals 1 through
4), and report an F-test for the joint significance of these pre-policy indicators. We find no
evidence that private developers in green policy adopters had different LEED registration trends
than private developers in the control cities. However, there is some evidence that local
governments tried LEED before adopting the procurement policy and that real estate
professionals in policy adopter cities were becoming LEED-accredited at a higher rate before the
23

policies went into place.29 We find no difference in the pre-adoption trends for any outcome in
the policy adopter neighboring cities.
Since there is typically some public discussion prior to the adoption of a green building
procurement policy, it is not especially surprising to find real estate professionals moving
slightly ahead of the policy change. Indeed, our preferred interpretation of the results in Tables 3
and 4 is that municipal green building policies help solve the coordination problem among
developers and complementary input suppliers by providing a highly visible source of demand
for green building inputs. To provide further evidence for this interpretation, we turn to a set of
analyses showing that the data do not support some of the alternative mechanisms discussed
above.
E. Awareness of LEED
One alternative to our proposed mechanism is that developers, consumers, and input suppliers
were unaware of LEED certification before their municipal government adopted a green building
policy. This is a plausible story, particularly given the overall trend in LEED adoption depicted
in Figure 1, which we take as evidence of increased awareness of the potential rents available to
green development (Eichholtz, Kok, and Quigley 2012). If a combination of latent demand and
increased awareness were driving our results, we would expect to see public green procurement
policy having a larger impact in cities where there is a higher demand for other green amenities,
since the publicity surrounding the municipal government’s commitment would raise awareness
of green building practices, which would stimulate private-sector adoption. We explore this idea
by estimating cross-sectional OLS models that predict Private LEED Registrations based on
interactions of a city’s average preference for environmental amenities (Prius Share and Green
Ballot Share) with Green Policy Adopter.30
The results in Table 5 show that private developers in cities with a greater share of Prius
registrations or greater support for green ballot initiatives do not exhibit a stronger response to a
29
Using an alternative hazard specification, we find no significant influence of either cumulative LEED registrations or
cumulative LEED Accredited Professionals on the adoption of a government green building procurement policy (results available
upon request).
30
In each regression, we demean the continuous variable in the interaction, so the main effect of policy adoption can be
interpreted as an average treatment effect on the treated.

24

public green procurement policy. While the Prius Share interactions are imprecise, the
interactions with Green Ballot Share are essentially zero for the neighbor city sample. LCV
House Score and LCV Senate Score also yielded precisely estimated zeroes on the interaction
term (unreported). These results are robust to dropping the CEM weights and varying the set of
control variables. Overall, the results in Table 5 suggest that the measured green procurement
policy effects do not stimulate latent demand by making consumers, developers, and suppliers
more aware of the possibility of LEED certification.
F. Entry and Scale Economies
A second alternative to the coordination mechanism that we emphasize is that government
procurement simply increases demand to the point at which building industry professionals can
recover the fixed costs of LEED accreditation. In this story, private-sector adoption follows
because learning and increased competition drive down the price of green inputs closer to
suppliers’ average cost once a larger number of LEED Accredited Professionals have entered the
local market.
One testable implication of the scale-and-entry-based explanation of our measured procurement
policy effects is that the impact of municipal procurement policies should decline with city-size.
Intuitively, private demand for LEED buildings is more likely to cover a supplier’s entry costs in
large markets, leading to robust competition among suppliers operating at efficient scale
(Bresnahan and Reiss 1991). With competitive factor markets, the increased demand from a
municipal procurement policy will have little or no impact on suppliers’ average costs or the
prices charged to a green building developer.
We examine the link between city-size and the impact of municipal green procurement policies
by estimating cross-sectional OLS regression models of the number of LEED Accredited
Professionals on two measures of market size (Population and Total New Buildings), each
interacted with our two treatment dummies (Green Policy Adopter and Green Policy Adopter
Neighbor). The results of these four models, reported in Columns 1-4 of Table 6, suggest that the
impact of policy adoption on the number of LEED Accredited Professionals increases with citysize for policy-adopter cities and has no relationship to city-size among policy adopter
25

neighbors.31 These results are inconsistent with the hypothesis that government procurement
policies promote entry in markets where limited private demand had been insufficient to
convince real estate professionals and other input providers to invest in LEED-specific
capabilities.
G. Indirect Network Effects
The results thus far measure the impact of government green procurement policy adoption on
private-sector green building activity and on real estate professionals’ investments in human
capital for green building. Our findings are consistent with the explanation that green building
procurement policies can break a deadlock among real estate professionals, who are reluctant to
invest in LEED accreditation without evidence of demand, and building developers, who are
reluctant to embark on building green until local real estate professionals have invested in
acquiring expertise. However, we have not yet tried to measure the indirect network effects at the
heart of this story; that is, the causal impact of LEED Accredited Professionals on LEED
registrations and vice versa. Our theory that procurement policies help local markets overcome
“excess inertia” requires both of these structural parameters to be positive.
Instrumental Variable Models—We use instrumental variables to estimate the indirect network
effects. To identify the impact of the number of LEED-accredited professionals on the number of
private LEED registrations, we require an instrument that is correlated with the supply of LEED
Accredited Professionals but uncorrelated with unobserved drivers of private LEED
registrations. We propose to use government green procurement policy adoption in “distant”
cities as our instrument. Specifically, we use the log of the number of green policy adopter cities
between 25 and 50 miles from the center of the focal city to instrument for the number of LEED
Accredited Professionals in all cities within 25 miles of that focal city. This instrument is
motivated by the assumption that markets served by building industry professionals are more
dispersed than both the drivers of municipal procurement policy and the direct impact of green
building procurement policies. Put differently, we assume that green building procurement
policies in cities that are 25 to 50 miles away have no impact on developers of private buildings
other than through the supply of LEED Accredited Professionals, which we view as a proxy for a
31

Once again, the results are robust to dropping the CEM weights and varying the set of regression controls.

26

host of local green inputs.
Figure 3 provides some evidence that building industry professionals might transmit the impact
of green building procurement policies over distances of 25 to 50 miles. It shows a histogram of
the distance between architects’ and general contractors’ business locations and the project sites
they work on, based on our McGraw Hill project-level construction starts data. The median
distance between a project and a professional’s office address is 28 miles; the 75th percentile of
this distribution is roughly 75 miles.
To isolate the reverse relationship—the impact of the number of LEED registrations on the
number of LEED Accredited Professionals—we require an instrumental variable that is
correlated with the number of LEED registrations but uncorrelated with unobserved drivers of
local real estate professionals’ decisions to seek accreditation. Building on the instrumental
variables strategy used in Corts (2010), we use Total New Buildings as an instrument for Total
Private LEED Registrations. Intuitively, as the number of new building starts increases, so does
the probability of having one or more LEED-registered projects that could stimulate investment
among real estate professionals to become LEED Accredited Professionals. Moreover, since we
condition on Population and New Buildings, the key assumption underlying the validity of our
instrument is that variation in the intensity of development (that is, the number of buildings per
capita within each city) between 2003 and 2007 will affect the number of private LEED
registrations (for example, because of competition among developers) without otherwise altering
the incentive for real estate professionals to seek LEED accreditation. Because the number of
new buildings is clearly exogenous to an individual real estate professional’s decision to seek
LEED accreditation, the main concern with this instrument is that omitted variables might be
correlated with both building activity and LEED accreditation rates. Thus, we continue to control
for various city-level measures of green taste.
Instrumental Variable Results.—The estimation sample for our IV analysis includes all cities
that did not adopt a green building procurement policy. All models control for Population,
Income, College, Prius Share, and Green Ballot Share. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 report OLS
and IV estimates of the impact of Total LEED Accredited Professionals on Total Private LEED
27

Registrations.32 Column 1 reports OLS estimates of the correlation between the number of LEED
Accredited Professionals in the cities within 25 miles of a focal city and the number of LEED
registrations in that focal city. This correlation is statistically significant and suggests an increase
of 0.14 private LEED registrations per log-point increase in the number of LEED Accredited
Professionals in the surrounding cities. Column 2 presents our IV estimates, which use distant
policy adoption as an instrument for the number of nearby LEED Accredited Professionals. The
IV results show a very strong first-stage correlation between distant cities with green policies and
LEED Accredited Professionals in the cities surrounding the focal city; the second-stage result
indicates a significant positive impact of these nearby LEED Accredited Professionals on the
number of private LEED registrations. While the IV estimate is very similar to our baseline OLS
estimate, it is important to stress that our "excess inertia" hypothesis implies that LEED
Registrations and LEED Accredited Professionals are simultaneously determined, and that the IV
procedure isolates the response of LEED Registrations to an exogenous shift in the supply of
Accredited Professionals. The IV estimates imply that adding seven LEED Accredited
Professionals to nearby cities causes one additional LEED registration in a focal city. This strikes
us as a plausible figure, particularly if we interpret the number of LEED Accredited
Professionals as a proxy for other inputs, such as the availability of green building materials
through local distributors.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 7 examine the impact of the number of private LEED registrations on
the number of LEED Accredited Professionals. OLS results are presented in Column 3 as a
baseline. In Column 4, we use New Buildings as an instrument for Private LEED Registrations.
Once again, we find a strong first-stage relationship and a positive impact of LEED building
rates on the supply of LEED Accredited Professionals. In this case, the key coefficient increases
by roughly 60 percent compared to the OLS correlation and a test of the null hypothesis that the
number of LEED registrations is exogenous is rejected at the five-percent level (p=0.01).
Together, these IV results provide evidence of two positive causal relationships operating
simultaneously: (1) an increase in the supply of LEED Accredited Professionals causes an
32
We find somewhat larger effects for a sample of medium-size cities (20,000 to 800,000 residents) that did not adopt a green
building policy. We also obtain estimates similar to those in Columns 2 and 4 of Table 7 if we estimate the full system of
equations using generalized method of moments (GMM) estimation.

28

increase in the number of private LEED registrations and (2) an increase in the number of private
LEED registrations causes an increase in the number of LEED Accredited Professionals. These
indirect network effects are a necessary (though not necessarily sufficient) condition for the
existence of a chicken-and-egg dilemma in the adoption of a new quality standard.33 More
generally, by showing how distant green procurement policies can influence local private LEED
registration rates through the supply of nearby LEED Accredited Professionals, these results
point to the importance of supply-side spillovers in the diffusion of LEED.
IV. Discussion and Conclusions
This paper provides evidence that public procurement policies can influence private-sector
purchasing decisions in a way that reinforces underlying policy goals. Given the relative scale of
public and private purchasing, such an effect might be a necessary condition for public
procurement guidelines to have substantive impacts comparable to new laws or regulations.
While there is a substantial economic literature asking whether public investments “crowd out”
private spending (e.g., Goolsbee (1998) on government R&D and Hoxby (1996) on public and
private education), little research has examined whether or how government spending stimulates
private-sector investment. We are aware of no prior study that examines whether or not
government procurement acts as a focal adopter that tips the market towards a particular standard
or certification scheme, despite this often being a primary stated objective of socially motivated
government procurement policies such as “buy green” initiatives.
Our evidence of positive spillovers from public procurement is based on private developers
adopting the LEED green building certification program following the enactment of public
green building procurement policies—municipal bylaws that require public construction to
follow green building practices. This is admittedly a case in which one might expect such
reinforcing spillover effects, since LEED was rapidly emerging as the de facto standard for green
building certification and many private developers could reasonably expect that green building
would yield direct economic benefits in the form of energy savings and increased demand.
33

Future work using a larger sample of cities might estimate a structural model that explicitly accounts for the possibility of
multiple equilibria in the adoption process.

29

Moreover, governments are especially large customers in the construction services sector.
Further research is needed to examine the extent to which public procurement rules influence
private purchasing in mature markets in which governments account for a smaller share of total
demand. Nevertheless, we find that a city with a municipal green building policy had roughly 90
percent more LEED registrations by 2008 than matched control cities of similar size,
demographics, and tastes for environmentalism.
Another contribution of our study is to consider several mechanisms that might produce the
private-sector spillovers discussed in the literature on government procurement, and to link these
spillovers to the types of coordination problems studied in the industrial organization literature
on platforms and compatibility standards (e.g., Farrell and Saloner 1986; Rysman 2009). In
particular, we find evidence of an excess inertia or chicken-and-egg problem—a type of
coordination failure typically associated with hardware-software platforms—in the diffusion of a
new quality standard, and we show how this problem might be overcome if local governments
step in as lead users.
Our analysis is subject to several caveats. First, despite our efforts to construct a well-matched
control sample using the new methods developed by Iacus, King, and Porro (2012), one might
still be concerned that our estimates are biased upwards if environmental preferences (beyond
those we controlled for) are correlated with both municipal procurement policies and privatesector LEED adoption rates. However, we are somewhat comforted by finding similar “crowding
in” effects in a sample of neighboring cities that had not themselves adopted green building
policies. We also find no evidence of a divergence in LEED adoption between treated cities
(either policy adopters or their neighbors) and their matched controls prior to the change in
procurement policy. These findings provide evidence against stories of reverse causation or
policy adoption by municipalities that are “captured” by greener elements of the real estate
profession. Our preferred explanation for our main results is that green procurement policies had
a combined effect that increased awareness of the LEED standard and fostered the development
of complementary markets for specialized inputs, such as LEED Accredited Professionals.
As second caveat is that we do not measure the environmental impacts of increased LEED
30

adoption (or even the final certification of all registered buildings). Engineering studies suggest
that LEED certification is correlated with increased energy efficiency, but those estimates are
based on data from a self-selected sample of LEED-certified buildings. Future research should
examine the impact of public green building policies on environmental performance.
Finally, since our findings suggest that government procurement policies can catalyze the
adoption of a privately developed certification scheme, one might ask whether governments
typically choose the “right” standard? In the case of LEED, it is not clear whether (a) municipal
green building policies promoted lock-in to a particular standard (the leading alternative was the
EPA’s Energy Star label) or (b) increasing returns simply led private and public actors to
coalesce around the most popular measurement system at the time. Nevertheless, our LEED
Accredited Professionals results show that government purchasing policies can promote
standard-specific investments by various third parties, such as architects, contractors, and
suppliers of green building materials. This both points to procurement policies as an effective
policy tool and highlights the potential dangers of lock-in to a government-selected standard—
particularly if it was developed by firms hoping to preempt more stringent regulation. The
question of how government should be involved in the ex ante development of voluntary
standards that might later provide the basis for procurement policies is an intriguing topic for
future research.

References
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bennear, Lori S., and Sheila M. Olmstead. 2008. “The Impacts of the ‘Right to Know’:
Information Disclosure and the Violation of Drinking Water Standards.” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 56 (2): 117−130.
Brander, Luke, Xander Olsthoorn, Frans Oosterhuis, and Vivien Führ. 2003. “Triggering
Innovation.” In Buying into the Environment: Experiences, Opportunities and Potential for
Eco-Procurement, edited by C. Erdmenger, 94−113. Sheffield, UK: Greenleaf.
Bresnahan, Timothy, and Peter Reiss. 1991. “Entry and Competition in Concentrated
Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 99 (5): 977−1009.
Chegut, Andrea, Piet Eichholtz, and Nils Kok. 2012. “Supply, Demand, and the Value of
Green Buildings.” Working Paper, European Center for Corporate Engagement.
http://www.corporate-engagement.com/research/76.
Choi, Eugene. 2010. “Green on Buildings: The Effects of Municipal Policy on Green Building
31

Designations in America’s Central Cities.” Journal of Sustainable Real Estate 2 (1): 1−21.
Clinton, William J. 1998. “EPA Guidelines from Executive Order 13101.” Federal Register 63
(179): 49643−49651, available at http://www.epa.gov/epp/pubs/13101.pdf.
Coggburn, Jerrell D., and Dianne Rahm. 2005. “Environmentally Preferable Purchasing: Who
Is Doing What in the United States?” Journal of Public Procurement 5 (1): 23−53.
Commission of the European Communities. 2008. Public Procurement for a Better
Environment. Brussels, July 16. Communication from the commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of
the Regions.
Corts, Kenneth S. 2010. “Building Out Alternative Fuel Retail Infrastructure: Government Fleet
Spillovers in E85.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 59 (3): 219−234.
Delmas, Magali A., and Maria J. Montes-Sancho. 2010. “Voluntary Agreements to Improve
Environmental Quality: Symbolic and Substantive Cooperation.” Strategic Management
Journal 31 (6): 576−601.
Doshi, Anil, Glen W. S. Dowell, and Michael W. Toffel. 2012. “How Firms Respond to
Mandatory Information Disclosure.” Strategic Management Journal, forthcoming.
Dranove, David, and Ginger Zhe Jin. 2010. “Quality Disclosure and Certification: Theory and
Practice.” Journal of Economic Literature 48 (4): 935−963.
Eichholtz, Piet, Nils Kok, and John M. Quigley. 2010. “Doing Well by Doing Good? Green
Office Buildings.” American Economic Review 100 (5): 2492−2509.
Eichholtz, Piet, Nils Kok, and John M. Quigley. Forthcoming. “The Economics of Green
Building.” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Environmental Law Institute. 2008. Municipal Green Building Policies: Strategies for
Transforming Building Practices in the Private Sector. Washington, DC: Environmental Law
Institute.
Farrell, Joseph, and Garth Saloner. 1986. “Installed Base and Compatibility: Innovation,
Product Preannouncements, and Predation.” American Economic Review 76 (5): 940−955.
Fetter, T. Robert, and Julie A. Caswell. 2002. “Variation in Organic Standards Prior to the
National Organic Program.” American Journal of Alternative Agriculture 17 (2): 55−74.
Fuerst, Franz, and Pat McAllister. 2011a. “Eco-Labeling, Rents, Sales Prices and Occupancy
Rates: Do LEED and Energy Star Labeled Offices Obtain Multiple Premiums?” Ecological
Economics 70 (6): 1220−1230.
Fuerst, Franz, and Pat McAllister. 2011b. “Green Noise or Green Value? Measuring the
Effects of Environmental Certification on Office Values.” Real Estate Economics 39 (1):
45−60.
Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. “Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Benefit Scientists and
Engineers?” American Economic Review 88 (2): 298−302.
Green Building Certification Institute. 2011. “LEED for New Construction: Registering a
Project.” http://www.gbci.org/main-nav/building-certification/certification-guide/LEED-forNew-Construction/Project-Registration/registration.aspx.
Heckman, James J., and V. Joseph Hotz. 1989. “Choosing among Alternative
Nonexperimental Methods for Estimating the Impact of Social Programs: The Case of
Manpower Training.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 84 (408): 862−874.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 1996. “Are Efficiency and Equity in School Finance Substitutes or
Complements?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10 (4): 51−72.
Iacus, Stefano M., Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro. 2012. “Causal Inference without Balance
32

Checking: Coarsened Exact Matching.” Political Analysis 20 (1): 1−24.
Jin, Ginger Zhe, and Phillip Leslie. 2003. “The Effect of Information on Product Quality:
Evidence from Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2):
409−451.
Johnstone, Nick, ed. 2003. The Environmental Performance of Public Procurement: Issues of
Policy Coherence. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Kahn, Matthew E. 2002. “Demographic Change and the Demand for Environmental
Regulation.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21 (1): 45−62.
Kahn, Matthew E. 2011. “Do Liberal Cities Limit New Housing Development? Evidence from
California.” Journal of Urban Economics 69 (2): 223−228.
Kahn, Matthew E., and Ryan K. Vaughn. 2009. “Green Market Geography: The Spatial
Clustering of Hybrid Vehicles and LEED Registered Buildings.” B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy: Contributions to Economic Analysis & Policy 9 (2): 1−22.
Kim, Eun-Hee, and Thomas P. Lyon. 2011. “Strategic Environmental Disclosure: Evidence
from the DOE’s Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Registry.” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 61 (3): 311−326.
King, Andrew A., and Michael J. Lenox. 2000. “Industry Self-Regulation without Sanctions:
The Chemical Industry’s Responsible Care Program.” Academy of Management Journal 43
(4): 698−716.
Kok, Nils, and Maarten Jennen. 2012. “The Impact of Energy Labels and Accessibility on
Office Rents.” Energy Policy 46: 489−497.
Kok, Nils, Marquise McGraw, and John M. Quigley. 2011. “The Diffusion of Energy
Efficiency in Building.” American Economic Review 101 (3): 77−82.
Lyon, Thomas P., and John W. Maxwell. 1999. “Corporate Environmental Strategies as Tools
to Influence Regulation.” Business Strategy and the Environment 8 (3): 189−196.
Marron, Donald. 1997. “Buying Green: Government Procurement as an Instrument of
Environmental Policy.” Public Finance Review 25 (3): 285−305.
Marron, Donald. 2003. “Greener Public Purchasing as an Environmental Policy Instrument.”
OECD Journal on Budgeting 3 (4): 71−105.
May, Peter J., and Chris Koski. 2007. “State Environmental Policies: Analyzing Green
Building Mandates.” Review of Policy Research 24 (1): 49−65.
McCrudden, Christopher. 2004. “Using Public Procurement to Achieve Social Outcomes.”
Natural Resources Forum 28 (4): 257−267.
Michelsen, Ottar, and Luitzen de Boer. 2009. “Green Procurement in Norway; A Survey of
Practices at the Municipal and County Level.” Journal of Environmental Management 91 (1):
160−167.
National Association of State Procurement Officials. 2010. “Green Purchasing Guidelines.”
http://www.naspo.org/content.cfm/id/green_guide.
National Association of State Procurement Officials and Responsible Purchasing Network.
2010. Responsible Purchasing Trends 2010: The 'State' of Sustainable Procurement. Oakland,
CA: Responsible Purchasing Network.
Navarro, Mireya. 2009. “Some Buildings Not Living Up to Green Label.” New York Times,
August 30.
Newsham, Guy R., Sandra Mancini, and Benjamin J. Birt. 2009. “Do LEED-certified
Buildings Save Energy? Yes, But…” Energy and Buildings 41 (8): 897−905.
33

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2000. Greener Public
Purchasing: Issues and Practical Solutions. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development.
Patrick, Deval L. 2009. “Executive Order No. 515 Establishing an Environmental Purchasing
Policy.”
October
27.
http://www.mass.gov/Agov3/docs/Executive%20Orders/executive_order_515.pdf.
Rader, Nancy. 1998. Green Buyers Beware: A Critical Review of Green Electricity Products.
Washington, DC, Public Citizen.
Rainwater, Brooks. 2009. Local Leaders in Sustainability: Green Building Policy in a
Changing Economic Environment. Washington, DC: American Institute of Architects.
http://www.aia.org/advocacy/local/AIAB089213.
Reid, Erin M., and Michael W. Toffel. 2009. “Responding to Public and Private Politics:
Corporate Disclosure of Climate Change Strategies.” Strategic Management Journal 30 (11):
1157−1178.
Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Jean Tirole. 2006. “Two-Sided Platforms: A Progress Report.”
RAND Journal of Economics 37 (3): 645−667.
Rysman, Marc. 2009. “The Economics of Two-Sided Markets.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 23 (3): 125−144.
Sabapathy, Ashwin, Santhosh K. V. Ragavan, Mahima Vijendra, and Anjana G. Nataraja.
2010. “Energy Efficiency Benchmarks and the Performance of LEED Rated Buildings for
Information Technology Facilities in Bangalore, India.” Energy and Buildings 42 (11):
2206−2212.
Siemens, Renetta. 2003. “A Review and Critical Evaluation of Selected Greener Public
Purchasing Programmes and Policies.” In The Environmental Performance of Public
Procurement: Issues of Policy Coherence, 51−94. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Sourani, Amr, and Muhammad Sohail. 2011. “Barriers to Addressing Sustainable
Construction in Public Procurement Strategies.” Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
Engineers (ICE)—Engineering Sustainability 164 (4): 229−237.
Toffel, Michael W., and Jodi L. Short. 2011. “Coming Clean and Cleaning Up: Does
Voluntary Self-Reporting Indicate Effective Self-Policing?” Journal of Law and Economics 54
(3): 609−649.
Turner, Cathy, and Mark Frankel. 2008. Energy Performance of LEED for New Construction
Buildings: Final Report. White Salmon, WA: New Buildings Institute.
United Kingdom Office of Government Commerce. 2010. “Sustainable Procurement and
Operations on the Government Estate: Government Delivery Plan Update—December 2009.”
http://www.ogc.gov.uk/documents/Delivery_plan_Dec09.pdf.
Weil, David, Archon Fung, Mary Graham, and Elena Fagotto. 2006. “The Effectiveness of
Regulatory Disclosure.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 26 (1): 155−181.
Wu, Xiaoyu, and Bowman Cutter. 2011. “Who Votes for Public Environmental Goods in
California? Evidence from a Spatial Analysis of Voting for Environmental Ballot Measures.”
Ecological Economics 70 (3): 554−563.

34

Figure 1. Annual U.S. LEED Registrations by Type of Owner

Notes: Graph is for all U.S. nonresidential new construction LEED registrations. Owner type codes provided by U.S.
Green Building Council. Government includes federal, state, and local.

35

Figure 2. Mean LEED Registrations and Accreditations by Procurement Regime

Note: All figures are based on CEM-weighted annual means.

Figure 3. Geographic Agglomeration in Labor Markets for Real Estate Professionals

Notes: Distance from professional’s address to building location based on great-circle calculations using Harvard Arc-GIS
mapping software. Vertical bars represent 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile values in the empirical distribution of projectprofessional distances.

36

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Variable Name

Definition

Panel A: City-level variables
Total Private LEED Registrations
Total LEED Accredited
Professionals
Total Government LEED
Registrations,
Green Policy Adopter
Green Policy Adopter Neighbor
Prius Share
Green Ballot Share
LCV Senate Score
LCV House Score
Population
Total New Buildings
Buildings per Capita
College
Income
Panel B: City-year variables
Annual Private LEED Registrations
Annual LEED Accredited
Professionals
Annual Government LEED
Registrations
Green Policy Adopted
Green Policy Adopted Neighbor
Annual New Buildings

Mean

SD

Min

Max

Total private LEED-registered buildings during 200108
Total LEED Accredited Professionals during 2001-08

1.93

6.25

0.00

99.00

7.51

27.38

0.00

416.00

Total government LEED-registered buildings during
2001-08
City adopted green building policy by 2008 (dummy)
City adjacent to a city that adopted green building
policy by 2008 (dummy)
Toyota Prius as percent of all car registrations (x 100)
Percent of votes in favor of green ballot measures
State senator’s League of Conservation Voters score
State representative’s League of Conservation Voters
score
City population (10,000s)
Total nonresidential construction starts during 2003-07
New Buildings / Population
Percent college-educated
Median household income

0.29

0.94

0.00

12.00

0.04
0.15

0.19
0.36

0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00

0.54
60.73
46.54
49.56

0.59 0.00
14.76 19.85
40.88 0.00
39.97 0.00

3.74
100.00
100.00
100.00

2.99
26.21
12.06
0.23
4.80

5.10
54.71
18.42
0.17
2.17

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00

46.15
869.00
204.00
0.89
20.00

New private LEED-registered buildings this year
New LEED Accredited Professionals this year

0.20
0.04

1.32
0.24

0.00
0.00

52.00
6.00

New government LEED-registered buildings this year

0.94

5.21

0.00

160.00

0.02
0.09
26.21

0.13
0.29
54.68

0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
869.00

Focal city adopted policy by this year
Neighbor city adopted policy by this year
Nonresidential construction starts this year

Notes: Panel A provides summary statistics for a cross section of 735 California cities. Panel B reports annual variables at the city-year level.
Both panels exclude Los Angeles, San Diego, San Jose, and San Francisco.

Table 2. Covariate Balance in Full and Matched Samples
Panel A
Full sample

Sample
Weighting
Green
policy
adopters
Prius Share
Green Ballot Share
LCV Senate Score
LCV House Score
Population
Annual New Buildings
Buildings per Capita
College
Income
Cities

No weights
All nonadopters

0.93
72.26
68.69
69.00
14.36
140.79
10.62
0.35
5.58
29

0.53
60.25
45.58
48.53
2.53
21.59
12.20
0.22
4.77
697

t-stat

3.62
4.35
3.00
2.72
13.68
12.64
0.45
4.09
1.97

Panel B
Green policy adopter cities and
matched controls
Weighted
Green
Matched
t-stat
policy
controls
adopters
0.86
71.08
68.96
65.62
13.70
139.77
10.83
34.53
5.70
26

0.80
68.27
60.85
61.64
13.51
109.53
9.98
34.17
5.83
180

0.41
1.09
0.81
0.33
0.06
0.78
0.49
0.10
0.33

Panel C
Green policy adopter neighboring
cities and matched controls
Weighted
Green
Matched
t-stat
policy
controls
adopter
neighbors
0.71
0.72
0.05
68.08
65.98
1.36
66.98
65.47
0.27
64.44
63.64
0.13
3.86
3.71
0.33
25.94
31.26
1.01
10.22
9.73
0.25
31.06
29.85
0.39
5.98
6.04
0.12
80
291

Notes: Panel A reports means of each variable and t-statistic from unweighted OLS regression of the variable on Green Policy Adopter dummy.
Panels B and C report CEM-weighted means of each variable and the t-statistic from CEM-weighted OLS regression of the variable on Green
Policy Adopter dummy (middle panel) or Green Policy Adopter Neighbor dummy (right panel). CEM weights are described in Iacus, King, and
Porro (2012) and discussed in the text.

37

Table 3. Effects of Green Building Procurement Policies on LEED Registrations and
Accredited Professionals: Cross-sectional Regression Results
Green policy adopter cities
and matched controls
Total
Total
Total
private
government
LEED
LEED
LEED
Accredited
registrations registrations Professionals

Sample
Outcome

Green policy adopter neighboring cities
and matched controls
Total
Total
Total
private
government
LEED
LEED
LEED
Accredited
registrations registrations Professionals

Panel A: CEM-weighted OLS Regressions
(1)
7.46
[3.26]**

Green Policy Adopter

(2)
1.59
[0.53]***

Green Policy Adopter Neighbor
CEM-weighted mean outcome
R-squared

8.29
0.56
(7)
7.20
[2.62]***

Green Policy Adopter

(3)
15.74
[14.46]

(5)

(6)

0.95
0.23
[0.39]**
[0.10]**
0.93
40.81
1.55
0.26
0.34
0.37
0.28
0.13
Panel B: Unweighted OLS Regressions
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
1.37
19.95
[0.39]***
[10.94]*

Green Neighbor Adopter
Neighbor
Unweighted mean outcome
R-squared
Observations (Cities)

(4)

4.75
0.64
202

0.69
0.47
202

17.95
0.59
202

0.94
[0.37]**
1.01
0.36
453

4.05
[1.84]**
7.20
0.41
(12)

0.22
[0.10]**
0.18
0.20
453

3.86
[1.60]**
4.48
0.38
453

Notes: CEM-weighted OLS regressions with robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.
Models in Panel A include controls for Prius Share, Total New Buildings, College, Income, Green Ballot Share, LCV
Senate Score, and LCV House Score. Unit of analysis is a city. (See Table 2 for the number of treated and control units
in the matched samples.)

Table 4. Effects of Green Building Procurement Policies on LEED Registrations and
Accredited Professionals: City Fixed-effects Regression Results
Sample
Outcome

Green Policy Adopted

Green policy adopter cities
and matched controls
Annual
Annual
Annual
private
government
LEED
LEED
LEED
Accredited
registrations
registrations Professionals
(1)
(2)
(3)

2.30
[0.78]***

0.27
[0.11]**

Green Policy Adopted
Neighbor
Observations (city-years)
Cities
Mean of outcome
R-squared

1672
209
0.50
0.17

1672
209
0.09
0.09

F-stat
P value

0.52
0.72

2.30
0.06

Green policy adopter neighboring cities
and matched controls
Annual
Annual
Annual
private
government
LEED
LEED
LEED
Accredited
registrations
registrations Professionals
(4)
(5)
(6)

11.01
[3.64]***

0.15
0.03
[0.07]**
[0.02]
1672
2968
2968
209
371
371
2.22
0.10
0.02
0.24
0.11
0.03
F-test for pre-policy trend differences
2.39
0.96
0.51
0.05
0.42
0.73

1.16
[0.26]***
2968
371
0.56
0.18
1.78
0.13

Notes: OLS coefficients, with robust standard errors (clustered on city) in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Unit of
analysis is a city-year. All regressions include city fixed effects and year fixed effects, control for Annual New Buildings, and do
not include CEM weights.

38

Table 5: Effects of Green Building Procurement Policy Interacted with Green
Demographics on LEED Registrations
Sample

Green policy adopter
Green policy adopter
cities and matched
neighboring cities and
controls
matched controls
Outcome
Total private LEED registrations
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Green Policy Adopter
6.95
7.36
[3.38]**
[2.97]**
Green Policy Adopter  Prius Share
4.68
[5.24]
Green Policy Adopter  Green Ballot Share
0.03
[0.33]
Green Policy Adopter Neighbor
0.83
0.79
[0.34]**
[0.40]*
Green Policy Adopter Neighbor  Prius Share
0.50
[0.62]
Green Policy Adopter Neighbor  Green Ballot Share
0.02
[0.04]
Observations (Cities)
206
206
371
371
R-squared
0.56
0.56
0.28
0.28
Notes: All models estimated with OLS using CEM weights. Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10. Unit of analysis is a city. Additional unreported controls are Prius Share, Green Ballot Share,
LCV Senate Score, LCV House Score, Total New Buildings, Population, College, and Income.

Table 6: Effects of Green Building Procurement Policy Interacted with City-Size on LEED
Professional Accreditations
Sample

Green policy adopter
Green policy adopter
cities and matched
neighboring cities and
controls
matched controls
Outcome
Total LEED Accredited Professionals
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Green Policy Adopter
-2.78
-8.30
[13.51]
[11.03]
Green Policy Adopter  Population
2.91
[1.27]**

0.39
Green Policy Adopter  Total New Buildings
[0.08]***
Green Policy Adopter Neighbor
3.44
3.61
[1.72]**
[1.56]**
0.39
Green Policy Adopter Neighbor  Population
[0.62]
0.05
Green Policy Adopter Neighbor  Total New Buildings
[0.08]
Observations (Cities)
206
206
371
371
R-squared
0.42
0.48
0.41
0.42
Notes: All models estimated with OLS using CEM weights. Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10. Unit of analysis is a city. Additional unreported controls are Prius Share, Green Ballot Share,
LCV Senate Score, LCV House Score, Total New Buildings, Population, College, and Income.

39

Table 7: OLS and IV Estimates of Indirect Network Effects
Sample

All cities without green procurement policy

Outcome

Total Private LEED
registrations

Estimation

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

(1)
0.14
[0.06]**

(2)
0.17
[0.08]**

(3)

(4)

log(Total of LEED Accredited Professionals
within 25 miles)
Total Private LEED Registrations

2.17
3.43
[0.26]***
[0.49]***
First-stage coefficients and statistics
1.29
[0.07]***
0.05
[0.01]***

log(Number of cities with green policy within 25 to
50 miles in 2008)
Total New Buildings
F-test of excluded IVs
Observations (cities)
R-squared

Total LEED Accredited
Professionals

322.11***
697
0.41

697
0.41

48.25***
697
0.55

697
0.47

Notes: OLS and instrumental variable regressions with robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.10. Unit of analysis is a city. All models include controls for Prius Share, Green Ballot
Share, Population, College, and Income.

40

Appendix. California Cities with a Green Building Policy by 2008
City

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

Los Angeles
San Diego
San Jose
San Francisco
Long Beach
Sacramento
Oakland
Anaheim
Stockton
Fremont
Glendale
Santa Clarita
Santa Rosa
Irvine
Sunnyvale
Corona
Costa Mesa
Berkeley
Santa Clara
Ventura
Richmond
Santa Barbara
Santa Monica
San Leandro
Carlsbad
Livermore
Alameda
Temecula
La Mesa
Cupertino
West Hollywood
Dublin
Cotati

In matched
sample

Population
(10,000s)

No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

369.49
122.34
89.50
77.67
46.15
40.70
39.95
32.80
24.38
20.34
19.50
15.07
14.76
14.31
13.18
12.50
10.87
10.27
10.24
10.09
9.92
9.23
8.41
7.95
7.82
7.33
7.23
5.77
5.47
5.05
3.57
3.00
0.65

Appendix - 1

