                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ELECTIONS AND MACROECONOMIC
                           POLICY CYCLES




                           Kenneth Rogoff

                            Anne Sibert




                       Working Paper No. 1838




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            February 1986




    The authors have benefitted from discussions with Rao Aiyagari
as well as from seminars at Harvard and Indiana Universities. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System. Financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program -in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                ER Working Paper p1838
                                                February 1986




                  Elections and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles




                                   ABSTRACT


    There is an extensive empirical literature on political business cycles, but

its theoretical foundations are grounded in pre-rational expectations macroeco-

nomic theory. Here we show that electoral cycles in taxes, government spending

and money growth can be modeled as an equilibrium signaling process. The cycle

is driven by temporary information asymmetries which can arise if, for example,

the government has more current information on its performance in providing

for national defense. Incumbents cheat least when their private information

is either extremely favorable or extremely unfavorable. An exogenous increase

in the incumbent partyts popularity does not necessarily imply a damped policy

cycle.




Kenneth Rogoff                                   Anne Sibert
Economics Department                             International Finance Division
1180 Observatory Dr., Rm. 6428                   Board of Governors of the
University of Wisconsin                            Federal Reserve System
Madison, WI 53706                                Washington, D.C. 20551
(608) 262—3906                                   (202) 452—3715
 I.    Introduction

       At one time, research on political business cycles received a great deal of

attention. Nordhaus (1975) and McRae (1977) provide important examples.1 Their

models suggest that politicians will inflate during election years in order to

exploit a Phillips curve tradeoff which is more favorable in the short-run than

in the long-run. Interest in these adaptive expectations models waned, however,

after the rational expectations revolution of the seventies. As long as private

agents (such as wage setters) understand the government's incentives, one would

not expect to observe any systematic rise in employment prior to elections.2

But the objections to conventional political business cycle models go beyond

their Phillips curve formulation, and apply to any model in which the government

takes artificial measures to make itself look good. Suppose the government

tries to please the public before elections by raising transfers or by lowering

taxes; according to Tufte (1978), this is the most robust empirical charac-

teristic of the electoral cycle. Why should voters prefer a candidate who is

suboptimally distributing tax distortions over time? Moreover, why should such

actions suggest that the incumbent will do a good job over the course of the

coming term?

      Here we argue that electoral cycles in certain macroeconomic policy

variables —- such as taxes, government spending, deficits and money growth

--    derive   from temporal information asymmetries.3 We assume that the government

observes an indicator of its performance (e.g., in providing national defense

efficiently) before the representative voter does. Administrative performance

is correlated over time; hence prior to election periods the incumbent has an

incentive to try to "signal" that it is doing well. This gives rise to an elec-

toral cycle in macroeconomic policy. (It is important to stress that our model

does not directly provide a rationale for an electoral cycle in unemployment.)4
                                        2


    In section II we present the basic model. 3ovrnments in this setup are

differentiated in part by their level of "competency". Although the analysis

could be extended to encompass other aspects of a government's performance,

the notion of competency that we use is as follows: The more competent that

a government is, the less revenue it needs to provide a given level of govern-

ment services. This particular measure of competency stresses the administra-

tive abilities of the policymaker. Naturally, other things being equal,

voters prefer more competent governments. The government obtains information

about its (serially correlated) competency more quickly than voters can.

However, at the beginning of each period voters receive a signal; they learn

the level at which the government is going to set income or poll taxes.

Because taxes are set at the beginning of the period, any (intentional or

unintentional) error the government makes must be made up through issuing

bonds or drawing seignorage. (In another variant of the model, government

spending can also be adjusted.) Thus the public observes the government's

competency directly, but with a lag. During an election year, a vote-

conscious incumbent party has incentive to make its most recent "competency

shock" appear large. The incumbent party's incentive to "cheat" (rely on

excessive seignorage or bond financing) is tempered only by the fact that it

places some weight on social welfare.

   There is oniy one really important difference between the incumbent party

and the opposition party in our model. The opposition party has no credible

way to "signal" the effectiveness of its policies. Obviously, there are many

factors other than "competency" which influence the outcome of an election, but

our model treats these as exogenous. Nevertheless, the framework developed here

is sufficient to capture the essential elements of a political business cycle.
                                       3


    In section III, we consider equilibria in which voters' expectations

depend only on known characteristics of the two parties, past observations on

the competency shocks, and the government's most recent tax bill.   In particular,

expectations do not depend on how much a party might have "cheated" (set taxes

suboptimally low) in previous elections. The equilibria in section III are the

only possible equilibria when the political parties have finite horizons, given

the assumed information structure. Using only mild restrictions on the utility

functions, we are able to prove the existence of a unique separating equilibrium.

In the separating equilibrium, voters are able to exactly infer the incumbent's

information from the tax bill. Because the competency shock is directly observed

by the public with a lag, there is never any "cheating" (suboptimal use of

seignorage or bond financing) during off-election periods.

    During election periods, the equilibrium has the following characteristics:

If the incumbent party knows that its competency shock is the lowest possible,

then it will not cheat at all. This result obtains even if the incumbent's

temptation to improve its image is greatest when its competency is lowest.

Cheating is increasing over a range of realizations of the unobservable

competency shock, but is declining at higher levels of competency. Incumbents

of intermediate ability cheat the most. (This conclusion must be amended if

there is an upper bound to the level at which taxes can be set.) The model also

yields some interesting conclusions with respect to changes in observable

factors. For example, the conventional wisdom is that the incumbent party will

inflate less if it becomes more popular for noneconomic reasons. We show,

however, that although an increase in popularity may cause the incumbent to

cheat less if its unobservable competency shock is high, it will cheat more if

its competency is low.
                                       4


    1r ecticn IV, e examine other equilibria which can arise if the two

political parties have infinite horizons. If their discount rates are low

enough, then there will exist an equilibrium in which there is no macroeconomic

policy cycle. "Enforcement" of the cooperative equilibrium can come through a

number of related channels, including both voters' expectations and the strate-

gic interactions of the two political parties. If the parties have sufficiently

high discount rates, there will always be a cycle, but it may be damped. We

illustrate some properties of sustainable equilibria for this case. Finally, in

section V. we briefly consider what happens if the incumbent party cannot per-

fectly project its revenue needs; i.e., has imperfect information about its com-

petency shock. The analysis of section III generalizes even if the forecast

error is strictly private information. In the conclusions, we discuss some

empirical implications of our model, and some possible extensions.
                                                 5



 II. The Model

       Every other period, atomistic voters choose between the two political

 parties, "R" and "0". A major factor in the election is voters' perception of

 the relative "competencies" of the two parties. A party's competency is

defined as follows: All governments are required to provide a fixed level of

government services, G.     (The operative assumption is that G is observable,

not that it is fixed.) The more competent the government, the less revenues

it requires to deliver G:


(1)



where e is the government's competency, T is direct taxes (or transfers if

negative), and     represents seignorage or bond-financing. "Competency" is

a broad index which captures the administrative abilities of the incumbent

party, and the success of its policies in providing necessary government services

efficiently. For example, a highly competent government will use well-designed

bidding procedures on government contracts, and will make good choices about

which weapons systems to purchase. (Although the analysis below focuses on the

definition of competency embodied in (1), it would be possible to apply our

framework to other measures of a government's performance).

      The underlying macroeconomic model is rudimentary. rn each period t,

every voter receives a fixed, known amount of the perishable good. Agents pay

a total of Tt in real taxes. Money is required to conduct transactions, and

the transactions technology is such that the equilibrium price level,              P, is
increasing in the money supply, Mt. We assume that there is no bond financing

and that seignorage revenues,      =         -
                                       (Mt           Mt_i)/Pt,   are strictly increasing in

Mt over the relevant range. Our analysis applies equally well to the case of
                                                        6


bond financing if taxes are d-istortionary. In this case there generally

exists an optimal distribution of tax distortions over time.5

      Each of the identical voters has a time-separable indirect utility

function, which depends on the incumbent's competency, e,                  the   level of distor—

tions arising from seignorage or suboptimal deficit financing, A, and exoge-

nous noneconomic factors which depend on which party is in power, i.                     (It   is

straightforward to extend the model to allow for different voters to have

different preferences with respect to exogenous factors.) Social welfare in

period t -is given by


                = —              +        +
(2)
                      W(At)          et

where W:)—A,A( -         R    is twice—continuously differentiable, except possibly at zero.

W'>(-<)O for A >(<)O, and W" >                0.   Thus, W is minimized at A = 0, and

W(A) -* oo as

      Each party's competency shock is serially correlated so that for party

j   = 0, R


(3)             =        +


where {a} is an i.i.d. stochastic process on A E (O,a(, where a may be

infinite. It is assumed that a0 and aR are independent Vs,t, that they have the

same twice-continuously differentiable distribution function, and that

E...1(a) = .        It       is crucial that {c} display some serial correlation, or there

would be no reason to vote for a party just because it appears more competent

today. The assumption that the competency shocks follow MA(1) processes simpli-

fies the analysis by making it possible for elections to be independent.

However, we present results in section III indicating some qualitative features
                                         7



of the more general case. The fact that the shocks vary over time may be

justified by noting that the leaders of a political party change, and that

policy prescriptions suited for one historical episode may be inappropriate in

other circumstances.

      We assume that exogenous, party-specific, non-economic preference shocks

also follow a MA(1) process so that

            R    D
(4)



where {q} is an i.i.d. stochastic process on R. Furthermore, the density

function of q is unimodal, continuously differentiable, and symmetrically

distributed around zero.

      Any promises the two parties might make before an election have no

impact on the voters in our model.    (All the voters are from Missouri.) What

does make an impression on voters is their observations on the incumbent party's

performance, from which they can infer something about its most recent

competency shock. (We will describe the information structure shortly.) The

macroeconomic policy cycle will arise because the incumbent party has an incen-

tive to try to signal that its most recent competency shock is high. The

opposition party can make promises, but it lacks an effective way to reveal

how well it would have performed if it were currently in office. In fact,

all the public knows about the opposition party is the probability distribu-

tion of its competency factor, c. Because E    is   an MA(1) process, the fact

that the opposition party may once have been in power is not relevant.7

      It would be pointless for the incumbent party to try to deceive the public

unless it has an information advantage. Our assumptions about the information

structure and the timing of elections are as follows. The incumbent party has
                                             8



coiitnipUraneous irifurmation about its most recent competency shock, a (In

sections III and IV, the information is perfect; in section V it is not.)

Citizens observe a only with a one-period lag. however, at the beginning of

each period, voters receive a signal from the incumbent in the form of a

per-iod—t tax bill. (When setting taxes, the incumbent party does not yet know

       the most recent exogenous shock to voters' preferences.) After receiving

their tax bill and observing           citizens vote if it is an election period. At

the end of the period, markets meet and the price level is determined. If the

government set taxes too low, it will be forced to use the inflation tax to

balance its budget. (Again, our results extend to bond financing if taxes are

distortionary.) Citizens can infer          and        at this point, though we make

the stronger assumption that citizens learn enough by t+1 to observe

      directly. The above scenario is consistent with the lag between conception

and implementation of fiscal policy. See figure 1.

      At time t, voters will prefer party R to party 0 if their expected utility

from having party R in office during periods t+1 and t+2 is greater than that

from having party 0 in office. Thus, party R will win if


                             -
(5)         E[Q1 +      +2
                                   +              0,




where       is the expectations operator conditioned on tinie—t public information,

which includes a1 Tt, 0i _1 and                   We will temporarily conjecture that

voters' expectations about         and t+2 (suboptimal use of seignorage) do not

depend on which party wins. Thus


(6)
           E[(W1+ W2) — (W1÷ W2)] = 0.
                                                        9


This assumption will turn out to be correct in equilibrium because:

(a) no party ever chooses to inflate in the off-election year t+1, and

(b) conditional on time t information, a÷2 and a2 have the same distribu-

tion. Thus, despite the fact that t+2 will turn out to be a function of

         voters have no information at time t to help predict which party will set

t+2 higher. Assumption (6) must be relaxed when                                and q follow more general

stochastic processes.

       As the opposition party D has no way to signal its most recent competency

shock, then by (3),

             PR          R          D      D            PR          a.
(7)
            E(c+1+ c÷2                    t+2   =
                                                    Et(at)
                                                                —



By (4),


(8)
             PR          R          0      0
            E(r1+1+ t+2 t+1 t+2 =

Thus, by (2) and (5) -          (8),    when party R is the incumbent it will win if8


(9)
            E(a)_a+qO.
       The incumbent party, R, does not observe the disturbance to voters'

preferences,        at       the time it sets taxes. Therefore its estimate of the

probability it will win the election is9


(10)        U =   U[E(a)]       =
                                    Prob[E(a)
                                                    -       +            0].

Given our assumptions about the distribution of q (see eq. (4)), we can infer

that U is twice-continuously differentiable, strictly increasing in E(a),

Urn     U'[E(a)] = 0, and that U"[E(a)) >N) 0 as E(a) <(>) &.
E(a)-'
                                          10



       We now specify the objective functions of the two political parties. Each

party aims to maximize a present—discounted-value functional which depends or,

(a) their probability of being in office, and (b) the social welfare losses due

to suboptimal use of seignorage or bond financing.10 The R party's objective

function is


(11)           =
                   Et[X   k-t u - (1-x) k-t    W(k)],
                      keS            k=t


where S is the set of even-numbered (election) periods, I is the (possibly)

infinite time horizon, and x is the weight the party places on being elected;

x is contained in the open interval ]0,1[. Party D's utility function is

identical

       Because the assumption that the policymaker has a temporary information

advantage over the public (at least, off the equilibrium path) drives the

results below, we need to discuss the reasonableness of our specification:

The representative voter understands the model. However, it is not worth it

for him as an individual to monitor the government closely enough to have

complete contemporaneous information on how effectively the government is

spending his tax dollars. It is certainly reasonable to assume that a voter

does not engage in costly information-gathering activities solely to decide

his own vote, which has infinitesimal weight. Implicitly, we are assuming

that other information which the voter does gather (because it is worthwhile

in his production or consumption activities) does not allow him to directly

observe a (until t÷1). We are, of course, also assuming that statements from

the opposition party cannot be trusted, and that there is no public watch group

which can provide free, complete and unbiased information.
                                       11



    Another variant of our model involves interpreting G + c as the effective

level of government services. The public only observes expenditures, G. This

seems quite realistic if one views 6 + e as national defense, given the secrecy

of military documents. (The country would not necessarily want to make these

documents public just to mitigate the political business cycle.) During an

election year, the incumbent might have an incentive to shave 6 and T, claiming

that military preparedness is adequate because the funds are being used

efficiently (high c). More generally, our model will suggest why the incumbent

is likely to cut back on expenditures which have low short-run visibility, and

focus on expenditures (and tax reductions) which have high immediate visibility.
                                          12



III. Finite-Horizon Equilibrium

         In this section, we analyze the case where the two political parties have

finite time horizons. Because the information asymmetries are temporary, and

because the random disturbances are MA(1) processes, each election cycle turns

out to be independent of previous election cycles. We are able to show that

there exists a unique (perfect) separating equilibrium, in which the incumbent

party's action (tax bill) fully reveals its information (competency shock).12

We also demonstrate the qualitative features of the model described in the

introduction.

       If there were full information, so that voters knew the competency shock

     at election time, then the incumbent party would have no incentive to cheat.

For then it could not possibly influence voters' perceptions of its competency.

Moreover, by cheating, it would only lower social welfare by increasing

seignorage distortions. With asymmetric information, however, the incumbent

party may have an incentive to lower taxes in election years to try to

exaggerate its competency. We will temporarily posit that voters recognize this

incentive and believe that the level of inflation (cheating) depends on the

government's competency shock,         Later, we will verify that if voters have

rational expectations, then this supposition is correct. Denote the voters'

conjecture of inflation as a function of a. by


(12)           =


where the superscript referring to the political party has been dropped for

notational convenience.13 Then by equation (1), voters believe that the tax

bill as a function of        is


                                  *1
Il         T       —
                   —
                         a   —
                                                       13


              G -             We temporarily assume that r* is continuous and
where g.            a_1.
strictly decreasing. Then r* has an inverse function, T*_l and the public's

time-t expectation of              is



(14)        E() = r*1(g_ a -

       Substituting   (14) into (10), and the result into (11) yields the incumbent

party's maximization problem


(15)        max {xU(T*_l(g_a_A)]              (1-x)W(A)), Va,



where the subscript t has been dropped. Given the public's beliefs (12), the

incumbent party's choice of A affects only current-period elements of its

objective function, (11).

       The first— and second-order conditions for an interior solution to (15) are


(16)        _xUI[r*_l(g_a_A)]T*_lI(g_a_A) —                 (1-x)W'(A)   =    0,


(17)        n(*_1(g_a_a)][T*l(ga_A)] +
            — (1—x)W"(A)      <   0.


       In a separating equilibrium, voters' conjectures must be consistent, and

hence A* = A Va. Thus, equations (16) and (17) can be rewritten as the interior

equilibrium conditions:



 18        A''a) —
                             xU'(a)       -   1
                      (1—x)W' [A(a)]




             xU"(a)      —   xU'(a)A"(a)          — (1—x)W"(A(a)] <
(19)                                                                     0,
            [1+A'(a)]2        (1+A'(a)]
                                                14

where we have made use of the fact that f [f(x)] =            1/f'(x),   and f1[f(x)] =
- f"(x)/[f'(x)]3.        Inspection of (18) confirms our assumption that T* -is

continuous and strictly monotoruic, since T' =         - (1÷A').
       The second-order condition (19) allows us to rule out equilibria involving

negative A:


Proposition 1. If A maximizes (15) and if voters' conjectures are consistent,

then A(a) cannot be strictly negative for any a.


Proof. By (13), T' = — (1 + A'). By (18), T' > (<) 0 for every a if and only

-if A < (>) 0 for every a. Differentiating both sides of the equilibrium

condition (18) with respect to a gives



                             xU"
(20)        A" = (1+A')    tl+A' —   (1-x)W"A'].
                   xU'

       Substituting (20) into (19) gives the result that the second-order condition

holds as long as W"/(l+A') > 0.


       Note that the proof of proposition 1 also established that (19) holds for

every A > 0 which solves (18). The proof required WI' > 0, but did not need

any restrictions on the sign of U". The intuition behind this is that in

equilibrium, U is not a function of the choice variable.

       Equation (18) is a first-order differential equation with no apparent

initial condition. The next proposition provides a boundary condition.


Proposition 2. A perfect equilibrium requires A(0) =           0.

Proof. By proposition 1, A(0)            0. Assume that voters' expectations A*(a) are

governed by (18) with initial condition A*(0) = a > 0. Define


           0(a) a xU(0) -    (1-x)W(0)   -
                                             xU(a) + (1_x)W(A*(a)].
                                            15



Since U(O) is the lower bound on U, D(a) represents the minimum gain to a type a

who defects and sets A = 0 instead of equal to A*(a) > 0. Clearly 0(0) > 0 for

A*(o) =    ö.   Furthermore, since 0 is continuous in a, there exists a neighborhood

of zero in R+ such that D(a) > 0. Hence defection is not a probability measure

zero event, since all a within a neighborhood of zero will defect.


Comment. It might seem that the "natural" boundary condition would be

A(a) = 0 rather than A(0) =    0.    The best type cannot gain by posing as a better

type. Proposition 2 tells us, however, that it is a = 0 who gains nothing by

cheating in equilibrium. As long as other agents are cheating enough so that,

by (18), it is not worthwhile for a = 0 to raise A above A*(o), then he might as

well not cheat at all since he will be recognized as a zero in equilibrium

anyway.

       The proof of proposition 2 relied on the fact that T   = g is a feasible
level of taxes. Suppose there exists some Tmax < g such that taxes cannot

exceed Tmax. (It would be plausible to posit that taxes cannot be raised

above rmax without fundamental changes in the tax system, and that these changes

would take several periods to implement.) Then A*(0) = g      - Tmax   is the only

consistent conjecture for voters. The proof is analogous to the proof of

proposition 2.14

       The incumbent party's maximization problem (15) does not always have an

interior solution on all of A. This issue definitely arises if

W'(O)      lim W'(A) > 0. Suppose for example that



(21)       Q(a)    xU'(a) — (1—x)W'(O),


is strictly negative for a =    0.   Then (18) implies that A'(O) is negative, but

this possibility is ruled out by propositions 1 and 2. Since U" > 0 for a < a,
                                                        16


it is possible that Q(a) > 0 for some a >                     0.     Denote the smallest a such that

Q(a)    0 as aL. (If Q(a) < 0              Va, let aL =            a.)     Then consider a solution

path to (18) initiating at A(aL) =                 0.   It is easy to show that A will initially

rise from zero, but eventually will decline and cross the a axis from above at

some aM <   .    (See Appendix A. If W'(0) = 0, the curve may asymptote to the a

axis rather than intersecting it.) Furthermore, it must be true that Q(a) is

strictly negative for all a aM (since U" < 0 for a >                             &).   This leads us to

proposition 3.


Proposition 3. A = 0 for a aM and for a
                                                                   aL.


Proof. Suppose voters believe A*(a) = 0                       Va         aM. so that


(22)        T*l(g_a_A) = g   -
                                  (g   -   a   -
                                                   A)   =   a + A Va
                                                                               aM.


Then since Q(a) < 0    Va        aM, A = 0 is optimal for a aM. The proof of the

second half of proposition 3 is similar and is subsumed in the proof of

Theorem 1 in Appendix A.


Definition 1. A separating equilibrium is a continuous function A5: A -

such that


(i)      AS = 0    if a aL.

(ii)     A5 satisfies (18) if          aL a <           aM.
(iii)    AS = 0 if a aM.


Theorem 1. A unique separating equilibrium exists.


Proof. See Appendix A.

The solid line in figure 2 is a graph of the equilibrium A function.

(There can be more than one turning point.) Figure 2 is drawn for
                                             17



the case where W'(O) > 0, so the solution to (18) intersects the a axis from

above instead of asymptoting to it. To understand the figure, it is helpful to

consider two closely neighboring realizations of the competency shock, a2 and

a.1, a2 > a1. Suppose both a types are thought to cheat by the same amount,

         =              Then when the incumbent party draws a., it would have to set
             A*(a1).
A =   A*(a)    + a2 -
                        a1 in order to convince the public it had drawn a2. In
deciding whether to take this action, the incumbent would compare the increased

expectation of winning with the marginal social welfare cost of distortions. If

U' is high, and if A and hence W' is low, then the temptation to cheat is great.

To discourage an a1 type incumbent from defecting, it is necessary to force it

to cheat more to gain any given increase in votes. This implies AS(a) > AS(a)

Good types must "run away" from bad types. As A rises, W' rises and the temp-

tation to cheat falls. Since U' begins to fall at a,          must eventually begin

to fall. The dotted line in figure 2 is a graph of AS for the case where type

zero must use seignorage since g - Tmax > 0. In this case, cheating may be

strictly decreasing in a.       It is simple to prove that AS(a) is nondecreasing

lng—Tmaxl5
      We have shown that a unique separating equilibrium exists. We now discuss

pooling equilibria. First, note that a pooling equilibrium would have to

involve a range of a types setting the same level of T (taxes), not the

same level of A (seignorage). Recall that voters observe T = g       -   a   -


not A(a). Second, there cannot be a pooling equilibrium where voters ignore
taxes completely, even though politicians would then have no incentive to

cheat. In this case, the incumbent party's tax bill would fully reveal its

type, and it would not be rational for voters to ignore this information. So

a pooling equilibrium must involve having all a on some interval (a11a2] set

the same level of taxes. But this cannot be an equilibrium if voters' mapping
                                                     18



from taxes to competency is monotonic. Suppose all types a                                      set
                                                                                      [a11a2]
T   = Ta.   Then E'[a)T = Ta) = aa           where         is the mean value of a on [a1,a2].

But faced with these expectations, type a2 has an incentive to set taxes

slightly lower. He thereby gains a discrete increase in votes, a2 - a8, at the

cost of an infinitesimal rise in seignorage distortions. The only pooling

equilibria that might exist in our model would have to involve perverse (and

nonmonotonic) expectations. For example, the following type of pooling

equilibrium might exist: Voters believe a =                    & if   T =   T, and believe a = 0
otherwise. It would seem very reasonable to rule out such equilibria.16

      We now turn to establishing some comparative statics properties of the

model. Define i(a,x) as an equilibrium path for a given value of x, the

weight the two parties place on votes. (For the remainder of this section,

we omit the "s" superscript.)


Proposition 4. a(a,x)/ax            0 Va, with strict inequality if                   >   0 and a > 0.


Proof. If aL > 0, then xU'(aL) =              (1-x)W'(O), and U(aL) > 0.                  Thus aaL/ax    0,

with strict inequality if           >   0.     Consider first the case aL = 0.                Then by

(18), for a aM,


            aA'(a,x)            U'(a)                xUt(a)W"[(a,x) .           8(a,x)
              aX                                                                 aX
                          (1—x) W'[i(a,x)]            (1—x)W'[A(a,x)]

      Evaluating   (23) at a = 0 we get


            a'(O,x) ——      U'jO)            > 0
              ax          (1—x)W'(O)

because A(O,x) = 0                      aA(0,x) =         0.   The function as/ax is continuous
                          Vx implies

in G;   hence there exists a deleted RHS-neighborhood N of zero where

aA(a,x)/ax > 0,        Va c N. Now suppose there exists an a > 0 such that
                                                        19


aA(a,x)/ax < 0.                Then it must be the case that there exists an a* > 0 such that

aA(a*,x)/ax = 0, and aA'(a,x)/ax < 0, within a RHS-neighborhood of a*. But by

(23),



               aA'(a*,x) —-                U'(a*)            >   0.
                  ax
                                    (1—x)2W'[A(a*,x)]

         aA'(a* ' x)
Hence
            ax
                           > 0 within a RHS-neighborhood of a*. And this is a
contradiction.

       If aL =    & > 0,        then clearly a(&)/ax > 0 and otherwise the proof is the

same as when               =   0.


       As x rises, the incentive to cheat rises. Equilibrium requires that

each type must cut taxes by more to pose as the next highest type. Thus

"good" types must cheat more relative to "bad" types. Since by proposition 2,

A(0) =    0,   then A must rise for all a > 0.                   The same result obtains if

A(0) = g -      Tm.            In figure 3, we illustrate proposition 4.

       Now suppose that voters like the incumbent party for observable "noneconomic"

reasons, indexed by the parameter u. In particular, suppose we modify equation

(9) so that the incumbent party wins if


(24)
            v+E(a)_a÷q)0.
In order to maintain our assumption that E(At+2) is the same for both parties,

we will assume that the popularity disturbance is transitory, affecting only

the current election. Then the first-order condition, (18), can be rewritten

as



'25'                   —       xU'(a+v)    —   1
                           (1—x)W'   (A)
                                           20


Define b(av) as an equilibrium A function for a given value of v.


Proposition 5   aA(a,v)/av    0 for a + v < a, with strict inequality if




Proof. The proof is analogous to the proof of Proposition 4.


        Proposition 5 contradicts the conventional notion that more popular

incumbents are less likely to engage in a political business cycle.17 If the

incumbent party draws a low a, then a rise in its popularity increases its

temptation to cheat. As a + v rises from zero to a, a small amount of

cheating yields larger and larger benefits in terms of increased probability

of election. Only for a + v   >   a,   so that U" < 0, can an increase in popularity

lead to a lower level of cheating.

    Proposition 5 deals with a small change in popularity, v. We conjecture

that a large increase -in v will move most types into the range where U' is

declining, and whereas some types will cheat more, most will cheat less.

Proposition 5 has a second important interpretation. The shift parameter v

may be viewed as an observable component of the incumbent's competency shock.

We illustrate proposition 5 in figure 4.

    Thus far, we have only analyzed the government's behavior during even

(election) periods. But clearly, there will be no gain to cheating in of f-

election years, since the public will have observed a+1 by period t+2. This

supports our assumption in section II that expected inflation is the same

regardless of which party wins the election. If the c's followed a higher—

order MA process, then expected inflation in t+2 (conditional on t information)

would not necessarily be the same for both parties (by proposition 5).
                                          21



However, proposition 5 does not allow us to unambiguously state whether expected

t÷2 inflation is    higher   or lower for the high c party. Also, we have only ana-

lyzed the case where the "R" party is the incumbent, but obviously the analysis

is the same when the "0" party is the incumbent. The fact that the parties tend

to move in and out of power (depending on competency shocks and voter preference

shifts) does not complicate our analysis because we assume that the public

directly observes       in period t+1. If they were only able to observe

   =      + a1, then there would be a "start-up" problem whenever a new party

moves into office. (The public doesn't know           and therefore can't sort out

       and at.) This case is much more complicated.

       It should be emphasized that elections are not necessarily a bad thing,

just because they result in excessive inflation or a suboptimal distribution

of tax distortions over time. By holding elections, the public gets a more

competent government, on average. It is possible in principle to explicitly

analyze the tradeoff in a model such as the present one. But the exercise would

not be interesting without allowing for a richer stochastic structure.
                                       22


IV.   Infinite-Horizon   Equilibria

      If the time horizons of the two political parties extend infinitely far

into the future, then equilibria which Pareto-dominate the "noncooperative"

equilibrium of section III will generally be attainable.18 There are three

related mechanisms for enforcing a more "cooperative" equilibrium. First, the

public can assume that a party which has defected in the recent past will not

cooperate during its next term(s) in office. The incumbent party must then

recognize that a defection will lower expected future social welfare and

thereby its own, since the social costs of distortions are an element of its

utility function. Second, if the public assumes there will be a reversion to

the noncooperative equilibrium next time the defector wins an election (and

hence higher expected distortions), then it will be less likely to vote for the

defector. The third mechanism for enforcing cooperation involves strategic

interactions between the two political parties. If the incumbent party cheats,

the opposition party can respond by cheating more the next time it is in office.

Since both parties care about social welfare, each may be willing to restrain

itself to keep the other party in line.19

      When politicians have high discount rates, even the best attainable

equilibrium will involve some cheating. We illustrate why in this case, any

sustainable equilibrium will still have the characteristic that higher a types

cheat to "run away" from low a types, just as in the finite horizon case.

However, to enforce any cooperative equilibrium, it is typically not necessary

(to threaten) to punish very high a types as severely. Here punishments are

never actually meted out along an equilibrium path, but the issue is relevant in

the strictly private information setting of section V.
                                       23


      There are a rich variety of supergame equilibria. However, it is

possible to exposit some of the general features of the infinite horizon

case if we consider a special class of equilibria in which only the first and

third enforcement mechanisms discussed above are relevant. Let T(a)         0 Va

be a candidate cooperative equilibrium, and suppose the public adopts the
                                        20
following trigger-strategy expectations:


Definition 2. Voters have a T(a) trigger strategy for A*(a) if:


(a)       When t i odd, A(a) = 0       Va.


          When t is even, then


(b)       à(a) =    A(a) Va if At2(a) 42(a)1 or if t-2 = A2(a).

(c)       b.(a) =   A(a) f _2(a) = A2(a) and t-2 > 42(a).

(d)       A(a) =    A,   where zero is the initial period.



      The trigger strategy expectations described above have the property

that whenever the incumbent party defects and sets     too high, then there

will be a temporary reversion to the noncooperative equilibrium,      at the

next election in t+2. This reversion takes place regardless of which party is

in office, so expected inflation is the same for both parties and assumption

(6) is intact. Note that there is no punishment for cheating too little;

i.e., if A(a) 4(a).
      Let us first consider conditions under which T(a) = 0 Va is a trigger-

strategy equilibrium. For the trigger strategies described in definition 2

the expected cost to the incumbent of defecting, P, is solely due to a higher
                                                    24



expected inflation rate (level of cheating) during the punishment period:

                         a
(26)         P =         I W(AS(cz)3dF(a)    -
                         0

where dF(a) is the continuous probability density of a. The expected cost P

will be the same for any            > 0.

        In deciding whether or not to defect, the incumbent party has to compare

its expected utility from defecting with its expected utility from

cooperating. If in period t voters believe the incumbent party will not cheat,

then by (13), T* =           - ai   and


(27)        E1'(a(T) =   g - T = a + A,

where time subscripts are omitted. If the party does not cheat, it attains


(28)        LC(a) = xU(a) + (1-x)W(0),


where LC stands for the party's utility level if it cooperates. If, on the

other hand, the party defects, it will attain


                                                         -   P.
(29)        L0(a) = max {xU(a+A) -         (1-x)W(A)}
                         A


Proposition 6.      If L(a) - L0(a)              0 Va, then AT = 0   Va is a

AT trigger strategy equilibrium.


       The particular trigger strategy described in (a)—(d) involves only a one-

election punishment period. If P is insufficient to prevent all a types from

cheating, then it still may be possible to attain the zero-cheating equilibrium

by extending the (threatened) punishment interval. In general, the threatened
                                          25



punishment interval may be shorter when the incumbent draws a high a, since then

the potential gains from cheating are very small. (Since a is observed with a

one-period lag, conditional punishment strategies are feasible.)

       If the incumbent's discount rate is very high, there may not exist any

punishment interval, or more general punishment strategy, sufficient to

discourage all a types from defecting. However, it may still be possible to

sustain an equilibrium which Pareto dominates the "noncooperative"

equilibrium.21     Although we do not provide a general analysis of this inter-

mediate case, we do provide an example which illustrates some of the special

features of our model. We construct our example in a way such that the maximum

punishment, p, is given. In equation (11) of section II, the two political

parties are assumed to have a constant discount rate .               Here we assume that $

is   time varying such that $(t) is much less than $(s) for all s >          t.   We assume

that after period t, $   is   large enough so that a zero-cheating equilibrium can

be achieved in all future election periods. But $(t) is so small that the

zero—cheating equilibrium cannot be sustained in election period t.               (It is

always possible to choose {$} to satisfy these assumptions.) To establish an

enforceable period—t trigger-strategy equilibrium, it is useful to ask what

would happen if voters think that no one cheats, so              =   0.
       Consider an agent of type a. Let


            G(a,) xU(a+) - (1-x)W(A)      - P -             -
(30)                                              (xtJ(a)       (1—x)W(0)]


be the gain from cheating by      rather than cooperating when A = 0.             By hypothe-

sis, there is some a c A such that there is a A > 0 where G(a,A)              0. Let

a be the minimum such a and let A0 be the minimum A such that G(a01A0)                 0.

Then a0 +
            A0 is the minimum a type any other type a would ever be willing to
                                                           26


"impersonate". Let A0 be the subset of A where the differential equation given

by (18) with initial condition (a0+A0) = 0 has a strictly positive solution,

AZ      Let



                             AZ(a)           a e A0

(31)             A8(a) a

                                 0
                                             aeA/A0.

Clearly                    Va £ A.        See figure 4. We now show


Proposition 7. A =                   A   is the time—t part of a trigger-strategy equilibrium.


Proof. Clearly a party with a >
                                                  a0
                                                       +        will   not defect. If a party with

a <         +        wants to defect, then by construction it must want to pose as
       a0       A0

a1 > a0 +        A.     But, since W" > 0, then Va <
                                                     a0
                                                        +                    and
                                                                                   Va1 c A0,


                xU(a)        -                                     xU'(a1)    - (1—x)W'[A8(a         =0
(32)                                 (1_x)Wt[AB(a 1 )+a1-a)                                 1
                                                                                                ))
                1+AB (a)                                           1+A (a1)


by (18); hence this is impossible.


            is not necessarily the best sustainable trigger—strategy equilibrium.

However, it seems clear that the optimal A function must still begin rising

from zero at a0 +                    though possibly more slowly than by (18). Thus the optimal

equilibrium should have similar qualitative features to figure 5. Although we

have structured our example so that the punishment P is constant, the

equilibrium will have the general shape of figure 4 even if P is determined

jointly with a0 +          A,        the "start-up" point.
                                          27


V. Equilibrium When CheatinQ is Never Directly Observed

       Until now, we have assumed that the incumbent government's information set

becomes common knowledge after a one-period lag. Thus in period t+1, the

public can directly confirm its inference about how much the government was

cheating in period t. Here we modify the information structure so that

electorate can never know for certain how much the incumbent cheated.22 Our

main purpose is to show that the results of section ru generalize.

       We assume as before that in period t1, all agents observe the lagged

competency shock, , and lagged seignorage (or bond financing),           However,

seignorage and cheating are not equivalent if the incumbent party cannot

perfectly predict its revenue needs when setting Tt. In particular, suppose it

only observes the noisy signal 8 =             where   is an i.i.d. stochastic

process on (0,1], and is independent of a.

       The analysis can be simplified somewhat with the assumption that the

social-loss function takes the special form:


(33)        W =


Since the quadratic form of W implies certainty equivalence, it would be

socially optimal for the government to set


(34)        TH(a(9)] = g -


where &(9)        E(aIO).

       Since the government has incentives to cheat as before, the public

believes that taxes are actually set according to


(35)       T*[â(9)] = g     -   (9) -
                                           28


where we now refer to K rather than A as the level of cheating. K denotes

voters' expectations of Kt, given their observation on Tt. Ex-post, seignorage

may be high in part because the incumbent party made a mistake in predicting a.

and in part because it was cheating:


(36)


Despite the fact that the public never directly observes K, there still exists

a separating equilibrium analogous to that of section III. The steps involved

in deriving the equilibrium are as before. Equation (37) is the same as the

first-order condition (18), except that         and A are replaced everywhere by (9)

and K:


                           xU'[â(O)]
                        — (1—x)Kfà(9)] —
                        —
'37)        K •raceyI
               L                           •1




Again, the separating equilibrium reveals the incumbent's information (9). As

long as         is observed in period t+2, the incumbent still has no incentive to

cheat in off-election periods. As in section III, this is the only equilibrium

in the finite-horizon case, and is an equilibrium in the infinite—horizon case.

       The infinite-horizon trigger—strategy equilibria of section IV do not

extend directly to the case of imperfect monitoring. The observation that the

incumbent party needed to rely on seignorage or suboptimal bond financing no

longer implies that it has cheated. An interesting topic for future research

would be to find the optimal equilibria for this case, drawing on the literature

on repeated principal agent problems [see, for example, Radner (1985)].
                                   29


Conclusions

    Our analysis illustrates the essential role of temporary information

asymmetries in explaining electoral cycles in macroeconomic policy variables.

Much of the extant empirical evidence on political business cycles deals with

national elections in the United States and Germany. Our model is broadly

consistent with this evidence. However, the general framework we develop can

also be used to examine other types of electoral policy cycles, such as those

associated with state and local elections.   (In this case, of course,

seignorage will not be a factor, but bond financing still is.) A limitation

in applying our model to some other countries is that it does not allow for

endogenous timing of elections. Nevertheless, if there is a sufficient lag

between the time when elections are called and the time when they are held,

the general notion that the incumbent will try to look good remains relevant.

    The analysis of the text focused on an electoral cycle in taxes, inflation

and deficits. But it is straightforward to extend the model to allow for

variable government spending. Consider again the highly plausible example where

the government has private information about the effective level of national

defense. The government might claim that it is efficiently obtaining a lot of

defense for any given input of expenditures. Therefore, it might signal its

competency by cutting defense appropriations. More generally, one would also

expect election—year shifts in the composition of government spending, towards

services with high immediate visibility (potholes), and away from expenditures

which the average voter only observes with a lag (contributions to government

pension funds).

    It would be of interest to extend this framework to address other aspects of

political economy, and to allow for more differences between the two political
                                   30


parties. A related extension would be to allow for imperfect information

about the incumbent's preferences. But the rationale presented here for an

electoral policy cycle should carry over to these more general frameworks.
                                                               31



                                                      Appendix A


        Proof of Theorem 1: Suppose xU'(O) - (1—x)W'(O) > 0. Then an

    equilibrium is given by


                                     xIJ'(a)          —    1    if A(a) > c or if a = 0,
                              (1—x)W'(A(a)]
              A'(a) =

(A.1)                         0                                otherwise.

              A(0) =    c,

where c = 0.          Note that we have not ruled out W'(O) = 0 and A is not a domain;

hence we cannot immediately apply the standard existence and uniqueness theorem

for differential equations. For c e ]0,A(, it is useful to construct


                             W(A)        if A c [c,A(,




          -
                             W(c)    —
                                         (1    —
                                                   eA)w1(c)         if A c



                             U'(a)           if a     0,

              Y(a)
                             U'(—a) if a < 0.


                        xY(a)            -
Let f(a,A)                                    1.    The strategy is to show that there exists a
                     (1-x)W' (A)

unique solution, A(a), to


(A.2)             =   f(a,A);            A(O) = C £ )O,A[,


and hence to (A.1) for c > 0. We then show that as c -÷ 0, the limit of the

solutions to (A.1) exists and satisfies (A.1) for c =                         0.   In order to prove

the existence of a solution to (A.2), we need the following lemma.
                                                   32



Lemma If a solution to (A.2) exists, then there exists a A                            A such that

           <           Va c A, if c <
                                         A.
Proof. Suppose Xt(a)               0. Then



                                   Y(a) <


      -     as A - A; hence A(a) must have an upper bound which is strictly less

than A.


          f is a continuous function on the domain 0 s R x ]—A,A[ and c is an

interior point of D. Thus by theorem 10.1 in Ross (1965), (A.2) has a

solution c(C)t on [—h, h], where h                 (A -
                                                            A)/maxIfI     >   0.   Likewise, (A.2)

with initial condition A(h) =
                                           (h),   has a solution on [0,2h). Proceeding

in this manner we can show (A.2) has a solution on R. Then clearly (A.1)

has a solution on A, denoted by A(a)1 for c                                   Denote the right-
                                                                ]O,AUJ.
hand side of (A.1) by g(a,A). By construction of                     and the assumption that

W"/W' is uniformly bounded, ag(a,A)/aA <                M   for some M <      , Va   c A,

VA c [c,A[. Thus, by the mean—value theorem, g satisfies a Lipschitz

condition on A. By theorem 10.1 in Ross (1965), the solution A(a) is unique.

       It remains to show that urn A (a) exists and satisfies (A.1) for c = 0.
                                         c-0 C
If    c decreases to zero, (A(a)} is non—increasing and bounded from below by

zero. Thus A0(a) = urn A (a) exists. A0(a) is clearly unique and satisfies
                               c-*0 C
(A.1).         Va' >   0, {A) is equicontinuous on a           a'. Hence, A0 is continuous on

a >   0.       A0(a) is strictly increasing in a (for small a) and bounded from below

by zero. Thus, lim A =              0   and A is continuous on A. The first and second
                         a—0                  0
                                       33



derivatives of A,. are given by (A.1). They exist and are Continuous except

at    =   0 (if W'(O) = 0) and aM.

     We have treated the case where aL = 0, but clearly the case   > 0 is a

trivial extension. The second part of proposition 3 is a straightforward

consequence of the fact that AS obeys (18) for all aL   a < aM, and that W" > 0.

Note that the proof of Theorem 1 required, in addition to the assumptions on W

given below eq.(2) of the text, that W"/Wt be uniformly bounded on [c,A( for

C > 0.
                                                              34



                                                     Appendix B


       Here we provide an example for which eq.(18) has a closed-form solution.

The example has U" < 0, which requires that q(t) be asymmetrically distributed

and/or that the incumbent's current popularity v be high. (We can have q(t)

being asymmetrically distributed and yet retain eq.(6) if q is viewed as an

incumbent-specific shock rather than a party-specific shock.)


Example. U[E(aIT)] =          ln[v         + E(aIT)]. and W() =              ln   B -   ln(B   -
                                                                                                   kI).   Note

that W" > 0, so the example satisfies the second-order conditions derived in the

proof of proposition 1. For                        0, substituting into (25) gives



                     xá
                                  =
                                               xB             -
(Bi)           +                                                   1,
                   (1-x)(v+a)          (1—x)(v+a)

a linear first—order differential equation with solution


(82)        (a) =   B —    (1-x)(v+a)          + C(v+a)1.

       First we observe that if the arbitrary constant C = 0, then cheating is

linear in a. This may seem like a natural equilibrium, but (O) = 0 requires

C =    (l-x)1-            8x/(1-x) It is easy to confirm that                            = 0 Va is an

equilibrium if
                    1-x> x    •       If   x
                                               >
                                                    1-x
                                                          ,       then
                                                                         a    > 0, and there is a range

of a over which the candidate cheats. It is also straightforward to confirm

proposition 4 with this example.
                                       35


                                   REFERENCES


 Abreu, Dilip, "Extremal Equilibria of Oligopolistic Supergames," Harvard
     Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper Number 1167 (July 1985).

 Alesina, Alberto, "Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Two-Party System,"
     mimeo, Harvard University (1985a).

 Alesina, Alberto, "Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two—Party System
     with Rational Voters," mimeo, Harvard University (1985b).

 Backus, David, and John Driffill, "Inflation and Reputation," American Economic
     Review 75 (June 1985), 530-538.

 Barro, Robert J., "On the Determination of Public Debt," Journal of Political
     Economy 87 (October 1979), 940—971.

Barro, Robert J., "Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy with Incomplete
    Information," mimeo, University of Rochester (August 1985).

Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon, "Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a
    Model of Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (July 1983),
     101—121.

Canzoneri, Matthew B., "Monetary Policy Games and the Role of Private
    Information," American Economic Review 75 (December 1985), 1056-1070.

Cho, In Koo, and David Kreps, "More Signalling Games and Stable Equilibria,"
    mimeo, Stanford University Graduate School of Business (1985).

Cukierman, Alex, and Allan H. Meltzer, "A Positive Theory of Discretionary
    Policy, the Cost of Democratic Government, and the Benefits of a
    Constitution, mimeo, Carnegie-Mellon University (September 1985).

Frey, Bruno, and Frederich Schneider, "An Empirical Study of Politico-Economic
    Interaction," Review of Economics and Statistics 60 (1978), 174-183.

Friedman, James W., "A Non-cooperative Equilibrium for Supergames," Review of
    Economic Studies 28 (1971), 1—12.

Golden, David G., and James M. Poterba, "The Price of Popularity: The Political
    Business Cycle Reexamined," American Journal of Political Science 24,
    (November 1980), 696—714.

Green, Edward J., and Robert H. Porter, "Noncooperative Collusion Under
    Imperfect Price Information," Econometrica 52 (January 1984), 87-100.

Hibbs, Douglas A., "Inflation, Political Support, and Macroeconomic Policy,"
    in L. N. Lindberg and C. S. Maier, eds., The Politics of Inflation and
    Economic Stagnation (Washington: The Brookings Institution, 1985).

Hibbs, Douglas A. and Heino Fassbender (eds.), Contemporary Political Economy
    (New York: North Holland Publishing Co., 1981).
                                       36



Jonung, Lars, "Business Cycles and Political Changes in Sweden," Skandinaviska
    Enskilda Banken Quarterly Review 2 (1985), 26—39.

Kimbrough, Kent P., "The Optimum Quantity of Money Rule in the Theory of Public
    Finance," mirneo, Duke University, (1985).

Kirchgässner, Gebhard, "Rationality, Causality and the Relation Between Economic
    Conditions and the Popularity of Parties: An Empirical Investigation for
    the Federal Republic of Germany, 1971-1982," European Economic Review 28,
    (June—July 1985), 243—268.

Kreps, David M., and Robert Wilson, "Reputation and Imperfect Information,"
    Journal of Economic Theory 27 (August 1982).

Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott, "Rules Rather than Discretion: The
    Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy 85 (June
    1977), 473-92.

McCallum, Bennett 1., "The Political Business Cycle: An Empirical Test,"
    Southern Economic Journal 44 (1978), 504—515.

McRae, Duncan, "A Political Model of the Business Cycle," Journal of Political
    Economy 85 (1977), 239-263.

Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts, "Limit Pricing and Entry under Incomplete
    Information: An Equilibrium Analysis," Econometrica 50 (1982), 443-459.

Nordhaus, William D., "The Political Business Cycle," Review of Economic Studies
    42 (1975), 169—190.

Radner, Roy, "Repeated Principal-Agent Games with Discounting," Econometrica 53
    (September 1985), 1173—1198.

Riley, John G., "Informational Equilibrium," Econometrica 47 (March 1979),
    331—359.

Roberts, John, "Battles for Market Share: Incomplete Information, Aggressive
    Strategic Pricing, and Competitive Dynamics," mimeo, Stanford University
    Graduate School of Business (July 1985).

Ross, Shepley L., Differential Equations. (New York: Blaisdell Publishing Co.,
    1965).

Stigler, George, "General Economic Conditions and National Elections," American
    Economic Review 62 (1973), 160-167.

Tabellini, Guido, "Accommodative Monetary Policy and Central Banking
    Reputation," mimeo, UCLA (October 1983).

Tufte, Edward R., Political Control of the Economy. (Princeton: Princeton
    University Press, 1978).
                                       37


                                   FOOTNOTES


There continues to be a significant amount of empirical work on the topic,
especially in the political science literature. See, for example, Kirchgässner
(1985), Hibbs (1985), or Jonung (1985).

2McCallum (1978) makes this point. The conventional rationale for political
business cycles is also questioned by Stigler (1973). Nordhaus (1975) notes
that the cycle will disappear in his model, once voters understand the process.

3Cukierman and Meltzer (1985) have independently developed a related line of
research, though their approach is very different from ours. Backus and Oriff ill
(1985) adopt Kreps and Wilson's (1982) model of reputation to provide another
rationale for political business cycles. (Barro (1985) and Tabellini (1983)
present similar models.] In the Backus-Driffill model, the probability the
incumbent will inflate increases towards the end of his final term in office.
He inflates precisely because he is not worried about the future, and has no
incentive to maintain his reputation as an inflation fighter. By inflating
(more than anticipated), the benevolent and rational elected offical is able to
temporarily reduce the effect of distortions which keep employment below its
socially optimal value. This repeated game "reputational" model of political
business cycles seem at odds with Tuffe's (1978) evidence that the political
business cycle is more pronounced when the incumbent is up for re-election.

4McCallum (1978), and Golden and Poterba (1980), find little evidence of a poli-
tical business cycle in employment. The evidence of a political business cycle
in variables such as transfers and money supply growth is stronger (see Tufte
(1978), or the Hibbs and Fassbender volume (1981).)

5See Barro (1979).

6Our main results do not depend on the assumption that W is minimized at zero,
or that W is independent of r. There is however a general argument, due to
Kimbrough (1985), that the seignorage tax should always be set at zero even if
taxes on labor and consumption are distorting. Kimbrough argues that for any
reasonable transactions technology, money should be viewed as an intermediate
good in the production function, and not as a final consumption good. By a
standard theorem in public finance, it is suboptimal to tax intermediate goods
(since it causes a distortion on two margins), unless there are increasing
marginal tax collection costs.

71f c follows a higher-order stochastic process, then the public may take into
account the opposition's performance when last in office. The main effect this
will have on the analysis is to alter the probability the incumbent will win;
the resulting political business cycle is qualitatively similar.

81n (2), the representative voter is risk-neutral with respect to e. If the
public were risk averse, then the fact that it knows more about the incumbent's
competency than the opposition's would make the incumbent's re-election more
likely. Allowing for this possibility should not alter the general nature of
the results.
                                       38

9when R is the opposition party, then uR = 1 - U0. The winner receives all the
votes only because we have not allowed for different voters to have different
values of q (party-specific preferences related to exogenous non-economic
factors). Our later analysis requires only that a party be more likely to win
the more competent it is perceived to be.

10The analysis would have to be modified slightly if parties also cared directly
about the competency of the government. The main qualitative effect would be
that when the incumbent knows it has a high level of competency relative to the
mean value of the opposition's competency shock, then it will place a greater
weight on being elected. If on the other hand, the incumbent knows its com-
petency to be very low, then there is the (perverse) possibility that it might
prefer to see the opposition win.

11The main effect of relaxing the assumption that both parties place the same
weight (x) on social welfare would be that expected inflation in t+2 is no longer
the same for both parties. See proposition 4 in section III below. Because we
allow for fairly general U functions, the analysis can be generalized to where
parties care about their plurality, and not just their probability of winning.

12The possible existence of pooling equilibria will be discussed later on.
We are grateful to Dilip Abreu for pointing out to us some formal analogies
between our model and the limit-pricing model of Milgrom and Roberts (1982).
See also Roberts (1985). Our model is not plagued by the existence problems
familiar from the information theory literature discussed in Riley (1979),
because voters face a single large agent.

131n the finite horizon case, (12) is the only possible form for rational expec-
tations. Expectations conditioned on past behavior "unravel backwards". Other
equilibria are possible in the infinite horizon case, however; see section IV
below.
14         max = A*
  If g — T           (0), then the type zero agent will not (cannot) defect by
setting A lower. (He is so incompetent that he cannot make ends meet without
relying on seignorage.) It is straightforward to show that no type a > 0 will
defect if A* =      follows (18).
l5 is also straightforward to examine the case where there is some maximum
level of cheating, Am.      may have a maximum if, for example, there
is a limit to how much seignorage can be extracted from money holders.
Suppose Amax exists, and the solution to (18) reaches Amax at some a
Then there is an equilibrium where A remains at Amax for a > a        the
                                      max                      z
lowest a such that xU'(a)   (1-x)W'(A     ). Denote this a as a . For
                                                     .

                                                                     a a
the equilibrium path is again governed by (18), and A begins t decline. Te
proof is analogous to the proof of proposition 3.

16There may also exist semi—separating equilibria involving mixed strategies.
These equilibria involve perverse expectations,           just like the pooling
equilibrium discussed in the text. They, too, can be ruled out by the assump-
tion that T*(a) is weakly monotonic. We have been implicitly using the notion
of sequential equilibrium; see Kreps and Wilson (1982), for example. By
appealing to a slightly stronger equilibrium concept, such as the one discussed
in Cho and Kreps (1985), it should be possible to definitely rule out all the
perverse equilibria with pooling, and be left with just the unique separating
equilibrium.
                                       39


17See, for example, Frey and Schneider (1978). There are several other empiri-
cal studies which also attempt to relate presidential popularity to the severity
of the political business cycle. Golden and Poterba (1980) find no evidence of
a relationship.

18That the infinite horizon case may yield outcomes with higher social welfare
is well—known. In the macroeconomics literature, see Barro and Gordon (1983),
or Canzoneri (1985), for example. The "election game" may end with some posi-
tive probability each period; this effectively raises the incumbent's discount
rate.

19Alesina (1985a,b), in the context of a Barro-Gordon (1983)/Kydland—Prescott
(1977) model, has shown how cooperation between two political parties can serve
to dampen post-election volatility in prices and employment. Wage setters
aren't sure which party is going to win, and hence cannot predict prices. The
two parties may implicitly "cooperate" and always choose the same post-election
monetary policy despite their different preferences vis-a-vis inflation and
unemployment. The winner of the election will follow the cooperative strategy
if the long-term gain in reduced volatility outweighs the short-run costs. The
"third" channel we refer to in the text is similar to Alesina's, except that our
analysis pertains to pre—election volatility.

20The trigger-strategy equilibria are analogous to those discussed in Friedman
(1971).

       is a fairly general result in infinitely repeated games. The class of
punishment strategies considered here involve a reversion to the finite horizon
equilibrium. It is possible that there exist more severe punishment strategies
in our model, analogous to those described by Abreu (1985).

22Canzoneri (1985) models private information in the framework of Barro and
Gordon (1983). His analysis is an application of the trigger strategy
equilibrium proposed by Green and Porter (1984). The model here is different in
part because there are a continuum of types (instead of one known type), each of
whom must be presented with the appropriate incentives.
                                               40




                           Figure 1. The Timing of Events




                            I                         I
                                                                             The winner of the
 The incumbent party            All agents observe    I Markets clear,       period t election
 observes the latest            the most recent          Voters observe      takes office for
 shock to its competency        shock to voter pre-     a1 directly and      two periods. The
 level, a. The govern-          ferences,     and        the level of        timing of events is
 ment sets tax rates for        elections are held.      seignorage (or      the same -in t÷1 as in
 period t.                                              of the deficit).     t, except there -is no
                                                      I
                                                                             election. The next
__________________________________________________________________________   election   is at t+2.
                                    Election


                      PERIOD t                                                  PERIOD t+1
                                        41



          A




    max
-
                    ——
                         —




              O(L


                             Figure 2




      A




                             -S
                                  -S
                /

                                             cc


                             Figure 3
                 42




                      c4




      Figure 4




c0+


      Figure 5
