NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE SOLVENCY OF NATIONS:
CROSS-COUNTRY EVIDENCE ON THE DYNAMICS OF EXTERNAL ADJUSTMENT
C. Bora Durdu
Enrique G. Mendoza
Marco E. Terrones
Working Paper 18380
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18380

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

We thank Shaghil Ahmed, Daniel Beltran, Betty Daniel, Jorg Decressin, Linda Goldberg, David Romer,
Barbara Rossi, and participants of the Global Imbalances Workshop at the Federal Reserve Board
for comments and suggestions. We also thank Stephanie Curcuru and John Rogers for kindly sharing
their datasets, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti and Philip Lane for their data on net foreign asset positions.
The analysis undertaken in this paper would not have been possible without their efforts. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the International Monetary
Fund, or to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by C. Bora Durdu, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Marco E. Terrones. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

On the Solvency of Nations: Cross-Country Evidence on the Dynamics of External Adjustment
C. Bora Durdu, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Marco E. Terrones
NBER Working Paper No. 18380
September 2012
JEL No. E66,F32,F41
ABSTRACT
We test the hypothesis that net foreign asset positions are consistent with external solvency and examine
the dynamics of external adjustment using data for 50 countries over the 1970-2006 period. Our analysis
adapts Bohn’s (2007) error-correction reaction function approach—which tests for a negative long-run
relationship between net exports (NX) and net foreign assets (NFA) as a sufficiency condition for
the intertemporal budget constraint to hold—to a dynamic panel framework. Pooled Mean Group and
Mean Group error-correction estimation yield evidence of a statistically significant, negative response
of NX to NFA. Moreover, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the response is largely homogeneous
across countries. Our sensitivity analysis shows that the countries with relatively weaker fundamentals
need to respond more strongly to the changes in NFA to keep their NFAs on a sustainable path.

C. Bora Durdu
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Avenue N.W.
Washington, DC 20551
bora.durdu@frb.gov
Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu

Marco E. Terrones
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington DC 20431
mterrones@imf.org

1. Introduction
One of the most signiﬁcant developments in international ﬁnance over the past decade
was the emergence of large imbalances in current accounts and net foreign asset positions.
Figures 1a-1b shows the evolution of these “global imbalances” since 1997. The U.S. current
account deﬁcit rose sharply in this period, reaching a record 1.6 percent of world GDP in
2006 (see Figure 1a), while current account surpluses grew to record levels in Emerging Asia,
oil exporting countries, and Japan. In line with these developments, the dispersion of NFA
positions widened substantially (see Figure 1b). The NFA position of the United States
declined markedly, while those of Japan, Emerging Asia, and the oil exporting countries
rose. Recent economic turmoil has reduced the U.S. current account deﬁcit somewhat, but
the nation’s large negative NFA position has changed little, and this “stock imbalance” is
very likely to persist.
[Insert Figure 1a-b here.]
Large and persistent imbalances in the NFA positions of nations pose three central questions that this paper aims to address: First, are the net exports and net foreign asset positions
observed in the last few decades consistent with external solvency conditions (e.g., the expected intertemporal budget constraint (IBC) or the no-Ponzi game condition)? Second, if
they are, what dynamic pattern of adjustment do net exports and net foreign assets follow
in the process to attain external solvency? Third, how does this pattern of adjustment diﬀer
depending on country characteristics, such as income levels, institutional quality, leverage
levels, trade openness, etc.?
To answer these questions, we implement a dynamic framework for evaluating external
solvency based on recent theoretical results derived by Bohn (2007). In particular, we adapt
his error-correction reaction function approach to a cross-country dynamic panel environment.

2

Bohn’s Proposition 3 (henceforth, PB3) establishes a suﬃciency condition for solvency
according to which, if NX and NFA satisfy an error-correction speciﬁcation of the form
N Xt −ρN F At−1 = zt , and zt is integrated of order m for some ρ < 0 such that |ρ| ∈ (0, 1+r],
where r is a constant interest rate, then the IBC holds. This proposition implies that we
can study the dynamics of external solvency by estimating an error-correction “reaction
function” between NX and NFA testing for a negative, statistically signiﬁcant relationship
between the two. Evidence that this reaction function exists indicates that NX reacts in the
long run to changes in NFA in such a way that NFA grows slower than what a Ponzi scheme
implies. Moreover, the magnitude of ρ drives the speed of the adjustment process by which
trade surpluses or deﬁcits adjust to larger or smaller NFA positions, and it becomes a key
determinant of the long-run average of NFA.
The rationale for following this reaction function approach is that, as Bohn’s Proposition
1 (henceforth, PB1) shows, all what is required for the IBC to hold is that the NFA series
be integrated of order m for any ﬁnite m ≥ 0. Thus, testing for solvency per se is not very
interesting, because it is very unlikely that NFA (just like any other macroeconomic time
series) is not integrated of low order. Hence, shedding light on the characteristics of the
adjustment process that sustains solvency is a more important task, and for this purpose
Bohn proposed the reaction function approach behind PB3.
In this paper, we use the reaction function approach to study the predictions of the data
as to the nature of the dynamic process by which solvency is expected to be attained. To
do so, we conduct panel error-correction estimation of a model of the NFA–GDP ratio (nfa)
and the NX–GDP ratio (nx ), using a panel dataset covering 50 countries for the period
1970-2006. We estimate Pesaran et al.’s (1998) Pooled Mean Group (PMG) and Mean
Group (MG) estimators, and ﬁnd evidence in favor of the homogeneity conditions of the
former vis-à-vis the latter. PMG models the dynamic nx and nfa relationship as a long-run
reaction function common to all countries in the sample, with homogeneity tests to validate
this assumption (against the alternative MG estimator that uses country-speciﬁc long-run

3

relationships). Despite this homogeneity restriction, PMG still allows for country-speciﬁc
short-run deviations from the long-run relationship.
The PMG results show that there is a statistically signiﬁcant error-correction relation
between nx and nf a both for the full sample of countries and for sub-samples separating
emerging from industrial countries, and creditor from debtor countries. The systematic longrun component of nx responds negatively to movements in nf a, in line with Bohn’s PB3, and
homogeneity tests cannot reject the hypothesis that this response coeﬃcient is similar across
countries (v. the null of country-speciﬁc response coeﬃcients produced by MG estimation).
The long-run response coeﬃcient is estimated at −0.07, which indicates that a one percentage point drop in nf a leads to a 0.07 percentage points increase in nx in the long run.
This result also implies that, assuming realistic growth-adjusted real interest rates (below
7 percent), both nx and nf a are stationary processes.4 The error correction coeﬃcient is
estimated at −0.27, which implies that the adjustment of nx to a given change in nf a has
an average half-life of over 2.2 years.
Does the response coeﬃcient of NX to NFA vary with the level of development? To
examine this issue, we split the sample into two groups of countries: industrial and emerging
market countries. The PMG results show that nx is more responsive to movements in
nf a in emerging markets than in industrial countries. The response coeﬃcient in emerging
markets is about twice as large as in industrial countries. Keeping other factors constant
(i.e., country-speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀects), this diﬀerence implies that industrial countries converge
to higher long-run averages of nf a that are consistent with external solvency.
We also explore the importance of institutional quality, ﬁnancial sector development,
capital account openness, and exchange rate regime. Our results show that the countries
with relatively weaker fundamentals (i.e., less institutional quality, less ﬁnancial sector development, less open to capital, and less ﬂexible exchange rate regime) need to respond more
4

With growth-adjusted interest rate lower than the long-run response coeﬃcient, the increases (decreases)
in initially positive (initially negative) nf a due to interest earnings (payments) will be oﬀset by decreases
(increases) in nx so that nf a would not continue to increase (decrease), e.g., would remain stationary.

4

strongly to the changes in NFA to keep them on a sustainable path. Our baseline ﬁndings
regarding the sustainability of imbalances are preserved in all these cases.
Our work is related to the large empirical literature on tests of ﬁscal and external solvency
and estimation of reaction functions. Studies in this literature include Mendoza and Ostry
(2008), Trehan and Walsh (1991), Wickens and Uctum (1993), Ahmed and Rogers (1995), Liu
and Tanner (1996), Engel and Rogers (2006), and Nason and Rogers (2006), among others.
The tests we conduct here diﬀer from several of the tests conducted in this literature, and
in the related literature testing for ﬁscal solvency, which generally test for unit roots in the
foreign debt–GDP (or public debt–GDP) and NX–GDP (or primary balance–GDP) ratios;
for cointegration between exports and imports (or between ﬁscal revenues and outlays); or
for speciﬁc orders of integration in debt (public or external). Bohn (1998, 2005, 2007) showed
that failure of these tests cannot be relied on to evaluate solvency because the tests consider
only suﬃciency conditions that are not necessary for the IBC to hold, and hence can indicate
that observed debt dynamics violate solvency, when in fact they do not.
Our tests are in line with the literature on ﬁscal reaction functions pioneered by Bohn
(1998) with an application to U.S. data, and extended to a cross-country ﬁscal panel by
Mendoza and Ostry (2008).5 However, these reaction functions were estimated using ﬁscal
datasets in which public debt and ﬁscal balances are stationary as shares of GDP. In contrast,
the hypothesis of unit roots cannot be rejected in our external accounts data (in levels
or in shares of GDP), and hence we cannot implement Bohn’s (1998) reaction function
speciﬁcation for stationary variables. Instead, we use the more general error-correction
formulation characterized in PB3, which applies even when the relevant debt stock and net
revenue ﬂow variables are not stationary.6
5

Engel and Rogers (2006) tested for external solvency in the United States using Bohn’s (1998) test.
They estimated a conditional linear reaction function for nx and the negative of the net external ﬁnancial
position–to–GDP ratio over the 1791-2004 period. They obtained a negative and statistically signiﬁcant
response coeﬃcient, which indicates failure of the suﬃciency condition for external solvency.
6
We also conduct the mth -order-diﬀerence stationarity tests implied by PB1. Results for this exercise
can be found in Section 3.4.

5

Our work is also related to the large and growing literature on global imbalances. This
literature presents opposing views about the sustainability of the global imbalances, along
with explanations of why the observed NFA dynamics may be consistent or inconsistent
with solvency.7 In this context, our results suggest that global imbalances are consistent
with external solvency, inasmuch as using an international dataset that includes about a
decade of observations of the global imbalances era we ﬁnd a well-behaved reaction function
that is suﬃcient for the expected IBC to hold. Moreover, in our setup it is possible for the
IBC to hold even if nfa is not stationary, but as long as the growth of nfa and the predicted
response of nx is such that net foreign liabilities grow at a slower pace than the one implied
by a Ponzi scheme. As PB3 shows, this only requires ρ < 0.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the analytical foundations of our empirical methodology. Section 3 presents the results of the empirical tests.
Section 4 concludes.

2. Methodology
Our methodology for testing external solvency adapts Bohn’s (2007) theoretical ﬁndings
to a dynamic panel cross-country environment. Consider an open economy with the following
standard period-by-period resource constraint:

N F At = Xt − Mt + (1 + rt )N F At−1 ,
7

(1)

One group of studies (e.g., Summers (2004), Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2004), Roubini and Setser (2005),
Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005), Krugman (2006)) argues that these imbalances are not sustainable. On
the other hand, other studies (e.g., Backus, Henriksen, Lambert and Telmer (2005), Bernanke (2005), Croke,
Kamin and Leduc (2005), Durdu, Mendoza and Terrones (2008), Gourinchas and Rey (2005), Hausmann and
Sturzenegger (2005), Henriksen (2005), Mendoza, Quadrini and Rios-Rull (2007), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2005), Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2006), Cavallo and Tille (2006), Engel and Rogers (2006), Fogli
and Perri (2006), Ghironi, Lee and Rebucci (2006)), argue that the imbalances are an equilibrium outcome
of various developments such as diﬀerences in business cycle volatility, ﬁnancial development, demographic
dynamics, a ‘global savings glut,’ self insurance against ﬁnancial crises, or valuation eﬀects.

6

where M denotes imports, X exports, and r the interest rate on external assets and liabilities.
These variables could be expressed in nominal terms, real terms, or as a ratio to GDP as
long as r is adjusted accordingly (i.e., if the variables are in nominal terms, r is the nominal
interest rate; if the variables are in real terms, r is the real interest rate; if the variables are
ratios to GDP, 1 + r is the growth-adjusted real interest rate that follows from dividing the
gross real interest rate by the gross rate of output growth).
Under alternative standard simplifying assumptions about the nature of the rt process,
the resource constraint implies:8

N F At = −ψEt [Xt+1 − Mt+1 − N F At+1 ],

(2)

where ψ = 1/(1 + r) < 1, and r = E[rt+1 ]. The above expectational diﬀerence equation,
together with the transversality condition,

lim ψ n Et [N F At+n ] = 0,

n→∞

(3)

implies the following intertemporal budget constraint:

N F At = −

∞
∑

ψ i Et (Xt+i − Mt+i ).

(4)

t=1

In what follows, we review Bohn’s PB3, which establishes testable predictions about the
time-series behavior of NFA and NX that characterize economies for which (3) and (4) hold.
2.1. The Error-Correction Reaction Function Approach
8
Bohn (2007) reviews three possible assumptions that deliver this outcome: (1) r positive and constant,
(2) r i.i.d with a positive and constant conditional expectation, or (3) r is any stationary stochastic process
with mean r > 0, and subject to implicit restrictions that may be required so that the process of “interest
adjusted imports” (Mt∗ = Mt − (rt − r)N F At−1 ) has similar statistical properties as Mt .

7

Our framework to study external solvency looks for a systematic negative response of
NX to NFA in the form of an error-correction speciﬁcation. In particular, Bohn (2007)
established the following result:
Proposition 1. PB3. If N Xt − ρN F At−1 = zt ∼ I(m) for some ρ < 0, such that |ρ| ∈
(0, 1 + r], and rt = r is constant, then N F A satisfies condition (3).
Proof. See p. 1844 in Bohn (2007).
This proposition states that if a country’s NX and NFA positions are linked through an
error-correction relationship with a ρ coeﬃcient that satisﬁes the stated conditions, then IBC
and the transversality condition hold. Existence of such a reaction function implies that,
implicitly, households, ﬁrms and the government adjust their savings and investment plans
over time in a manner that is in line with the ﬁnancing requirements implied by changes in
the economy’s NFA position. With this response in place, the economy’s external liabilities
grow at a slower pace than what a Ponzi scheme implies, so that external positions are
consistent with the IBC. For countries with more negative ρ, the response of net exports
to changes in net foreign assets is stronger. In turn, more negative ρ’s are likely to reﬂect
limitations aﬀecting the ﬁnancial markets that those countries can access, in terms of the
level of ﬁnancial development and/or the presence of ﬁnancial frictions.
It is important to keep in mind that the above results establish only a suﬃciency condition
for the IBC to hold. Thus, it is possible that countries might not display a negative response
coeﬃcient and still display NFA data that are stationary of a ﬁnite order, so that IBC holds.
For example, in abnormal situations, like when a country is in default with its external
creditors, the reaction function relationship may break but the IBC is maintained because
by lowering its net external debt via restructuring the country brings closer to balance
its existing debt with the expected present value of its net exports. Hence, evidence of a
systematic reaction function consistent with solvency is not inconsistent with the observation
that countries may default. The reaction function describes the normal dynamic adjustment
of net exports to changes in debt, while default events reﬂect discrete adjustments.
8

Eﬃcient estimation of country-speciﬁc error-correction reaction functions linking NX
and NFA requires large datasets that are generally not available for a large number of
countries. The best data available for NFA positions, which is the dataset constructed
by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2010), covers only the 1970-2008 period. The alternative,
therefore, is to exploit the cross-sectional, time-series structure of the data to estimate a
panel error-correction speciﬁcation of the following form:

nxit − ρnf ait−1 = ηit ,

(5)

where η is an I(0) process. This is an error-correction speciﬁcation in the class of those
allowed by PB3.
Following Pesaran et al. (1999), we can nest the above relationship in an auto-regressive
distributed lag (ARDL) model. In this model, lagged dependent and independent variables
enter the right-hand-side of the model with lags of order p and q, respectively:

nxi,t = µi +

p
∑

λi,j nxi,t−j +

j=1

q
∑

′
δi,l
nf ai,t−l + εi,t ,

(6)

l=0

where nxi,t and nf ai,t denote the net exports–GDP and NFA–GDP ratios in country i at time
t respectively, and µi denotes country-speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀects. ε is a set of normally distributed
error terms with country-speciﬁc variances, var(εit ) = σi2 .
The above equation can be expressed in terms of a linear combination of variables in
levels and ﬁrst diﬀerences, as follows:

∆nxi,t = µi + ϕi nxi,t−1 + φi nf ai,t +

p−1
∑

λ∗i,j ∆nxi,t−j +

j=1

where ϕi = −(1 −

∑p
j=1

λi,h ), φi =

∑p

j=0 δi,j ,

with j = 1, 2, ..., p − 1, and l = 1, 2, ..., q − 1.

9

q−1
∑

∗
∆nf ai,t−l + εi,t ,
δi,l

l=0

λ∗i,j = −

∑p
m=j+1

∗
λi,m , δi,l
=−

∑q

m=l+1 δi,m ,

To highlight the long-run relationship, the above equation can be rearranged as:

∆nxi,t = µi + ϕi [nxi,t−1 − ρi nf ai,t ] +

p−1
∑

λ∗i,j ∆nxi,t−j

j=1

+

q−1
∑

∗
δi,l
∆nf ai,t−l + εi,t ,

(7)

l=0

where ρi = −ϕ−1
i φi denotes the long-run reaction function relationship between nx and nf a,
and ϕi denotes the speed at which NX adjusts towards that long-run relationship following a
change in NFA. As shown earlier, a negative and statistically signiﬁcant response coeﬃcient
ρ is suﬃcient to guarantee that IBC in eq. (4) holds.
We estimate the dynamic panel equation (7) using MG and PMG estimators. MG estimates independent error-correction equations for each country and computes the mean of
the country-speciﬁc error-correction coeﬃcients and its relevant statistics (see Pesaran and
Smith (1995)). This approach produces consistent estimates of the average of the coeﬃcients
as long as the country-speciﬁc coeﬃcients are independently distributed and the regressors
are exogenous. If some of the coeﬃcients are the same for all countries, however, the MG
estimates are ineﬃcient. In this case, PMG is eﬃcient (see, Pesaran, et. al. (1999)). The
PMG estimator imposes the restriction that the long-run coeﬃcients are the same across
countries, but the intercept, short-term coeﬃcients and error variances still can diﬀer. Pesaran et. al. (1999) suggest as the criterion for choosing whether the PMG estimator should
be preferred to the MG estimator a standard Hausman test on the homogeneity restriction
that the long-run coeﬃcient is the same for all countries.
Using the results from PMG or MG estimation, we can derive estimates of the long-run
average nf a positions to which each country converges. For the long-run average of nf a
to exist, nf a must be stationary, and this requires that the estimation results satisfy three
conditions: ϕ < 0, ρ < 0 and |ρ| > r. The ﬁrst condition is required for the error-correction
speciﬁcation to be well-deﬁned, and the last two follow from PB3. Note that if ρ < 0 but
|ρ| ≤ r, PB3 still applies and IBC still holds, but nf a and nx are not stationary (see Bohn
(2007)).

10

If nf a is stationary, equation (7) and the resource constraint imply that each country’s
nf a position converges to the following long-run average:

E[nf ai ] =

µi
.
ϕi (ρi + r)

(8)

If we use the PMG estimator, ρi is the same for all countries in the estimation panel, but
there can still be signiﬁcant heterogeneity in the predicted values of E[nf ai ] because PMG
still allows for country-speciﬁc estimates of ϕi and µi .
Since the stationarity conditions imply ϕi < 0 and (ρi + r) < 0, the denominator of the
right-hand-side of the above expression is positive, and therefore sign(E[nf ai ]) = sign(µi ).
The intuition for this result is straightforward: if µi is positive (negative), the country’s
long-run trade balance converges to a deﬁcit (surplus), and the resource constraint dictates
that in the long run E[nf ai ] = −E[nxi ]/r (i.e., net foreign assets are equal to the negative
of the annuity value of the trade balance).
It is important to note that sign(µi ) also determines whether E[nf ai ] is a positive or negative function of the parameters that determine it. E[nf ai ] is a positive (negative) function
of ρi , ϕi or r if µi is positive (negative). This result has an important implication: everything
else constant, countries with lower ρ converge to higher (lower) mean nf a positions if µi is
negative (positive). This result is also intuitive. Comparing two net debtor countries (each
with µi < 0), the one with a stronger response coeﬃcient responds to temporary declines in
its nf a by adjusting its trade surplus relatively more, vis-a-vis the alternative of widening
more the current account deﬁcit, and the larger surpluses imply a higher (less negative)
long-run average of nf a. A similar intuition applies to a comparison of two creditor countries. This suggests that stronger response coeﬃcients can be viewed as evidence that the
corresponding countries have more limited access to ﬁnancial markets, either to borrow or
to save, than those that display weaker response coeﬃcients.

11

2.2. General Equilibrium Representation
The derivation of the IBC in eq. (4) followed from a generic setup that applies to a variety
of intertemporal open-economy models, as long as condition (3), and the assumptions about
the r process that support the expectational diﬀerence equation for N F At hold. The latter
can be particularly restrictive, however, because they eﬀectively imply that the expected
future stream of trade balances in the right-hand-side of (4) can be discounted at a timeand state-invariant average interest rate. This simpliﬁcation is very useful for the proof of
PB3, but it is important to note that the key implications of PB3 still hold in more general
environments that do not restrict discount rates in the same way. In particular, we show
below that this is the case in a canonical general equilibrium model of a small open economy
with complete markets of state contingent claims traded at exogenous world-determined
prices.
Domestic output (y) in this economy is an exogenous random process, and there are
similar processes driving the output of a large number of identical countries. The worldwide state of nature s (i.e., the vector of all country output realizations) follows a stochastic
process with the Markov transition density function f (st+1 , st ). Since agents have access to
complete international markets of state-contingent claims bt (st+1 ), the small open economy’s
period-by-period budget constraint is:
∫
Q1 (st+1 |st )bt (st+1 )dst+1 = bt−1 (st ) + y(st ) − c(st ),

(9)

where Q1 (st+1 |st ) is the period-t world-determined price of a state-contingent claim that
pays one unit of good in state st+1 at period t + 1. At equilibrium, these prices are equal to
the corresponding stochastic marginal rates of substitution in consumption across time and
states of nature. Given these prices, and if the appropriate transversality condition holds,

12

the above budget constraint implies the following IBC:

bt−1 (st ) = N Xt +

∞
∑
j=1

[
Et

]
β j u′ (yt+j − N Xt+j )
N Xt+j ,
u′ (yt − N Xt )

(10)

where u′ (·) denotes the marginal utility of consumption, β denotes the subjective discount
factor, and

β j u′ (yt+j −N Xt+j )
u′ (yt −N Xt )

is the stochastic discount factor. If we denote by Rjt the rate of

return of a j-period-ahead risk-free asset, we can rewrite the IBC as follows:9

bt−1 (st ) = N Xt +

∞ {
∑

[
−1

[Rjt ] Et (N Xt+j ) + covt

j=1

β j u′ (yt+j − N Xt+j )
, N Xt+j
u′ (yt − N Xt )

]}
.

(11)

If the economy’s output process represents purely diversiﬁable country-speciﬁc risk (e.g.,
if the country-speciﬁc output processes are i.i.d. and aggregated into a non-stochastic worldwide income), domestic agents would attain a perfectly smooth consumption path constant
across time and states, and the compounded risk-free rate would be [Rjt ]−1 = β j . In this
case, the small open economy’s IBC simpliﬁes to the same expression in (4), and proposition
PB3 obviously apply.
If domestic agents cannot attain perfectly smooth consumption (which could happen for
a variety of reasons, such as a global component in country output ﬂuctuations, the existence
of nontradable goods, country-speciﬁc government purchases, incomplete markets, etc.), the
expressions of the IBC in (4) and (11) are not equivalent. In particular, the co-variance
terms in the right-hand side of (11) are not zero, and as a result a constant discount factor
equal to the unconditional expectation of the interest rate, as assumed in (4), is not the
appropriate discount factor that is consistent with the true solvency condition (11). The
correct discount factor is given by the equilibrium asset pricing kernel.
9

At equilibrium, this interest rate satisﬁes [Rjt ]−1 = β j Et

13

[

u′ (yt+j −N Xt+j )
u′ (yt −N Xt )

]

The intuition for why the risk-free rate is not the appropriate discount factor is that,
depending on the shocks hitting the economy, the NFA stocks that result from the resource
constraint can vary over a wide range and be correlated with sources of risk such as termsof-trade shocks, foreign demand shocks, etc. As a result, NFA, NX, and asset prices and
returns implied by the equilibrium pricing kernel are likely to follow very diﬀerent stochastic processes, and therefore risk-free interest rates are not appropriate discount rates. As
Bohn (2005) puts it: “not just technically wrong, but also providing a misleading economic
intuition.”
Equation (11) also implies an interesting relationship between the economy’s initial NFA
position and the sequence of conditional covariances of stochastic discount factors and NX.
In particular, given the same expected present discounted value of net exports, a Country
A with lower covariances than a Country B should display a lower initial NFA position. In
turn, assuming a standard isoelastic utility function, the covariances can be re-interpreted
as covariances between inverse consumption growth rates and net exports, which can then
be related to observed co-movements between these variables (see Section 3.2 below).
A second important implication of eq. (11) is that, as Bohn (1995 and 2005) showed,
it again implies that a reaction function with a negative, linear response of NX to NFA
is suﬃcient to guarantee that external solvency holds. Thus, this suﬃciency condition for
solvency holds here even with an interest rate that is generally not time- and state-invariant
as assumed in PB3.

3. Estimation Results
3.1. Data
Our analysis is based on annual data for the period 1970-2006 covering 21 industrial
countries (IC) and 29 emerging markets (EM). The IC mainly comprise the core OECD
countries while the EM are those listed in Appendix 1. NFA data in U.S. dollars are from

14

Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2010).10 Data for NX and GDP in U.S. dollars are from the
International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics. Summary statistics are
provided in Table 1.
[Insert Table 1 here.]
Our sample selection is simply based on data quality and availability. The sample includes
all the countries, which satisfy two criteria: ﬁrst, NX and NFA data start at least as of 1990
and second, if the ﬁrst holds, go as far back as possible up to 1970. Overall, the sample
consists of 1765 observations for both the NX and NFA positions–of which 754 observations
correspond to IC group and 1011 observations to EM group.
3.2. Panel Error-Correction Estimation
We test PB3 by estimating the dynamic panel equation derived in the previous Section
using PMG and MG estimators. Table 2 reports results for the full sample combining ICs
and EMs and for subsamples separating ICs from EMs. The table is divided into two
blocks. Block 1 shows our baseline results, and Block 2 shows results obtained with the
data expressed as ratios of world gdp.11 We selected the ARDL lag structure for each
country using the Schwartz Bayesian criterion. For the majority of countries, the criterion
rejected speciﬁcations without lagged dependent variables at conventional levels of statistical
signiﬁcance. Throughout this section, we examine the null hypothesis that there is no errorcorrection relation between nf a and nx under both the PMG and MG estimators, and use
t-statistics to test this hypothesis.
[Insert Table 2 here.]
10

Lane and Milesi-Ferretti report data up to 2008 but the observations for 2007 and 2008 are preliminary
and subject to revisions that are likely to be large in light of the large ﬂuctuations observed during the global
ﬁnancial crisis.
11
We also studied the results where only those countries with statistically signiﬁcant EC coeﬃcients and
intercept terms (as reported in Table 3) are kept in the sample. We found that the results are robust to this
sample selection.

15

The Full Sample panel in Block 1 shows the main results combining all the countries in
our sample. The Hausman h-statistic test cannot reject the slope homogeneity restriction,
indicating that the PMG estimator is preferred to the MG estimator (see the p-value, which is
above the critical threshold of 0.10). The PMG estimates of the long-run response coeﬃcient
show a negative and statistically signiﬁcant response of nx to nf a. A reduction (increase)
of one percentage point in nf a raises (lowers) nx by 0.07 percentage points. The estimated
error correction coeﬃcient of 0.27 (in absolute value) indicates that the adjustment of nx to
a given change in nf a has an average half-life of just over 2.25 years.12 Overall, these results
for the full sample indicate that PB3 and the external solvency condition hold.
The IC and EM panels of Block 1 show that the results of MG and PMG estimation
splitting the sample according to whether countries are industrialized or emerging economies
also support the hypothesis that PB3 holds. The null hypothesis of no error-correction
relation between nx and nf a is rejected in both the IC and EM groups, and the h-test
indicates that PMG dominates MG for both the IC and EM groups. What is more important
is that now, comparing across the two groups, we ﬁnd that the long-run response coeﬃcient
is higher in EMs than in ICs (−0.092 v. −0.047). Both of these estimates are statistically
signiﬁcant at a 1 percent signiﬁcance level. The error-correction coeﬃcients imply that the
adjustment of nx to changes in nf a is more protracted in ICs, for which the average half-life
is about 3.1 years, than in EM, for which the average half-life is 1.8 years.
The result indicating that the long-run response coeﬃcient of EMs is about twice larger
than that for ICs implies that net exports in EMs need to respond more to changes in net
foreign assets in order to support external solvency. As suggested earlier, this diﬀerence can
be attributed to the underdevelopment of ﬁnancial markets or the severity of the ﬁnancial
frictions that EMs face compared to ICs.
The half-life is calculated as log(0.5)/ log(1 − |EC|), where EC denotes the error correction coeﬃcient.
The higher is the |EC|, the lower is the half-life and the faster is the adjustment.
12

16

Table 3 shows the long-run nf a positions that each country group converges to. In this
table, we report the estimates for a selected small group of countries to illustrate potential
country-speciﬁc variations. The nf a estimates reported in column 5 are calculated using
the formula in (8). The column labeled “nfa for constant µ” calculates the implied estimate
for nf a in the formula where the intercept term (µ) is set to the value estimated for the
whole sample (All). The purpose of this exercise is to illustrate the potential changes in
estimated nf a driven solely by the changes in the EC term (ϕ). Likewise, the last column
shows the estimates for nf a when the EC coeﬃcient is ﬁxed at the estimate for the whole
sample to illustrate the importance of the intercept term. The results show that even if the
long-run coeﬃcient (ρ) is kept the same for both country groups, there are marked variations
in long-run nf a estimates that each group converges to. The large changes in these estimates
are driven by diﬀerences in the EC and intercept terms, which, in turn, is aﬀected by the
structural diﬀerences across countries.
[Insert Table 3 here.]
In order to study further the dynamic pattern of adjustment of net foreign assets and
net exports implied by our estimates, Figures 2 illustrate the impulse responses functions
of nf a and nx for a selected group of countries when those economies are subject to a
one-standard-deviation noise shock (ﬁgures are shown for only a selected set of countries
due to space limitations but results for other countries are available upon request). These
impulse responses are calculated using the PMG estimates reported in Table 2, and setting
the initial nf a and nx positions to the long-run values the model predicts they converge to.
The main ﬁnding is that although nx can converge back to its long-run equilibrium faster,
the adjustment of nf a (i.e., the stock imbalance) can persist much longer. The convergence
of the nf a positions to their long-run values in our sample takes from about 10 years to up
to 50 years. Our exercise also illustrates that, although the long-run coeﬃcients are common
across EMs and ICs, there is marked variation among countries in their convergence.

17

[Insert Figure 2 here.]
3.3. Robustness Analysis
We study next the robustness of our results to several interesting modiﬁcations. First,
we implement a reformulation of the data in which the NX and NFA series are normalized
using world GDP instead of country-speciﬁc GDPs (Block 2, Table 2). For this purpose, the
world GDP is simply the sum of the respective GDPs of the countries in the sample, each
expressed in U.S. dollars. In addition, we impose global market clearing by requiring NFAs
and NXs to sum to zero across the world. This is done by introducing a residual country
with NFA and NX positions equal to negative of the sum of the NFA and NX positions for
all countries in our sample. This exercise aims to explore if the baseline results are altered
by relative country size or by restrictions that force global market clearing.
In Block 2, the results for the Full Sample panel show that again the Hausman h-test
indicates that the cross-country slope homogeneity restriction cannot be rejected, and that
the PMG estimate of the response coeﬃcient (−0.077) must be chosen over the MG estimator.
The average half-life of adjustment to the long-run relationship in this scenario is 2.2 years.
These results are very similar to those obtained using the standard nx and nf a measures
based on country GDPs.
The results for the IC and EM panels with world gdp ratios are also similar to those
obtained with country gdp ratios. The Hausman h-test cannot reject the long-run homogeneity condition for ICs, which implies that the PMG estimate of −0.063 is preferred to
the MG estimator. And the average half life for this country group is 3.16 years. Both of
these estimates are very similar to ones reported using country gdp ratios. Also for EMs, the
Hausman h-test suggests that the hypothesis of long-run homogeneity cannot be rejected and
that the PMG estimate of −0.079 should be chosen. And the average half-life is estimated
at 1.8 years, which is very close to the one reported earlier.
The next robustness test explores the implications of splitting the sample into high vs. low
leverage countries (leverage is deﬁned as the ratio of total assets relative to equity liabilities,
18

see Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2011), for details). High (low) leverage countries are deﬁned
as those with above (below) median leverage level.13 The results of the dynamic panel
estimation are shown in Panel 1 of Table 4. For low leverage countries, the Hausman h-test
cannot reject the cross-country homogeneity restriction and, thus, indicates that the PMG
estimate of −0.124 should be preferred. The average half-life for this group is estimated at
2.11 years. For high leverage countries, the Hausman h-test indicates that the cross-country
homogeneity restriction can be rejected and that the MG estimate of −0.147 is preferred.
The average half-life for this group of countries is estimated at 2 years. In summary, these
ﬁndings suggest that in terms of its implications for sustainability, there is no signiﬁcant
behavioral diﬀerence between high or low leverage countries.
[Insert Table 4 here.]
Next, we explore the importance of trade openness (panel 2, Table 4). Those countries
with a volume of trade as a share of GDP higher than the volume for the median country
are treated as more open economies, and the rest is treated as less open economies. For
both groups, the long-run homogeneity restriction cannot be rejected. The implied PMG
estimates are −0.070 (with half life 2.8 years) and −0.065 (with half life 1.4 years) for more
open and less open economies, respectively, suggesting that there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between these two groups.
We also explore the importance of institutional quality, ﬁnancial sector development,
capital account openness, and exchange rate regime as shown in panels 3-6, respectively. In
all these cases with the exception of panel 6, the Hausman test cannot reject the long-run
homogeneity restriction so that the PMG should be the preferred method.14 These results
mainly show that the countries with relatively weaker fundamentals (i.e., less institutional
quality, less ﬁnancial sector development, less open to capital, and less ﬂexible exchange rate
13

The list of countries pertaining to each group is available on request.
Note that both the PMG and MG estimators provide evidence of external solvency. Thus, whether the
Hausman test selects the PMG over the MG estimator or vice versa does not change the main ﬁndings of
the paper.
14

19

regime) need to respond more strongly to the changes in NFA to keep them on a sustainable
path (notice that implied PMG estimates for the long-run coeﬃcient is more negative for
these groups compared to their counterparts with stronger fundamentals). However, our
baseline ﬁndings regarding the sustainability of imbalances are preserved in all these cases.
3.4. Testing Solvency with NFA Integration Tests
As explained earlier, proposition PB1 in Bohn (2007) established that a stochastic time
series of debt or assets is consistent with its corresponding IBC if the series is stationary at
any ﬁnite order of diﬀerencing.15
In our context, this proposition indicates that as long as any ﬁnite diﬀerence of NFA is
stationary, the NFA positions are consistent with solvency. The intuition, as pointed out by
Bohn (2007), is that if NFA is mth -order integrated, its n-period-ahead conditional expectation is a polynomial that is at most of order m. The discount factor in the transversality
condition, however, grows exponentially with n. Since exponential growth dominates polynomial growth of any order, NFA grows slower than the discount factor in the transversality
condition as long as NFA is integrated of any ﬁnite order.
Following the above proposition, we proceed now to establish, using the Augmented
Dickey-Fuller (ADF) and Phillips-Perron (PP) tests, that indeed the degree of integration
of nfa is ﬁnite, and in fact quite low, for each country in our sample. As discussed before,
however, this conﬁrms that the solvency condition cannot be rejected by the data, but is
otherwise uninformative about the nature of the external adjustment process.
We use both ADF and PP tests because, although they are asymptotically equivalent,
they can diﬀer signiﬁcantly in small samples (see Hamilton (1999)). We ﬁrst test the null
hypothesis that nfa is integrated of order 1 (H(0): nf a ∼ I(1)) against the alternative that it
is stationary (H(1): nf a ∼ I(0)). Second, if the null is accepted, we test the null hypothesis
15

A common test used to evaluate external solvency is to test if NFA is diﬀerence-stationary (integrated of
order 1). Rejection of this hypothesis was commonly taken as evidence against external solvency, but PB1
demonstrates that this interpretation is incorrect.

20

that the ﬁrst diﬀerence of nfa is integrated of order 1 (i.e., H(0): ∆nf a ∼ I(1)) against
the alternative that it is stationary (H(1): ∆nf a ∼ I(0)). We continue on this procedure
until we arrive at stationarity at a ﬁnite order of diﬀerencing. As detailed, we arrive at
stationarity in the ﬁrst order of diﬀerencing on most cases.
Figure 3 summarizes our main ﬁndings. The top panel of the Figure shows that ADF and
PP tests cannot reject the null hypothesis of a unit root in nfa at commonly used signiﬁcance
levels for all countries in the sample. The bottom panel shows that when we perform the
tests for the ﬁrst diﬀerence of nf a, however, we reject the null hypothesis of a unit root
in favor of the alternative of stationarity for almost all of the countries. This means that
in most countries nf a is integrated of order 1. Only for very few countries (e.g., Belgium,
Germany, Portugal, Colombia, India), we cannot reject the hypothesis of unit roots present
in the ﬁrst diﬀerences of nfa.16 These results do not change signiﬁcantly when we allow
for the possibility of structural breaks, intercepts and trend components in the time-series
processes.
[Insert Figure 3 here.]
To examine the robustness of the above ﬁndings, we also conducted tests using the KPSS
stationarity test, developed by Kwiatkowski, Phillips, Schmidt and Shin (1992). In contrast
with the ADF and PP unit root tests, KPSS tests the null that nfa is stationary (H(0):
nf a ∼ I(0))) against the alternative that it is integrated of order 1 (H(1): nf a ∼ I(1))). In
the event the null hypothesis is rejected, we next proceed to check if the ﬁrst diﬀerence of
nfa is stationary (i.e., H(0): ∆nf a ∼ I(0)) against the alternative that it is integrated of
order 1 (H(1): ∆nf a ∼ I(1)). As in the case of the ADF and PP tests, the results of the
KPPS test indicate that nf a is integrated of ﬁnite order.17
We performed additional robustness tests using historical data for the United States. The
U.S. has a large weight in our analysis because of its large share of global imbalances. For
16
17

For those countries, the second diﬀerence of nf a passes the unit root tests.
The results for KPSS tests are available upon request.

21

this exercise, we performed the aforementioned unit root tests using a long time series data of
nf a covering 1790-2004 from Engel and Rogers (2005), and data from Curcuru et al. (2008),
which is corrected for valuation changes. We ﬁnd that our main ﬁndings are preserved in
both datasets, i.e., nf a is nonstationary in levels but stationary in ﬁrst diﬀerences.
It is important to keep in mind that the usual caveats about inference problems in short
samples due to limited power of the tests are relevant for our sample. In particular, it is well
known that the ADF and PP tests do not have the power to distinguish between a unit root
or a near unit root process or between a drifting or trend stationary process. In fact, when
we examine the individual AR(1) coeﬃcients for each country (see Figure 4), we ﬁnd that
they span a wide range from 0.59 to 1.06, and that their standard errors are relatively large
(ranging from 0.065 to 0.146). Thus, although we could not reject the hypothesis of unit
roots in nf a, the possibility remains that due to the low power of the tests the true data
generating process is in fact stationary in levels. This, however, would not aﬀect our ﬁnding
that the data support the hypothesis that the solvency condition holds, since stationarity in
levels is also consistent with PB1.
[Insert Figure 4 here.]

4. Conclusion
This paper conducts an empirical investigation of external solvency and the dynamics of
adjustment of net foreign assets using a dynamic panel framework with data for 21 industrial
and 29 emerging economies for the 1970-2006 period.
Following the theoretical results established by Bohn (2007), we use an error-correction
reaction function approach to test for a suﬃciency condition that ensures that the intertemporal budget constraint linking net exports and net foreign assets holds. This condition
requires a negative, statistically signiﬁcant coeﬃcient of response of net exports to increases
in net foreign assets. We provide the ﬁrst set of empirical results in which this approach to
study external solvency has been applied in a cross-country dynamic panel setting.
22

We estimate panel error-correction models using PMG and MG estimators. In these
models, the reaction function is postulated as a long-run relationship that can diﬀer country
by country (in the MG model) or homogeneous across countries (in the PMG). Both estimators produced strong evidence of a negative, statistically signiﬁcant response coeﬃcient,
but homogeneity tests favor the PMG estimates over the MG estimates. We also provide
results of stationarity of net foreign assets at a low order of integration, which are in line
with Bohn’s (2007) necessary condition for solvency that simply requires net foreign assets
to be stationary at any ﬁnite order of integration. As Bohn argued, however, this approach
to study solvency is not very informative, given that stationarity of any ﬁnite order is a very
weak condition. In contrast, the reaction function approach allows us to characterize the
dynamic adjustment process of net foreign assets that is consistent with solvency, and also
allows to study how that adjustment process diﬀers according to country characteristics.
Our results indicate that the statistically signiﬁcant error-correction relation between nx
and nf a holds both for the full sample as well as for the subsamples. Simulations based
on PMG estimates show that nx can converge back to its long-run equilibrium faster, but
the adjustment of nf a (i.e., the stock imbalance) can persist much longer. The convergence
of the nf a positions to their long-run values in our sample takes from about 10 years to
up to 50 years. We also found that the response coeﬃcient of emerging markets is higher
than industrial countries, and that as a result emerging economies converge to higher longrun averages of nf a than industrial countries. Finally, the countries with relatively weaker
fundamentals (i.e., less institutional quality, less ﬁnancial sector development, less open to
capital, and less ﬂexible exchange rate regime) need to respond more strongly to the changes
in NFA to keep them on a sustainable path.
Our analysis has important implications for the ongoing debate on global imbalances.
Inasmuch as we found robust evidence in support of the reaction function suﬃciency condition for solvency using a database with 50 countries over 1970-2006, which includes more
than a decade of data from the global imbalances era, our ﬁndings suggest that observed

23

global imbalances are not inconsistent with external solvency. On the other hand, the reaction function provides only a suﬃciency condition for solvency, and hence does not preclude
instances in which adjusting net foreign assets to restore a path consistent with solvency
may be done by means such as sovereign default and debt restructuring. Still, the robust
empirical evidence in favor of the reaction function suggests that in “normal times” the
dynamics driven by the gradual adjustment of net exports in response to net foreign assets
are the centerpiece of the process that maintains solvency. Moreover, the evidence also indicates that there is a surprisingly high degree of homogeneity across countries in the response
coeﬃcient governing these dynamics.

24

References
[1] Ahmed, S. and J. H. Rogers (1995). “Government Budget Deﬁcits and Trade Deﬁcits:
Are Present-Value Constraints Satisﬁed in Long-Term Data?.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, vol. 36, pp. 351-74.
[2] Backus, D., Henriksen, E., Lambert, F., and Telmer, C. (2005). “Current Account Fact
and Fiction.” Unpublished manuscript, New York University.
[3] Bernanke, B. S. (2005). “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deﬁcit.”
Speech at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, March 10, 2005.
[4] Blanchard, O., Giavazzi, F., and Sa, F. (2005). “The U.S. Current Account and the
Dollar.” NBER Working Paper No. 11137.
[5] Bohn, H. (1998). “The Behavior of U.S. Public Debt and Deﬁcits.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 113, pp. 949-63.
[6] Bohn, H. (2005). “The Sustainability of Fiscal Policy in the United States.” Mimeo,
Department of Economics, University of California-Santa Barbara.
[7] Bohn, H. (2007). “Are Stationary and Cointegration Restrictions Really Necessary for
the Intertemporal Budget Constraint?.” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54, pp.
1837-1847.
[8] Caballero, R. J., Farhi, E., and Gourinchas, P. O. (2006). “An Equilibrium Model of
“Global Imbalances” and Low Interest Rates.” American Economic Review, Vol. 98(1),
pp. 358-393.
[9] Cavallo, M. and Tille, C. (2006). “Could Capital Gains Smooth a Current Account
Rebalancing?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ Report 237, January.

25

[10] Croke, H., Kamin, S. B., and Leduc, S. (2005). “Financial Market Developments and
Economic Activity during Current Account Adjustments in Industrial Economies.” International Finance Discussion Papers No. 827, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
[11] Curcuru, S., T. Dvorak, and F. Warnock. (2008). “Cross Border Return Diﬀerentials.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124, pp. 1495-1530, November.
[12] Durdu, C. B., E. G. Mendoza and M. E. Terrones (2008). “Precautionary Demand for
Foreign Assets in Sudden Stop Economies: An Assessment of the New Merchantilism.”
Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
[13] Engel, C. and Rogers, J.H. (2008), “The U.S. Current Account Deﬁcit and the Expected
Share of World Output,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
[14] Fogli, A. and Perri, F. (2006). “The great moderation and the US external imbalance,”
mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Minnesota.
[15] Ghironi, F., J. Lee and A. Rebucci (2006), “The Valuation Channel of External Adjustment,” mimeo, Research Department, International Monetary Fund.
[16] Gourinchas, P. O. and Rey, H. (2005). “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist:
US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege.” NBER Working Paper No.
11563.
[17] Gourinchas, P. O. and M. Obstfeld (2011). “Stories of the twenty century for the twentyﬁrst.” NBER Working Paper No. 17252.
[18] Hausman, R. and Sturzenegger, F. (2005), “U.S. and Global Imbalances: Can Dark
Matter Prevent a Big Bang?.” Center for International Development, Harvard University, Working Paper No. 124.

26

[19] Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2010). “The External Wealth of Nations Mark III:
Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2008. ”
[20] Henriksen, E. R. (2004), “A Demographic Explanation of U.S. and Japanese Current
Account Behvaior.” mimeo, Carnegie-Mellon University.
[21] Krugman, P. (2006), “Will there be a Dollar crisis?,” mimeo.
[22] Lane, P. R. and Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. (2005). “A Global Perspective on External Position.” NBER Working Paper No. 11589.
[23] Lane, P. R. and Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. (2006). “The External Wealth of Nations Mark
II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004.” IMF
Working Paper 06/69.
[24] Liu, P. and E. Tanner (1996). “International Intertemporal Solvency in Industrialized
Countries: Evidence and Implications.” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 62. Pp. 73949.
[25] Mendoza, E. G. and J. Ostry (2007). “International Evidence on Fiscal Solvency: Is
Fiscal Policy “Responsible”?.” NBER Working Paper, No. 12947.
[26] Nason, J. and J. H. Rogers (2006). “The Present Value Model of the Current Account Has Been Rejected: Round Up the Usual Suspects.” Journal of International
Economics, vol. 68 pp. 159-187.
[27] Obstfeld, M. and Rogoﬀ, K. (2004). “The Unsustainable US Current Account Position
Revisited.” NBER Working Paper No. 10869, November.
[28] Roubini, N. and Setser, B. (2005). “Will the Bretton Woods 2 Regime Unravel Soon?
The Risk of a Hard Landing in 2005-2006,” Unpublished manuscript, New York University and Oxford University.

27

[29] Summers, L. H. (2004). “The United States and the Global Adjustment Process.” Speech
at the Third Annual Stravos S. Niarchos Lecture, Institute for International Economics,
March 23, 2004.
[30] Terrones, M. E. and R. Cardarelli (2005). “Global Imbalances: A Saving and Investment
Perspective.” WEO, Building Institutions, September.
[31] Trehan, B. and Walsh, C. E. (1991). “Testing Intertemporal Budget Constraints: Theory
and Applications to U.S. Federal Budget and Current Account Deﬁcits,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 23(2), pp. 206-23, May.
[32] Uctum, M. and M. R. Wickens (1993). “The sustainability of current account deﬁcits:
A test of the US intertemporal budget constraint,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, vol. 17(3), pp. 423-441.

28

Appendix I: Derivation of the PMG equation
Following Pesaran et al. (1999), we can nest the relationship in eq. 5 in an auto-regressive
distributed lag (ARDL) model in which dependent and independent variables enter the righthand-side of the model with lags of order p and q, respectively:

nxi,t = µi +

p
∑

λi,j nxi,t−j +

j=1

q
∑

′
δi,l
nf ai,t−l + εi,t ,

l=0

where nxi,t and nf ai,t denote the net exports-GDP and NFA-GDP ratios in country i at time
t respectively, and µi denotes country-speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀects. ε is a set of normally distributed
error terms with country-speciﬁc variances, var(εit ) = σi2 .
Using the following identity in the left-hand side of the equation nxi,t = nxi,t−1 + ∆nxi,t ;
and the following identities in the right-hand side of the equation nxi,t−1 = nxi,t − ∆nxi,t
and nf ai,t−1 = nf ai,t − ∆nf ai,t ; the above equation can be rewriten as follows:

nxi,t−1 + ∆nxi,t = µi + λi,1 nxi,t−1 + δi,0 nf ai,t +

p
∑

λi,j [nxi,t−j+1 − ∆nxi,t−j+1 ]

j=2

+

q
∑

δi,l [nf ai,t−l+1 − ∆nf ai,t−l+1 ] + εi,t ,

l=1

or

∆nxi,t = µi − (1 − λi,1 − λi,2 ...)nxi,t−1 + (δi,0 + δi,1 + ...)nf ai,t − (λi,2
+λi,3 + ...)∆nxi,t−1 − (λi,3 + λi,4 + ...)∆nxi,t−2 − ...
−(δi,2 + δi,3 + ...)∆nf ai,t−1 − (δi,3 + δi,4 + ...)∆nf ai,t−2 − ... + εi,t ,

or
29

∆nxi,t = µi + ϕi nxi,t−1 + φi nf ai,t +

p−1
∑

λ∗i,j ∆nxi,t−j +

j=1

where ϕi = −(1 −

∑p
j=1

λi,h ), φi =

∑p

j=0 δi,j ,

q−1
∑

∗
δi,l
∆nf ai,t−l + εi,t ,

l=0

λ∗i,j = −

∑p
m=j+1

∗
λi,m , δi,l
=−

∑q

m=l+1 δi,m ,

with j = 1, 2, ..., p − 1, and l = 1, 2, ..., q − 1.
To highlight the long-run relationship, the above equation can be rearranged as:

∆nxi,t = µi + ϕi [nxi,t−1 − ρi nf ai,t ] +

p−1
∑
j=1

λ∗i,j ∆nxi,t−j

+

q−1
∑

∗
δi,l
∆nf ai,t−l + εi,t ,

l=0

where ρi = −ϕ−1
i φi denotes the long-run equilibrium relationship between nx and nf a,
and ϕi denotes the speed at which NX adjust toward their long-run equilibrium following a
change in NFA.
Appendix II: Sample of Countries
The sample comprises 21 industrial countries and 29 emerging markets.
Industrial Countries: Australia (AUS), Austria (AUT), Belgium (BEL), Canada (CAN),
Denmark (DNK), Finland (FIN), France (FRA), Germany (DEU), Greece (GRC), Ireland
(IRL), Italy (ITA), Japan (JPN), Netherlands (NLD), New Zealand (NZL), Norway (NOR),
Portugal (PRT), Spain (ESP), Sweden (SWE), Switzerland (CHE), United Kingdom (GBR),
United States (USA).
Emerging Markets: Argentina (ARG), Brazil (BRA), Chile (CHL), China (CHN),
Colombia (COL), Costa Rica (CRI), Ecuador (ECU), Egypt (EGY), El Salvador (SLV),
Hong Kong (HKG), Hungary (HUN), India (IND), Indonesia (IDN), Israel (ISR), Jordan
(JOR), Korea (KOR), Malaysia (MYS), Mexico (MEX), Morocco (MAR), Pakistan (PAK),
Peru (PER), Philippines (PHL), Saudi Arabia (SAU), Singapore (SGP), South Africa (ZAF),
Thailand (THA), Turkey (TUR), Uruguay (URY), Venezuela (VEN).
30

Figure 1a. Current Account Balances
1.5

1.0

Percent of World GDP

0.5

0.0
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0
United States

Euro Area

Japan

Emerging Asia

Oil exporters

Figure 1b. Net Foreign Assets
6.0

4.0

Percent of World GDP

2.0

0.0
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

-2.0

-4.0

-6.0

-8.0
United States

Euro Area

Japan

Emerging Asia

Oil exporters

Notes: Emerging Asia comprises of China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand.
Oil exporters comprise of Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Rep. of Congo, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Iran, Kuwait,
Libya, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkmenistan, UAE, Venezuela and Yemen

Figure 2. Impulse Responses to a One-Standard-Deviation
Noise Shock: Selected Industrial Countries

Notes: This figure illustrates the impulse responses functions of NFA and NX to a one-standard-deviation noise shock These
impulse responses are calculated using the PMG estimates reported in Table 2, and setting the initial conditions to the long-run
values the model predicts they converge to. The main finding is that although NX can converge back to its long-run equilibrium
faster, the adjustment of NFA (i.e., the stock imbalance) can persist much longer.

Argentina
Brazil
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Hong Kong
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Israel
Jordan
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
South Africa
Thailand
Turkey
Uruguay
Venezuela

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

p-value

Argentina
Brazil
Chile
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Hong Kong
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Israel
Jordan
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Morocco
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
South Africa
Thailand
Turkey
Uruguay
Venezuela

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

p-value

Figure 3. The Order of Intergration of Net Foreign Assets Positions
Lag = 0

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4
Dickey-Fuller

Phillips-Peron

0.3
Critical Value

0.2

0.1

0

Lag=1

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4
Dickey-Fuller

Phillips-Perron

0.3
Critical Value

0.2

0.1

0

Notes: This figure shows unit root tests for NFA using Dickey-Fuller and Phillips-Perron tests. The top panel shows that our tests cannot reject
cannot reject the null hypothesis of a unit root at commonly used significance levels. The bottom panel shows that when we perform the tests
for the first difference, however, we reject the null hypothesis of a unit root for almost all of the countries.

Venezuela

Turkey

Thailand

Singapore

Peru

Pakistan

Morocco

Mexico

Korea

India

Hungary

Hong Kong

Ecuador

Costa Rica

Colombia

China

Chile

Brazil

US

UK

Switzerland

Sweden

New Zealand

Greece

Germany

Finland

Belgium

Austria

Figure 4. The Estimated AR(1) Coefficients

Net Foreign Assets

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

Table 1. Sample Statistics
Period 1970-2006

All

Industrial
Countries

Emerging
Market
Economies

1. Net exports (% of GDP)
Mean
Median
Bottom quartile
Top quartile
Standard deviation
Number of observations
Number of countries

-0.7
-0.4
-3.5
2.6
8.6
1844.0
50.0

0.2
0.2
-1.9
2.7
4.9
777.0
21.0

-1.4
-1.3
-4.9
2.6
10.4
1067.0
29.0

-17.9
-20.0
-39.7
-4.8
42.2
1765.0
50.0

-10.5
-11.5
-26.8
4.6
34.2
754.0
21.0

-23.3
-28.8
-44.4
-12.7
46.5
1011.0
29.0

2. Net foreign assets (% of GDP)
Mean
Median
Bottom quartile
Top quartile
Standard deviation
Number of observations
Number of countries

Table 2. Dynamic Panel Estimates of Net Exports on Net Foreign Assets
(1970-2006 period)
Full Sample
Industrial Countries
MG
PMG
MG
PMG

Emerging Markets
MG
PMG

1. As a Percent of Country GDP
LR Coefficient
EC Coefficient

-0.124
[0.036]
-0.314***
[0.030]

-0.070***
[0.010]
-0.265***
[0.030]
2.38
[0.12]

-0.077
[0.058]
-0.279***
[0.042]

-0.047***
[0.013]
-0.201***
[0.039]
0.28
[0.60]

-0.157***
[0.045]
-0.339***
[0.042]

-0.092***
[0.015]
-0.316***
[0.043]
2.35
[0.13]

50

50

21

21

29

29

-0.077***
[0.010]
-0.271***
[0.037]
0.08
[0.78]

-0.443
[0.337]
-0.286***
[0.041]

-0.063***
[0.016]
-0.197***
[0.038]
1.27
[0.26]

0.083
[0.243]
-0.361***
[0.050]

-0.079***
[0.013]
-0.326***
[0.055]
0.45
[0.50]

Hausman Statistics
p-value
Number of countries

2. As a Percent of World GDP†
LR Coefficient
EC Coefficient
Hausman Statistics
p-value

-0.134
[0.200]
-0.330***
[0.034]

Number of countries
51
51
21
21
30
30
Note: The symbols *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%, levels, respectively. Standard errors are
reported in brackets. The Hausman statistic refers to the test statistic on the long-run homogeneity restriction. The maximum
number of lags considered in the estimation is 2.
†Includes the Rest of the World, which is created as the negative of the global external imbalances. The World Output is the sum of
the outputs of industrial and emerging market countries in our sample.

Table 3. Long-run NFA

Countries

𝜌

𝜙

𝜇

nfa

nfa for
constant 𝜇

-46.457

nfa for
constant 𝜙

Brazil

-0.0917***

-0.305***

-0.7071**

-28.740

India

-0.0917***

-0.3415***

-1.0257***

-32.904

-36.667

Japan

-0.0469***

-0.344***

0.6869***

42.960

-13.259

73.524

Mexico

-0.0917***

-0.3301***

-1.2124**

-48.225

-45.465

-50.377

Spain

-0.0469***

-0.2223**

-0.625**

-42.787

-14.513

-47.321

Venuzuela

-0.0917***

-0.4967***

2.9557**

74.189

-28.690

116.613

EM All

-0.0917***

-0.316***

-1.143**

-41.792

-41.792

-41.792

Industrial All

-0.0469***

-0.201***

-0.212

-25.263

-25.263

-25.263

Note: The table shows the long-run NFA positions that the PMG model converges to for the
countries with significant phi and mu. The last two columns illustrate the respective implied NFA
positions if the EC coefficient and intercept terms were kept constant at the value estimated for
the whole sample for the EM or IC group.

-27.740
-35.560

Table 4. Dynamic Panel Estimates of Net Exports on Net Foreign Assets
(As percent of GDP, 1970-2006 period)
1. External Leverage
Low Leverage
High Leverage
MG
PMG
MG
PMG
LR Coefficient
EC Coefficient

-0.093***
[0.053]
-0.344***
[0.044]

-0.124***
[0.021]
-0.280***
[0.046]
0.38
[0.54]

-0.147
[0.049]
-0.290 ***
[0.042]

-0.064
[0.011]
-0.240***
[0.042]
3.10
[0.08]

-0.081*
[0.043]
-0.375***
[0.048]

-0.060***
[0.014]
-0.327***
[0.049]
0.27
[0.60]

25

25

25

25

25

25

Hausman Statistics
p-value
Number of countries

4. Financial Sector Development
More Financial Sector Dev.
Less Financial Sector Dev.
MG
PMG
MG
PMG
LR Coefficient
EC Coefficient

-0.167*** -0.076***
[0.057]
[0.014]
-0.253*** -0.204***
[0.033]
[0.031]
2.67
[0.10]
25

25

5. Capital Account Openness
More Open to Capital
Less Open to Capital
MG
PMG
MG
PMG

-0.112*
[0.060]
-0.273***
[0.034]

-0.063***
[0.013]
-0.203***
[0.034]
0.68
[0.41]

-0.136***
[0.040]
-0.354***
[ 0.049]

-0.078***
[0.015]
-0.326***
[0.048]
2.35
[0.12]

-0.082*
[0.048]
-0.316***
[0.051]

-0.047***
[0.011]
-0.254***
[0.052]
0.55
[0.46]

25

25

25

25

25

25

Hausman Statistics
p-value
Number of countries

2. Trade Openness
Less Open Economies
More Open Economies
MG
PMG
MG
PMG

-0.159*** -0.133***
[0.052]
[0.020]
-0.312*** -0.259***
[0.037]
[0.038]
0.30
[0.58]
25

25

3. Institutional Quality
More Institutional Quality
Less Institutional Quality
MG
PMG
MG
PMG
-0.083
[0.051]
-0.287***
[0.036]

-0.048***
[0.012]
-0.216***
[0.035]
0.49
[0.49]

-0.168***
[0.050]
-0.343***
[0.049]

-0.097***
[0.016]
-0.327***
[0.050]
2.26
[0.13]

25

25

25

25

6. Exchange Rate Flexibility
More Flexible
Less Flexible
MG
PMG
MG
PMG
-0.077*
[0.043]
-0.344***
[0.041]

-0.062***
[0.010]
-0.285***
[0.042]
0.13
[0.71]

-0.222***
[0.061]
-0.250***
[0.035]

-0.114***
[0.028]
-0.220***
[0.032]
3.95
[0.05]

25

25

25

25

Note: The symbols *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%, levels, respectively. Standard errors are reported in brackets. The Hausman statistic refers to the test statistic on the
long-run homogeneity restriction. The maximum number of lags considered in the estimation is 2.

