                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             DURATION DEPENDENCE AND LABOR MARKET CONDITIONS:
                THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                             Kory Kroft
                                            Fabian Lange
                                       Matthew J. Notowidigdo

                                         Working Paper 18387
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18387


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2012




We thank Marianne Bertrand, Eric Budish, Jon Guryan, Yosh Halberstam, Rob McMillan, Phil Oreopoulos,
Paul Oyer, Yuanyan Wan, and seminar participants at University of Rochester, McGill University,
Utah Winter Business Economics Conference, University of North Carolina, Duke University, Iowa
University, McMaster University, George Mason University, and Oberlin College for helpful comments.
We thank Thomas Bramlage, Rolando Capote, David Hampton, Mark He, Paul Ho, Angela Li, Eric
Mackay, Aaron Meyer, Nabeel Thomas, Stephanie Wu, Steven Wu, Vicki Yang, and Dan Zangri for
excellent research assistance. We thank Ben Smith for excellent research assistance and exceptional
project management throughout the experiment, and we thank Bradley Crocker at HostedNumbers.com
for assistance with setting up the local phone numbers used in the experiment. We gratefully acknowledge
the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, the Neubauer
Family Assistant Professorship, and the Connaught Fund for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Kory Kroft, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Duration Dependence and Labor Market Conditions: Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment
Kory Kroft, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo
NBER Working Paper No. 18387
September 2012
JEL No. J64

                                                 ABSTRACT

This paper studies the role of employer behavior in generating "negative duration dependence" -- the
adverse effect of a longer unemployment spell -- by sending fictitious resumes to real job postings
in 100 U.S. cities. Our results indicate that the likelihood of receiving a callback for an interview significantly
decreases with the length of a worker's unemployment spell, with the majority of this decline occurring
during the first eight months. We explore how this effect varies with local labor market conditions,
and find that duration dependence is stronger when the labor market is tighter. We develop a theoretical
framework that shows how the sign of this interaction effect can be used to discern among leading
models of duration dependence based on employer screening, employer ranking, and human capital
depreciation. Our results suggest that employer screening plays an important role in generating duration
dependence; employers use the unemployment spell length as a signal of unobserved productivity
and recognize that this signal is less informative in weak labor markets.


Kory Kroft                                               Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Department of Economics and                              University of Chicago
School of Public Policy and Governance                   Booth School of Business
University of Toronto                                    5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
150 St. George Street                                    Chicago, IL 60637
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7                                      and NBER
kory.kroft@utoronto.ca                                   noto@chicagobooth.edu

Fabian Lange
McGill University
Department of Economics
855 Sherbrooke Street West
Montreal, Quebec, H3A 2T7
fabolange@gmail.com
1    Introduction

Does the length of time out of work diminish a worker’s job market opportunities?                         This question at-
tracts substantial attention from policymakers and researchers alike, re‡ecting the widespread belief that
the adverse e¤ect of a longer unemployment spell – what economists call “negative duration dependence”
– undermines the functioning of the labor market and entails large social costs.                   Recently, the sharp rise
in long-term unemployment has renewed interest in duration dependence; according to a recent report by
the Congressional Budget O¢ ce, long-term unemployment may “produce a self-perpetuating cycle wherein
protracted spells of unemployment heighten employers’ reluctance to hire those individuals, which in turn
leads to even longer spells of joblessness” (CBO 2012).
    Despite this widespread interest, it has proven very di¢ cult to credibly establish that a longer unem-
ployment spell has a genuine causal e¤ect on an individual’s job-…nding probability. The di¢ culty arises
because workers with di¤erent unemployment spell lengths who appear (otherwise) similar to researchers
may actually look very di¤erent to employers. As a result, in observational data, job-…nding rates might
decline with unemployment duration either because of “true”duration dependence or because unemployment
spell lengths correlate with other …xed characteristics that are observed by employers, but not researchers.2
Perhaps as a result of this challenge, empirical evidence on duration dependence is mixed. Van den Berg
and van Ours (1996) …nd that, “except for white men, duration dependence is dominated by unobserved
heterogeneity.” Machin and Manning (1998) review the large literature and …nd little evidence of duration
dependence, once one controls for observable …xed characteristics. On the other hand, studies by Imbens and
Lynch (2006) and Shimer (2008) …nd evidence of negative duration dependence. The state of the empirical
literature is succinctly summarized by Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998), who write: “It is fair to say that the
general evidence for duration dependence is mixed and controversial”.
    In this paper, we confront this challenge by estimating duration dependence using a large-scale resume
audit study. We submit …ctitious resumes to real, online job postings in each of the 100 largest metropolitan
areas (MSAs) in the U.S., and we track “callbacks” from employers for each submission.                           In total, we
apply to roughly 3,000 job postings in Sales, Customer Service, Administrative Support, and Clerical job
categories, and we submit roughly 12,000 resumes. In designing each resume, we explicitly randomize both
the employment status and the length of the current unemployment spell from 1 to 36 months (if the worker
is unemployed), so that the unemployment spell length is orthogonal to all of the other characteristics of the
resume that are observable by potential employers.3                Our experiment therefore directly uncovers duration
   2 More broadly, this challenge relates to the standard econometric problem of distinguishing state dependence from unobserved

heterogeneity. Previous work has shown that without functional form assumptions on job-…nding rates, it is not possible to
distinguish between duration dependence and unobserved heterogeneity using observational data with a single unemployment
spell for each individual (Heckman and Singer 1984). Multiple-spell data can resolve this identi…cation problem, but at the cost
of strong assumptions on how job-…nding rates vary across unemployment spells for a given individual.
   3 To be precise, from the employer’s perspective, a "gap" in work experience on a CV technically corresponds to a period of

non-employment. Nevertheless, we will refer to this gap throughout as an unemployment spell, although we recognize that this



                                                               1
dependence arising through employers’beliefs about unemployed workers.
    To help guide our empirical analysis and interpret our experimental results, we develop a simple “me-
chanical model” of unemployment. We label the model “mechanical” since it does not contain any micro-
foundations for …rm or worker behavior. Firms are homogeneous and workers can be of two types: high or
low. Workers are born continuously into unemployment and meet …rms randomly. We characterize the job-
…nding probability for an unemployed worker (at a given unemployment duration) under three assumptions.
First, …rms are more likely to hire high type workers (“Assumption 1”). Second, for both types of workers,
the chance of getting hired increases with the share of high types (“Assumption 2”). Third, worker type and
the share of high types are both weakly separable from market tightness in the job-…nding rate (“Assumption
3”). We show formally that Assumptions 1-2 imply negative duration dependence in job-…nding rates, and
Assumptions 1-3 imply that duration dependence is stronger when the labor market is tighter (i.e., a higher
ratio of vacancies to unemployed workers).
    There are two key advantages of pursuing this reduced-form modeling approach. First, it allows us to
isolate in a clear way the assumptions that are pivotal in generating negative duration dependence (Assump-
tions 1 - 2). Second, it is useful in discerning among leading models of duration dependence (Assumptions 1
- 3). We show that employer screening models (Vishwanath 1989; Lockwood 1991) satisfy Assumptions 1-3
and therefore predict negative duration dependence and a positive relationship between duration dependence
and market tightness. On the other hand, we show that alternative models of duration dependence do not
satisfy all three assumptions and therefore di¤er in their predictions regarding how duration dependence
varies across local labor markets. The employer ranking model (Blanchard and Diamond 1994; Moscarini
1997) predicts a negative interaction between duration dependence and market tightness, and a model of
human capital depreciation (Acemoglu 1995) predicts no interaction since the rate of human capital depre-
ciation does not vary with market tightness.            Thus, it is possible to distinguish between leading models
of duration dependence by examining how duration dependence varies with labor market conditions. Our
second major empirical contribution is to implement this test empirically. To do this, we exploit variation
in labor market tightness across 100 local labor markets.
    Turning to empirical results, a simple plot of the raw data displays clear visual evidence of negative
duration dependence: the average callback rate sharply declines during the …rst eight months of unemploy-
ment and then it stabilizes. OLS regression results con…rm the pattern from the nonparametric plot. At
eight months of unemployment, callbacks are about 45 percent lower than at one month of unemployment,
as the callback rate falls from roughly 7% to 4% over this range.                After eight months of unemployment,
we …nd that the marginal e¤ect of additional months of unemployment is negligible.                       To benchmark the
is not the conventional de…nition. Our view is that the current gap represents the best available information to an employer
about a job seeker’s current job market status; in particular, whether he or she is currently unemployed, and what that signals
about his/her productivity.




                                                              2
magnitude of this result, in their study of racial discrimination, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) …nd that
Black-sounding names received about 33 percent fewer callbacks than White-sounding names. The sharp
drop in the callback rate at the beginning of the spell suggests that gradual loss of skill is unlikely to be the
sole factor that accounts for duration dependence.
   We next estimate how duration dependence varies with labor market conditions. Our results indicate that
duration dependence is signi…cantly stronger when the local labor market is tight. This …nding is robust
to using several di¤erent measures of market tightness: …rst, the callback rate for a newly-unemployed
individual in each MSA, a measure which is motivated by the mechanical model; second, metropolitan area
monthly unemployment rates; …nally, metropolitan area-level data on vacancies and unemployment (from
the Help Wanted OnLine Index and the BLS, respectively).          As the model makes clear, these results are
consistent with employers using unemployment spell length as a signal of unobserved productivity, and
employers recognizing that this signal is less informative in weak labor markets.       However, we emphasize
that our evidence does not rule out a role for human capital depreciation, as well.          For instance, it is
possible that both human capital depreciation and screening are operative in generating negative duration
dependence across all local labor markets, with the screening component leading to an interaction e¤ect with
market tightness.
   Most closely related to our work is Oberholzer-Gee (2008) and Eriksson and Rooth (2011), who also
investigate how employers respond to unemployment spells using a resume audit study.            Oberholzer-Gee
(2008) analyzes Swiss employer responses to 628 resume submissions. Eriksson and Rooth (2011) submit
8,466 job applications to 3,786 employers in Sweden and compare the e¤ects of contemporary and past un-
employment spells (e.g., unemployment spells at graduation). Both of these studies report results consistent
with the long-term unemployed being less likely to receive callbacks. Our study builds on these papers in two
ways: …rst, unlike these studies which randomize across a small number of unemployment spell lengths, our
study estimates a callback rate for each month in the interval [1,36]. This allows us to ‡exibly estimate the
relationship between callback rate and unemployment duration, which we …nd is highly nonlinear. Second,
neither of these papers considers how duration dependence varies across local labor markets, a key feature
of our experiment.
   To address the concern (both in our work and in the related papers above) that the unemployment spell
length is not salient to employers, we administer a web-based survey to MBA students. Our survey results
indicate that the length of the current unemployment spell is salient to the survey participants; in particular,
subjects were able to recall a worker’s employment status and unemployment spell length with roughly the
same degree of accuracy and precision as other resume characteristics such as education and job experience.
This supports our assumption that the way we represent unemployment durations on resumes is salient to
the employers in our experiment.



                                                       3
      The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 develops the mechanical model.         Section 3
describes the main predictions from three speci…c models of duration dependence: the employer screening
model, the human capital depreciation model, and the employer ranking model.           Section 4 describes the
experimental design, the resuls from the web-based survey, and the empirical models. Section 5 describes
our experimental results. Section 6 concludes.


2      Mechanical Model

This section describes a mechanical model of unemployment. We purposely label the model “mechanical”
since it is not explicitly based on microfoundations; it does not specify an information structure, …rm or
worker objectives, or a wage setting process. The question we address is the following: What properties
on the job-…nding process lead to duration dependence and how does duration dependence vary with labor
market conditions? By considering a reduced-form approach to this problem, we simplify the analysis
considerably. More importantly, this approach demonstrates that the predictions of the model are general:
we show in Section 3 that a class of employer screening models, including a generalized version of the
screening model in Lockwood (1991), map into the reduced-form of this mechanical model and therefore
generate the same comparative statics. Thus, the approach pursued here can be thought of as identifying
the pivotal assumptions in screening models that feature duration dependence in unemployment.


2.1     Population Flows

We consider economies in steady state such that in‡ows into unemployment are equal to out‡ows out of
unemployment. A population of mass 1 is born continuously into unemployment. There are two possible
types: either “high”(y = h) or “low”(y = l). The fraction of these two types are   0   and 1   0,   respectively.
In the screening model below, worker type will correspond to unobserved worker productivity.
      In the unemployed population, we allow the share of high types to depend on unemployment duration,
which we denote by d. Formally, we de…ne:


                                               (d)   Pr(y = hjd)                                             (1)


      In terms of out‡ows, we assume that individuals transition out of unemployment either by …nding a job
or by retiring. We assume that the job-…nding rate depends on worker type and the share of high types,
and we denote this rate by hy ( (d)).
      We assume that individuals retire at an exogenous rate       which does not depend on worker type or
labor market status. The decision to assume away job separations is primarily to keep the analysis simple.
Employer screening models that feature job separations are more complicated since this provides another



                                                      4
source of information to potential employers to learn about worker productivity. Our interest is characterizing
the adverse e¤ects of a current spell of unemployment. While characterizing the e¤ects of a worker’s entire
work history is interesting, it is beyond the scope of our study. We therefore follow Lockwood (1991) and
assume that a worker is employed with at most a single …rm in his lifetime.
      The individual exit rate out of unemployment is the sum of the individual job-…nding rate and retirement
rate:
                                                         hy ( (d)) +                                       (2)

Given the escape rate in equation (2),          (d) satis…es:

                                                              Rd
                                                   0   exp(   (hh ( ( )) + ) d )
                                                                0
                   (d) =              Rd                                       Rd                          (3)
                           0   exp(   0
                                           (hh ( ( )) + ) d ) + (1    0 ) exp(  0
                                                                                  (hl ( ( )) + ) d )

   To interpret equation (3), recall that the unemployed population at d = 0 is normalized to 1, so 0 gives
                                                              Rd
the number of newly unemployed high types and the term exp( 0 (hh ( ( )) + ) d ) is the survival function
for high types. Thus, the numerator exactly represents the number of high types that are unemployed after
d periods. By similar logic, the denominator is the total number of individuals that are unemployed at
duration d. Thus, their ratio pins down           (d).
      Finally, given the individual job-…nding rate and the share of high types, we can de…ne the population
job-…nding rate at a given duration as a mixture of the type-speci…c job-…nding rates:


                                  h( (d)) =       (d) hh ( (d)) + (1    (d)) hl ( (d))                     (4)


      Expression (4) shows that the population job-…nding rate varies with unemployment duration through
two channels. First, it varies directly with duration through the share of high type workers. This source
of variation represents “unobserved heterogeneity”. Intuitively, the composition of types at risk of leaving
unemployment shifts over time. Second, it varies indirectly with duration through the individual job …nding
rates. This source of variation captures “true duration dependence”and represents how the population job-
…nding rate varies over the spell, holding the share of high types constant. Ultimately, both sources depend
on how the share of high types varies over the unemployment spell, so that the two sources of duration
dependence interact and reinforce each other.


2.2     Duration Dependence

To operationalize the model, we impose two key assumptions on the individual job-…nding rate. The …rst
assumption states that there is heterogeneity in job-…nding rates across types, so that one type …nds jobs at
higher rates than the other. Without loss of generality, we assume that the “high”type …nds job at a higher



                                                                5
rate.

Assumption 1 At a given unemployment duration, high types …nd jobs at higher rates than low types:


                                                            hh ( (d)) > hl ( (d))                                                                 (5)


The second assumption restricts how the type-speci…c job-…nding rates vary with the share of high types in
the unemployed population.

Assumption 2 The individual job-…nding rates increase in the share of high types:

                                                                @hy ( (d))
                                                                                     0                                                            (6)
                                                                   @

   Assumptions 1 and 2 are intuitively explained in the context of employer screening models (Vishwanath
1989; Lockwood 1991). In such models, worker types di¤er in productivity, …rms draw signals on worker
productivity, and …rms set a hiring threshold for signals.                                Since the signals are informative on worker
productivity, high types are more likely to draw high signals and be hired. Assumption 2 is satis…ed since
the hiring threshold decreases in the …rm’s prior that a worker is productive. Under rational expectations,
this threshold equals the share of high types in the unemployed population.
   The next proposition states that the proportion of high types among the unemployed and, as a result,
the job-…nding rates decline with duration.

Proposition 1 The proportion of high types in the unemployed population (3) and the population job-…nding
rate (4) decline strictly with duration. The individual job-…nding rate declines weakly with duration d. Thus,
the model features negative duration dependence in unemployment.

   The proof is straightforward. First, by Assumption 1, high types …nd jobs more frequently than low
types. As a result, the composition of the unemployed shifts to low types at longer durations. Since the
share of high types declines over the spell and since individual job-…nding rates are increasing in the share
of high types (Assumption 2), individual job-…nding rates decline over the spell. Finally, the population
job-…nding rate declines due to true negative duration dependence and unobserved heterogeneity.4
   To study how duration dependence interacts with market tightness, we impose more structure on individ-
ual job-…nding rates. First, we assume that a single worker and a single …rm randomly meet according to the
constant returns to scale (CRS) matching function m (U; V ) ; where U and V are the number of unemployed
  4 More                                    (d)                                                                                           0 (d)
            formally, de…ne (d) =       1    (d)
                                                 .   Di¤erentiating   (d) with respect to d and applying Assumption 1 gives                       < 0.
                                                       @hy ( (d))                         @h( (d))               @h ( (d))             @hh ( (d))
This combined with Assumption 2 delivers                  @d
                                                                      0.       Finally,      @d
                                                                                                     = (1   (d)) l @d        +   (d)       @d
                                                                                                                                                    +
                                                                                                                0                        0
@ (d)
 @d
      (hh   ( (d))    hl ( (d))) < 0:
 <0              >0




                                                                           6
                                                            V
workers and vacancies, respectively. De…ning x =            U   as labor market tightness, the CRS assumption implies
that the rate at which unemployed individuals are matched with vacancies depends only on labor market
tightness. Under this assumption, worker type does not in‡uence the arrival rate of jobs o¤ers. This is useful
since it allows us to isolate the consequences of employer behavior.
     Once a …rm and worker have matched, we assume that the conditional hiring rate depends on worker type
and the share of high types in the population. We denote this rate by ly ( (d; x)) and assume that lh ( ) >
               @ly ( )
ll ( ) and       @       0, which ensures that the individual job-…nding rate continues to satisfy Assumptions 1
and 2. The third key assumption of the model governs how individual job-…nding rates vary with market
tightness.

Assumption 3 In the individual job-…nding rate, the type of the worker and the share of high types condi-
tional on duration are weakly separable from market tightness:


                                               hy (d; x) = m (x)       ly ( (d; x))                                          (7)


     We next de…ne the following function:

                                                                    h (d; x)
                                                      r(d; x) =                                                              (8)
                                                                    h (0; x)

The function r(d; x) is the ratio of the population job-…nding rate evaluated at duration d to the population
job-…nding rate among the newly unemployed.                 This is an intuitive measure of the strength of duration
dependence. If there is negative duration dependence, this ratio is below 1; conversely, if there is positive
duration dependence, this ratio exceeds 1.5              A key property of this ratio is that it depends on market
tightness only through the share of high types. The e¤ect of market tightness on duration dependence
occuring through the arrival rate is not operational since it a¤ects the job-…nding rate at all durations in a
uniform way. This leads to the second proposition.

Proposition 2 Duration dependence is stronger (more negative) when labor markets are tighter.

     Formally, this proposition states that r(d; x) for tight labor markets (large x) lies everywhere below the
function r(d; x) observed in loose labor markets (small x); i.e., @r(d; x)=@x < 0. For a mathematical proof,
we refer the reader to Appendix A. Intuitively, in tight labor markets, workers are more likely to meet
early on with …rms. By Assumption 3, this rate of matching does not depend on worker type. Assumption
1 guarantees that high types are relatively more likely to exit unemployment when matched with a …rm.
   5 An   alternative measure of how duration dependence varies with market tightness is the cross-derivative of this function:
@ 2 r(d;x)
  @d@x
         However, the cross-derivative is local, and it can be positive for some values of d and negative for others. As it turns
           :
out, our measure has no general implications for such local measures of duration dependence. Instead, we will use a global
measure that holds for all positive values of d.



                                                                7
This selection e¤ect implies that the share of low types is relatively larger among the long-term unemployed.
By Assumption 2, this strengthens duration dependence. By contrast, in loose labor markets, both worker
types are less likely to meet open vacancies. Therefore, the share of high types will vary little over time,
generating less duration dependence.                      As described in more detail in Appendix C, in employer screening
models that are consistent with this mechanical model, market tightness a¤ects the job-…nding rate through
two channels. First, it a¤ects the rate at which workers meet …rms.                      Second, it controls the precision of
the information revealed by a worker’s unemployment duration.                        In tight markets, a long unemployment
spell reveals that the worker has likely been previously found unsuitable by prospective employers. Thus,
the conditional hiring rate will implicitly depend on market tightness.


2.3     Callbacks

Propositions 1 and 2 deliver testable predictions on job-…nding rates. However, in our audit experiment,
we do not observe hiring decisions, but rather whether applicants are called back for interviews. To align
the theory more closely with our empirical application, we now adapt the model to incorporate an interview
stage and callbacks. We de…ne the callback rate as the probability that a worker gets invited for an interview.
This is to be distinguished from the job-…nding rate, the (joint) probability a worker receives a callback and
gets hired.
      The decision to interview a worker will depend on individual characteristics in addition to the duration
of unemployment. We represent these characteristics by the vector                     and denote its distribution conditional
on type y and duration d by                   y (:jd).    The unconditional distribution is given by     (:jd).6 We denote the
share of high types in the population by                      (d; ).
      We consider the case where the callback rate has the form c ( (d; ) ; x) and we assume that it is weakly
increasing in the high type share. When d = 0, the callback rate varies with market tightness only through
the congestion channel; in particular, the information channel is absent. Intuitively, a newly unemployed
worker reveals no information to …rms that can be used to predict productivity.                         Thus, in our empirical
work, we will use the callback rate of a newly unemployed worker as a measure of market tightness. The
population job-…nding rate, conditional on , is obtained by replacing                     (d) with     (d; ) and hy ( (d)) with
hy ( (d; )) in equation (4). This immediately implies the following corollary to Proposition 1:

Corollary 1 Callback rates exhibit negative duration dependence:

      Intuitively, once all of a worker’s characteristics ( ) are accounted for, back luck that leads to a longer
duration at the individual level will lead to a callback rate that declines at the individual level. Next, as an
  6    (:jd) is equal to   (d)   h (:jd)   + (1    (d))    l (:jd).




                                                                       8
analog to the function r(d; x), we de…ne the relative ratio of callback rates:

                                                                 c (d; ; x)
                                                rc (d; x; ) =                                                    (9)
                                                                 c (0; ; x)

This delivers the following corollary to Proposition 2:

Corollary 2 Duration dependence in the callback rate is stronger if markets are tighter.

      Formally, this corollary states that conditional on ; rc (d; x; )       rc (d; x0 ; ) if x < x0 . The practical
value of this corollary is that it implies we can use callback rates to test the implications on job-…nding rates
that we derived above. In practice, it is di¢ cult to empirically test for true duration dependence in callback
rates using observational data. If an econometrician cannot fully account for the impact of            on callbacks,
                  @c( (d; ))
the estimate of       @d       will be confounded by composition bias. For example, it is easy to account for some
characteristics on a resume (such as gender, education and experience). However, resumes are complex and
it is di¢ cult to fully control for all characteristics. Even though the econometrician might have access to
the entire resume, he will not know the complete mapping between callbacks and all of the variables on the
resume and potential interactions between them.
      To illustrate this bias more formally, consider the extreme case where callbacks depend only on , so that
we may write the callback rate as c ( ). Furthermore, assume that c0 ( ) > 0. This represents a situation
where …rms do not condition their callback decisions on d; there is no true duration dependence under this
formulation. Assume that            is unobserved by the econometrician. The population callback rate c(d) is
de…ned as follows:
                                                      Z
                                                                 d ( jd)
                                              c (d)       c( )           d                                      (10)
                                                                   d

      In Appendix A, we establish that c0 (d) < 0. Intuitively, the unemployment distribution shifts to those
with low     as spell lengths increase; resumes with long current spells of unemployment are more likely to be
low     and thus likely to have lower callback rates, even in the absence of duration dependence. Thus, in the
absence of any duration dependence, callback rates will decline unless we are able to control for all relevant
components of the CV.
      In our resume audit study, randomization of unemployment durations ensures that the distribution of
unobserved characteristics         is independent of the duration of unemployment, and so the composition bias
described above will be absent. Since we randomize unemployment duration, our experiment recovers how
the average callback rate evolves with unemployment duration. More formally, de…ne the distribution e (:)
as the distribution of characteristics on our experimental set of CVs. Note that this distribution will not be




                                                            9
the population distribution. Instead, we recover the following object:

                                                                   Z
                                   e
                                   c (d) = E e [c ( (d; )) jd] =       c ( (d; )) d e ( )                                (11)


     The function e
                  c (d) is an average over the callback rates for which the above corollary holds and the
predictions of this corollary therefore also apply to e
                                                      c(d). This implies that we can use the callback rates
elicited in our experiment to test the implications of the model. Finally, it is worth noting that even
conditional on , the population job-…nding rate, h ( (d; )), will nevertheless decline in d due in part to
unobserved heterogeneity. This occurs since hh ( (d; )) > hl ( (d; )) and because the share of high types
conditional on       increases with duration d.       To see the intuition for this, consider a …rm who interviews
a high type and a low type worker, both of whom have the same value of . As we show formally in the
screening model in Appendix C, it is more likely that a …rm draws a relatively higher signal (z) for the high
type worker. Thus, workers with long durations will be those with low values of                   and low values of z. An
econometrician who observes         –but not the signal z at the hiring stage –may be led to conclude that there
is duration dependence in job-…nding rates when in fact the estimates are picking up a selection e¤ect. In
this sense, it is more straightforward to identify duration dependence in callback rates than in job-…nding
rates, since an econometrician only needs to condition on the information that a potential employer sees at
the interview stage, not the hiring stage.


3     Employer Screening, Human Capital Depreciation, and Employer Ranking

In this section, we brie‡y (and informally) present three leading behavioral models of employer-driven du-
ration dependence.7 In doing so, we discuss whether the hiring rates in these models satisfy Assumptions
1-3 of the mechanical model in Section 2. We …nd that the mechanical model is not so general so as to be
vacuous: there are speci…c behavioral models which do and do not map into the structure of the mechanical
model.        These models therefore do not generate the same predictions regarding the interaction between
hiring rates and the strength of duration dependence.
     In Appendix C, we develop a simple screening model of employer-driven duration dependence.8 Matching
frictions and …rm screening of workers interact to generate duration dependence in job-…nding rates. Search
frictions result in equilibrium unemployment: unemployed workers and vacancies meet at a rate determined
    7 Thesemodels are presented formally in Appendices C, D, and E.
    8 Ourmodel is related to Lockwood (1991). However, we depart from Lockwood in two ways. First, we allow for an interview
stage that is distinct from the hiring stage. Second, in the hiring stage, we allow for a more general signal distribution. In
particular, Lockwood (1991) imposes that applicants signals are either high or low and that productive types always send
the high signal, whereas unproductive types send the high signal with a probability less than one. Lockwood’s model results
in extreme duration dependence in the sense that upon hitting a certain duration, the probability of …nding a job for a low
productive type declines to zero. This extreme assumption makes it di¢ cult to map empirical results into the framework of
Lockwood (1991). By allowing for a more general, continuously distributed signal, we allow for a continuous form of duration
dependence; in our model job …nding rates decline smoothly with durations.




                                                             10
by aggregate unemployment and vacancies in the economy. Upon a meeting between a vacancy and a job
seeker, the potential employer obtains a signal on worker productivity. One can conceptualize this signal as
the job seeker’s resume. Interviewing an applicant is costly, and …rms call applicants for interviews only if
they receive su¢ ciently high signals. If a worker is called in for an interview, the …rm observes an additional
signal, providing new information on worker productivity. A worker with a su¢ ciently high signal is hired
and earns his outside option.9 In this model, …rms lower their priors about individuals with long durations,
since they believe that these have been found wanting by other potential employers. This induces negative
duration dependence.
      The screening model satis…es Assumptions 1-3 of the simple mechanical model. First, high productivity
workers signal their type during the interview and are hired at greater frequency than low productivity
workers (Assumption 1). Second, the hiring rate increases with             because employers’prior is        (Assumption
2). Third, the matching structure implies weak separability between market tightness and                     (Assumption
3).    Thus, in the screening model, duration dependence gets stronger in tight labor markets (Proposition
2). In tight markets, employers believe that the unemployed were evaluated more frequently and rejected
by potential employers and …rms therefore adjust their priors more. In contrast, in loose markets, it is less
likely that applicants met with …rms in the past. Thus, screening predicts that as labor markets tighten,
duration dependence gets stronger.         Therefore, the screening model can be tested by examining duration
dependence in callback rates and how duration dependence interacts with market tightness.
      As a contrast to the screening model, we consider two alternative models of duration dependence that
do not map into the structure above. The …rst model, developed in Appendix D, is a model of human
capital depreciation. The rate at which applicants meet …rms is again governed by a matching function
that depends on market tightness. Individuals’human capital a¤ects their productivity in all …rms in the
same way. This human capital –common to all employers –depreciates while workers are unemployed and
the rate of this depreciation does not depend on market tightness.                In addition to this common human
capital component, there is a worker-…rm speci…c match component. In order to isolate the implications of
human capital depreciation from screening considerations, we assume that …rms are fully informed about the
human capital parameter. However, …rms need to interview workers in order to learn their match-speci…c
component. As in the simple screening model, wages are given by a …xed outside option. The expected …rm
surplus from a given match therefore declines if an applicant has been unemployed for longer and the model
generates negative duration dependence. However, the frequency with which the unemployed are matched
to …rms does not a¤ect the speed with which their human capital depreciates. Therefore, this model does
not generate any interaction between duration dependence and market tightness.
  9 The screening model can allow for less restrictive assumptions on wage setting. What is required is that applicants and

…rms, upon receipt of the signal, are more likely to enter into an employment relationship if the expected productivity of a
worker is higher. We conjecture that most bargaining models satisfy this requirement.




                                                            11
      In Appendix E, we consider the well-known ranking model proposed by Blanchard and Diamond (1994).
This model emphasizes the consequences of crowding in the labor market; vacancies potentially receive
multiple applications. It is assumed that if a …rm meets multiple workers, it hires the worker with the
minimum duration. This assumption immediately implies that there is negative duration dependence. In
addition, the ranking model has implications for how market tightness a¤ects duration dependence.               In
tight markets, applicants for a given position are less likely to face competition from applicants with shorter
durations. Therefore, under employer ranking, duration dependence is weaker in tight labor markets.
      The key insight from our theoretical framework is that these three mechanisms for duration dependence
(screening, human capital depreciation, and ranking) di¤er in what they predict about how duration de-
pendence varies with local labor market conditions: screening generates a positive interaction e¤ect, human
capital depreciation does not generate an interaction e¤ect, and ranking generates a negative interaction
e¤ect. Therefore, by estimating how duration dependence varies with labor market tightness, we will be able
to shed light on the relative importance of these mechanisms. This theoretical prediction motivates a key
aspect of the design of our resume audit study, which focuses on estimating duration dependence in a large
number of local labor markets.


4       Experimental Design

The design of the …eld experiment follows Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), Lahey (2008), and Oreopoulos
(2011) in how we generate …ctitious resumes, …nd job postings, and measure callback rates.               All of the
experimental protocols (as well as the web-based survey for MBA students) were reviewed and approved by
the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the University of Chicago. The IRB placed several constraints on
the …eld experiment.10 First, none of the researchers involved in the study could contact the …rms at any
time, either during or after the experiment. Second, in order to ensure that the individual representatives
of the prospective employers could never be identi…ed, we were required to delete any e-mails or voice
messages that we received from employers after ascertaining the information from the message needed for
the experiment.           Finally, we were not able to preserve any identifying information about the prospective
employers other than the industry.              By contrast, we were approved to preserve richer information on the
characteristics of the job posting, such as (among other things) the posted wage and required experience.
      The setting for our experiment is a single major online job board in the U.S. This online job board contains
jobs advertised across most cities in the U.S., allowing us to implement our experiment in a broad set of local
labor markets. Following earlier audit studies, we focus on three job categories: Administrative/Clerical,
Customer Service, and Sales.              Within these job categories, we sent roughly 12,000 …ctitious resumes to
3,000 job openings located in the largest 100 Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) in the U.S. according
    1 0 The   web-based survey instrument described below was approved with no additional constraints.



                                                                 12
to population (as measured in the 2010 Census). The distribution of the 3,000 jobs across the 100 MSAs
was …xed prior to the experiment and primarily re‡ected the population distribution across MSAs.11                          For
example, we planned on submitting resumes to roughly 200 jobs to the MSA New York-Northern New
Jersey-Long Island, NY-NJ-PA and roughly 15 jobs to the MSA Raleigh-Cary, NC. However, we also chose
to oversample the bottom ten and top ten MSAs (within the set of 100) based on the unemployment rate in
July 2011.12     Within each MSA, 30% of jobs were allocated to Administrative/Clerical, 30% to Customer
Service, and 40% to Sales.
    In choosing a job to apply to, we began by randomly sampling without replacement from the distribution
of MSA and job category combinations. Upon being assigned an MSA and job category, we had a Research
Assistant (RA) visit the online job board and search for jobs within the pre-determined MSA for the pre-
determined job type.13 When picking jobs to apply to, we imposed several restrictions. First, we avoided
independent outside sales positions (e.g., door-to-door sales). Second, we did not pick jobs that require
advanced skill sets, licenses, or advanced degrees (beyond a standard 4-year college degree). Typically, a job
opening within a given category and MSA that satis…es these criteria is immediately available, or (in rare
cases) becomes available within one or two weeks.
    Once a job was identi…ed, the next step was to construct four …ctitious resumes that we would customize
and e-mail to this job opening.14          The design of these resumes was based on roughly 1,200 real resumes
that we manually collected from various online job boards. These resumes were selected based on the
job categories we focused on: individuals applying to Administrative/Clerical, Customer Service, and Sales
positions. These resumes informed the design of our …ctitious resumes in several ways.                       First, we found
that workers do not “shroud” their unemployment spells: approximately 75% of resumes from workers who
were currently unemployed listed both the year and month of when they last worked.                           Second, among
the currently unemployed, roughly 95% of resumes do not provide any discernable explanation for the gap
(e.g., obtained a license or certi…cate, engaged in community service, worked as a volunteer, training, etc);
moreover, this percentage did not vary by gender or by the length of the unemployment spell. Given this,
we designed all of our resumes to contain both the year and the month of last employment, and we did not
purposefully try to provide any information that could be seen as accounting for the gap.
    In total, we created ten resume templates that were based on the most frequent resume formats observed
   1 1 Our initial motivation for sampling based on population size was to achieve a nationally representative sample of job

postings. As the experiment proceeded, however, we discovered a practical bene…t of this decision, which was that we found
it easier to …nd suitable jobs for the experiment in larger cities.
   1 2 We designed the experiment this way in order to help identify the interaction between market tightness and duration

dependence. The 20 oversampled MSAs were the following: (High Unemployment MSAs) Miami, FL; Detroit, MI; Riverside,
CA; Sacramento, CA; Las Vegas, NV; Fresno, CA; Bakers…eld, CA; McAllen, TX; Stockton, CA; Modesto, CA; (Low Unem-
ployment MSAs) Washington, DC; Boston, MA; Minneapolis, MN; Oklahoma City, OK; Honolulu, HI; Tulsa, OK; Omaha, NE;
Des Moines, IA; Madison, WI; Lancaster, PA.
   1 3 The online job board used in the experiment lists job postings by city rather than MSA, so we searched for appropriate

jobs within 25 miles of the major city within the MSA.
   1 4 We always e-mailed the resumes from within the online job board website. We never e-mailed any of the employers directly.




                                                              13
in this database.15 From this set of templates, we selected four templates (one per …ctitious resume) according
the following rule: if an RA applied to a given MSA and job category combination before, she reused the
templates from that application. Otherwise, she randomly drew four new templates from the ten possible
templates, drawing without replacement to ensure that no two resumes being sent to a given job share the
same resume template. There are six more steps in designing a …ctitious resume:

   1. We decided whether each resume would be male or female. For Customer Service and Sales jobs, we
      sent two female and two male resumes. For Administrative/Clerical jobs, we sent four female resumes.
      This design decision follows the protocol of Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004).

   2. We randomly generated a name for the resume. The bank of names were chosen based on common
      frequency census data and were chosen to be minimally informative about the race of the applicant.

   3. We chose the home address, local phone number, and e-mail address. In general, we constructed local
      addresses based on addresses that were listed in the real resumes in the database of actual resumes
      described above, and we modi…ed these addresses by choosing a non-existent street number.                             We
      purchased 400 unique local phone numbers (4 per MSA) which could each receive voice mail messages,
      and we created roughly 1,600 unique e-mail addresses to use in the experiment.16                       Both the phone
      numbers and e-mail addresses allowed us to track callbacks on an ongoing basis.

   4. The next step was updating the …ctitious resume’s job history, educational history and the objective
      summary to match the job that we applied to.                 Work histories were constructed from the sample
      of real resumes that we self-collected. For instance, if the job was for an Administrative Assistant
      position, we identi…ed a resume with experience as an Administrative/Executive Assistant and used
      this to construct the work history. For resumes that were sent to jobs in the same MSA, we never
      shared work histories. In terms of education, we searched for large, local degree-granting institutions.
      Finally, we veri…ed that there was not a real individual with a similar background on any of the major
      social network and job network websites (e.g., Facebook and LinkedIn).

   5. We de…ned a measure of “quality”for each resume. A “low quality”resume is one that is assigned the
      minimum quali…cations required for the job (in terms of experience and education). A “high quality”
      resume had quali…cations that exceeded these minimum requirements. Speci…cally, these resumes had
      a couple of extra years of experience and an extra “level”of education. For instance, if the job requires
      high school completion, we would list an associate degree or if the job requires an associate degree,
      we would list a bachelor degree. For jobs that required a bachelor degree, we did not bump up the
  1 5 By “template” we mean the speci…c formatting and layout of the items on the resume (e.g., style of bullet points, ordering

of items, etc.).
  1 6 As explained above, we re-use resumes when we can. When we do that, we re-use both the name and e-mail address.




                                                              14
        education level for the high quality resumes. For each job that we applied to, two resumes were low
        quality and two were high quality. This means we either had a set of {one high quality male, one high
        quality female, one low quality male, one low quality female} or we had a set of two high-quality female
        resumes and two low-quality female resumes (depending on the gender ratio that the job category calls
        for).

  6. The …nal and most important step was to randomize employment status and the length of the current
        unemployment spell.     We describe the randomization procedure in more detail when we introduce
        the empirical model. The randomly drawn length of the unemployment spell for a given resume pins
        down the end date of the worker’s last job, and hence the worker’s prior job tenure. In most cases,
        we designed resumes so that the most recent job started in 2008 or earlier, so that we did not end up
        dropping a job when assigning long unemployment spells.


4.1     Measuring Salience of Resume Characteristics

Our …eld experiment assumes that the information on the resume regarding a job applicant’s employment
status and unemployment spell length is salient to employers. To test this assumption, we designed and
conducted a web-based survey. A link to the survey was e-mailed to 365 MBA students at the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business. A total of 91 students completed the survey. This section summarizes
the design and results of the survey; more details on the survey can be found in Appendix F.
      The survey took place in three stages. First, respondents were asked to read a hypothetical job posting
and to consider two resumes for the job opening (see Appendix Figure A1). The respondent was then asked
to select one of the two resumes to contact for an in-person job interview. Second, once the respondent made
a selection, she was then asked to recall speci…c information on the resume such as total work experience,
tenure at last job, level of education, current employment status, and the length of unemployment spell
(Appendix Figure A2). We use these responses to evaluate the extent to which the various characteristics
on the resume are salient to subjects.       Finally, we asked respondents several demographic questions; in
particular, whether they had prior experience evaluating resumes (Appendix Figure A3).
      To empirically measure salience, we rely on two proxies: (1) the fraction of time the respondents correctly
recall the information, and (2) the correlation between the reported and true answers. As shown in Appendix
Table A1, across both of our measures of salience, respondents are able to recall information about applicant’s
employment status and length of unemployment spell about as well as they are able to recall information
about other resume characteristics (such as education, total work experience, and tenure at last job). When
we restrict the sample to those that respond that they have “high experience”reviewing resumes (column (2)),
respondents are more likely to correctly identify employment status and length of unemployment. Overall,
these results suggest that employment status and length of unemployment are salient to those evaluating


                                                        15
resumes, especially if they are experienced at evaluating resumes.


4.2     Measuring Callbacks

We track callbacks from employers by matching voice or e-mail messages to resumes. We follow Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2004) by de…ning a callback as a message from an employer explicitly asking to set up
an interview.     The voicemail messages were coded independently by two Research Assistants (RAs) who
were not otherwise involved in the project, and the two RAs agreed virtually all of the time. In Table 4,
we report results which use an alternative de…nition of a callback based on whether the employer left any
voice message at all, even if the message simply asked for more information.                  We always allowed at least
six weeks for a callback, though in practice the the vast majority of callbacks were received in the …rst two
weeks.     Additionally, the vast majority of callbacks were voice messages; e-mail messages from employers
asking to set up an interview were extremely rare.


4.3     Empirical Models

In terms of the experimental design, we created two treatment groups:

        Treatment 1: Individuals are randomly assigned to employment status “Employed”with probability
        0:25. In this case, the resume indicates that the person is still working at her current job. Let Ei;c
        denote an indicator variable that equals 1 if individual i in MSA c is employed and 0 otherwise.

        Treatment 2: Individuals that are not assigned to the Employed treatment are unemployed and
        randomly assigned an (integer) unemployment duration or “gap” (in months) according to a discrete
        uniform distribution on the interval [1, 36]. Let log(di;c ) denote the log of the unemployment duration
        for individual i in MSA c. Employed individuals are assigned log(di;c ) = 0.

      To analyze the experimental data, we estimate the following linear probability model that includes, for
e¢ ciency gains, individual and MSA characteristics Xi;c :


                                 yi;c =   0   +   1 Ei;c   +   2   log(di;c ) + Xi;c + "i;c                         (12)


where yi;c is a callback indicator that equals 1 if individual i in MSA c receives a callback for an interview.
Given our randomized design, the coe¢ cients           1   and      2   provide unbiased estimates of the mean impact of
being employed versus being newly unemployed and the mean impact of changes in unemployment duration
conditional on being unemployed. Since the e¤ect may di¤er in magnitude across di¤erent unemployment
durations, we also report results using alternative functional forms. In particular, we examine the data
nonparametrically by using moving averages and plot callback rates as a function of unemployment duration.


                                                               16
    To examine how duration dependence varies with local labor market conditions, we pursue two comple-
mentary approaches. First, we estimate …xed e¤ects and (correlated) random e¤ects models of the following
form:
                                                                   c       c
                                          yi;c =    1 Ei;c   +         +       log(di;c ) + Xi;c + "i;c                                (13)

                                      c                                                  c
In the …xed e¤ects model,                 is a MSA …xed e¤ect and                             is a MSA-speci…c estimate of the e¤ect of
                                                                                                       c                                  c
unemployment duration on callbacks.                     In the random e¤ects model,                        is a MSA random e¤ect and
is a MSA-speci…c random coe¢ cient on unemployment duration.                                      This speci…cation is directly motivated
                                                                                                                                          c
by our mechanical model which indicates that there is a one-to-one relationship between the intercept
(i.e., the callback rate for a newly unemployed individual) and the level of market tightness. Therefore, the
                        c         c                 c        c
covariance between          and       (i.e., E[(                 ) c ]) indicates the extent to which duration dependence varies
with market tightness. For the …xed e¤ects model, we prove in the Appendix that an unbiased estimate of
this covariance is given by the following expression:

                                                           C         C
                                          c    c    c   1 X ^c c  1 X ^ 2c Ec [log(d)]
                                  E[(              ) ]=       ^ +                                                                      (14)
                                                        C c=1     C c=1 N c V ar(log(d))

                                                      c
where C is the total number of cities in the sample, ^ and ^ c are the estimated MSA …xed e¤ects and
MSA-speci…c estimates of the e¤ect of unemployment duration, ^ 2c is the estimated MSA-speci…c residual
variance and N c is the number of observations in the MSA. The second term in equation (14) represents
                                                                                                        c
a bias correction to account for the negative mechanical correlation between the MSA-speci…c estimates ^
and ^ c .   Intuitively, the slope and intercept estimates in an OLS regression are correlated, so in order to
obtain an unbiased estimator of the covariance of the estimated intercept and slope parameters across cities,
we need to adjust for this “mechanical” bias using equation (14) above.                                      We then convert the covariance
estimate to a correlation by dividing by the standard deviation of the estimated MSA-speci…c interaction
terms and the standard deviation of the estimated MSA …xed e¤ects.17                                         For the random e¤ects model,
                                                                   c             c
the covariance is estimated by specifying that                         and           are jointly normally distributed and estimating the
variance-covariance parameters of the joint normal distribution.
    Our second approach to estimating how duration dependence varies with market tightness uses proxies
for market tightness (xc ) to estimate the following linear probability model:


                              0       0             0                        0                        0               0
                    yi;c =    0   +   1 Ei;c   +    2   log(di;c ) +         3   log(di;c )    xc +   4 xc   + Xi;c       + "i;c       (15)


This speci…cation includes an interaction between log duration and the market tightness proxies. We explore
several alternative proxies in the speci…cations below, including the metropolitan area unemployment rate
  1 7 We adjust the estimates of standard deviation of the interaction terms and city …xed e¤ects by a “shrinkage factor” based

on an estimate of the residual variance.



                                                                           17
and MSA-level estimates of the vacancy-unemployment ratio.
      Finally, we examine how duration dependence varies with characteristics of the resumes, employers, and
job postings. We do this by reporting results estimated for various subsamples based on these characteristics.


5      Experimental Results

Our …nal sample includes 12,054 resumes submitted to 3,040 jobs.18                    Of these 12,054 resumes, 9,236 of
the resumes had (ongoing) unemployment spells of at least one month, with the remaining 2,818 resumes
conveying that the worker was currently employed.19 Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the sample.
About 13 percent of our resumes elicit some response by employers. However, not all of these are callbacks
for interviews. About one-third of all callbacks were classi…ed as callbacks for interviews, for a total callback
rate of about 4:7 percent. In terms of demographics, roughly two-thirds of our resumes are female, and
most of our resumes show relatively little experience. Mean experience is 5 years with a max of 15 years
of experience. Compared to the types of jobs that individuals are applying to, the resume sample is fairly
educated: one-third of the respondents have Bachelor’s degrees. This is primarily due to our strategy
of sending out both resumes that just match the minimum requirements and resumes that are of higher
quality. Due the randomized design of the …eld experiment, there is balance across the covariates (across
employed/unemployed and across the distribution of unemployment durations), as shown in Table 2.


5.1     Estimating Duration Dependence

      Nonparametric Evidence
      Before turning to regression results, we begin with a simple nonparametric plot of the average callback
rate. Using the sample of unemployed individuals (N = 9,236), Figure 1 reports the relationship between
the callback rate and unemployment duration. The dots in the …gure report average callback rates across
3-4 month bins while the dashed line is a 5-month moving average computed at each month. Both the dots
and the dashed line show clear visual evidence that callbacks decline sharply with unemployment duration
for the …rst 6-8 months, and then the callback rate is ‡at for unemployment durations beyond that. Figure
2 shows a similar pattern using the ratio of the callback rate in each bin divided by the callback rate
in the …rst bin (i.e., the lowest unemployment durations).                This …gure corresponds more closely to the
function r(d; x) de…ned in Section 2 above.            In Figure 3, we report nonparametric local linear regression
results that are constrained to be weakly monotonic following the rearrangement procedure of Chernozhukov,
  1 8 Our power calculations called for 12,000 resume submissions. We needed to submit to more than 3; 000 jobs to reach 12; 000

resumes because there were several instances where the job posting was taken down before we were able to submit all four of
the resumes prepared for the job. This happened on occasion because we waited one day between each resume submission for
a given job posting. In total, we were not able to send four resumes to 46 jobs; these jobs received 78 resumes.
  1 9 The share of resumes currently employed is 23:4%, which is less than 25% (which was the experimental protocol). The

discrepancy comes from roughly 600 resumes where the employment status was randomized slightly di¤erently (in particular,
employment was chosen with p = 1=37 rather than p = 0:25). All results are robust to dropping these observations.



                                                              18
Fernandez-Val, and Galichon (2003). The bootstrapped standard errors in Figure 3 are uniform con…dence
intervals. We can visually reject the null hypothesis that there is no relationship between unemployment
duration and callback rates based on the inability to draw any horizontal line through the plotted con…dence
intervals. Overall, all three of these …gures show a clear negative relationship between callback rates and
unemployment duration, with the steepest decline coming in the …rst eight months of the unemployment
spell.   This provides some of the …rst experimental evidence of negative duration dependence in callback
rates, and it also helps to partially resolve the set of mixed and inconclusive empirical results from studies
that are based on non-experimental approaches. Finally, the pattern of duration dependence in these …gures
suggest that human capital depreciation is unlikely the sole mechanism behind our results; for if it were, we
would have expected callback rates to continue to decline beyond the eight month mark, as worker skills
continue to erode. This suggests other factors at work, such as employer screening, which we investigate in
more detail in the next subsection.
    Regression Results
    The regression results con…rm the results from the graphical analysis. Table 3 reports OLS regression
results estimating equation (12). Longer unemployment durations are associated with lower callback rates.
A 1 log point change in unemployment duration is associated with a strongly statistically signi…cant 1:1
percentage point decline in the callback probability, from a mean of 4:7 percentage points. This corresponds
to a 23 percent decline in the callback rate. Surprisingly, the results in the second row suggest that employed
applicants are actually less likely to receive callbacks (relative to newly unemployed individuals). We discuss
possible explanations for this result at the end of this section.             In the remaining columns, we investigate
alternative functional forms. Column (2) reports results from a speci…cation with unemployment duration
in levels, while column (3) reports results using piecewise indicator variables for various groups of months
(with months 0-6 as the omitted category).               The pattern of coe¢ cients in column (3) suggest a strong
decline in callback probability after six months, and a negligible decline thereafter.                   Finally, column (4)
reports results from a spline regression which allows for a structural break in the e¤ect of unemployment
duration at eight months (the location of the structural break is determined through auxiliary regressions
which choose the location of the break to maximize the R2 of the regression). The results in this column
suggest that callbacks are sharply decreasing for the …rst eight months and nearly ‡at after that.20
    Table 4 shows that results are robust to alternative speci…cations. First, we explore speci…cations where
all controls are excluded or additional controls are added.21 Second, we estimate a Probit model to address
  2 0 Appendix Table A2 reports the estimated coe¢ cients on the control variables used in all of the main tables, such as gender

and “high quality” resume indicator. Additionally, Appendix Table A2 shows that when we drop city …xed e¤ects and include
the city unemployment rate as an additional control instead, we …nd that the unemployment rate strongly predicts callbacks.
This is consistent with a large literature in labor economics which …nds that aggregate labor market variables strongly predict
individual unemployment duration (Petrolongolo and Pissarides 2001).
  2 1 The additional control variables that we add include the following: resume template and resume font …xed e¤ects, year

week …xed e¤ects, metropolitan area       job type …xed e¤ects, and year    week   job type …xed e¤ects.




                                                               19
concerns about boundary e¤ects that arise because of the low average callback rate. Lastly, we explore an
alternative, more inclusive de…nition of employer callbacks.22 In all cases, we …nd results that are extremely
similar to our main results.


5.2     Duration Dependence and Labor Market Conditions

We next turn to the question of how the relationship between callback rates and unemployment duration
varies with market tightness.         We begin by providing graphical evidence.             Figures 4 and 5 show plots
analogous to Figures 1 and 2, but they divide the sample depending on whether the local unemployment
rate is above or below 8:8% (the median unemployment rate across cities in the experiment). As before,
we …rst plot the raw callback rates (Figure 4) and then we plot the relative callback rate, the callback rate
divided by average callback rate in the …rst “bin” (Figure 5), which corresponds to the function r(d; x)
                                                                                                  @r(d;x)
introduced in Section 2. As discussed in Section 3, the screening model implies that                @x      < 0 for all d > 0,
                                               @r(d;x)
whereas the ranking model implies that           @x      > 0, and the human capital depreciation model implies that
@r(d;x)
  @x      = 0. Figure 5 therefore allows us to discern among these models and it …nds evidence in favor of the
screening model: the relative callback rates always decline more rapidly in markets with lower unemployment.
These patterns are robust to other proxies for labor market conditions. For example, Figures 6 and 7 show
similar results when the sample is divided based on median ratio of vacancies to unemployment (V =U ratio),
while Figures 8 and 9 show similar results when the sample is split based on whether the unemployment rate
increased by more than 3:6 percentage points between 2008 and 2011 (the median percentage point increase
across the cities in the experiment).
      The regression evidence con…rms the visual patterns in these …gures. We begin with a simple test of
whether there is heterogeneity in duration dependence across labor markets. Table 5 reports results which
test whether the e¤ect of unemployment duration on callbacks is the same across all metropolitan areas
based on our …xed e¤ects estimates from equation (13). We interact a full set of metropolitan area …xed
e¤ects with unemployment duration and conduct an F-test of equality across all of the estimated coe¢ cients
for these interaction terms. Based on the results in column (1), we con…dently reject the null hypothesis
that the e¤ect of unemployment duration is the same across all metropolitan areas (p = 0:001).                        To test
exactly how the e¤ect of unemployment duration varies with market tightness, we construct an estimate
of the correlation between the estimates of the MSA-speci…c interaction terms and the MSA …xed e¤ects
estimated in equation (13). Consistent with the results in Figures 4 through 9, we estimate a statistically
signi…cant negative correlation between          c
                                                     and    c              \
                                                                ; i.e., corr( c
                                                                                ; c) =   0:790; s.e. = 0:187.23        Under
the assumption that the MSA …xed e¤ects are valid proxies for market tightness, these results imply that
  2 2 Additionally,
                  we explore a speci…cation which drops 83 jobs (comprising 330 resumes) that were posted by employers that we
later deemed “questionable.” These employers were ‡agged because we found evidence online that the employer was engaging
in dishonest, deceptive, or illegal behavior.
  2 3 See Appendix G for details on constructing standard errors for inference.




                                                                 20
duration dependence is stronger (i.e., more negative) in tight labor markets, consistent with the predictions
of the employer screening model.            These results are also consistent with the pattern shown in Figure 10,
which graphs the relationship between the estimated MSA-speci…c coe¢ cient on unemployment duration
(from the …xed e¤ects regression estimated in column (1) of Table 5) against the MSA unemployment rate
(at the start of the experiment).            The positive relationship in the …gure implies that MSAs with lower
unemployment rates have stronger (i.e., more negative) duration dependence.
   The remaining columns in Table 5 repeat this same exercise, reporting the covariance in equation (14), but
replacing log(d) with other covariates in Xi;c .24 Columns (2) and (3) test for similar hetereogeneous e¤ects
across labor markets for the e¤ect of gender and “skill” (as measured by whether or not resume was “high
quality”), and we …nd no evidence that the e¤ect of either of these covariates varies across cities. Columns
(4) and (5) show that the callback rate of customer service jobs and sales jobs (relative to admin/clerical jobs)
varies strongly across cities. However, these e¤ects are correlated with the average callback rate within the
experiment to a much lesser extent, and the sign is not consistent across the two types of jobs. In particular,
cities with higher average callback rates are not relatively more likely to call back applicants to customer
service jobs or sales jobs, even though these jobs have higher average callback rates. We interpret this as
evidence against a “mechanical” interpretation of our results in column (1): speci…cally, these results are
inconsistent with low average callback rates in a MSA simply being associated with attenuating the e¤ect
of all covariates. In this case, one would expect that cities with higher average callback rates to also have
higher callback rates for customer service jobs and sales jobs relative to Administrative/Clerical jobs, and
we do not …nd evidence that this is the case.
   Table 6 reports similar results based on estimating a correlated random coe¢ cients model, where the
                                                                                                           c
regression model in equation (13) above is given an alternative interpretation: speci…cally,                   is assumed to
                                                 c
be a MSA-speci…c random e¤ect and                    is a MSA-speci…c random coe¢ cient on unemployment duration.
The random coe¢ cients are allowed to be ‡exibly correlated and assumed to be jointly normally distributed
across cities. As in Table 5, we report whether we …nd evidence that the random coe¢ cients on unemploy-
ment duration are statistically signi…cantly di¤erent, and we also report estimates of the correlation between
the random coe¢ cient and the MSA-speci…c random e¤ect.                      The results are qualitatively similar: for un-
                                                                      \
employment duration we estimate a signi…cant negative correlation (corr( c
                                                                           ; c) =                    0:909; s.e. = 0:094),
which implies that cities with higher average callback rates within the experiment have stronger duration
dependence.
   Our …nal test of how duration dependence varies with labor market conditions uses two proxies for local
labor market tightness: the unemployment rate and the vacancy-to-unemployment (V =U ) ratio. When using
the unemployment rate as proxy for labor market tightness, we use the monthly unemployment rate in the
 2 4 When   we replace log(d) with one of the covariates in Xi;c , we place log(d) in Xi;c vector.




                                                                21
metropolitan area at the start of the experiment (July 2011) from the BLS. The V =U ratio is constructed
using data on vacancies from the Help Wanted Online Index and data on the number of unemployed from
the BLS. Table 7 reports the OLS estimates of equation (15) using these proxies for labor market tightness.
Using several alternative functional forms for the unemployment rate and the V =U ratio, we consistently
estimate that the e¤ect of unemployment duration is stronger when the local labor market is relatively tight
(i.e., either the unemployment rate is relatively high or the V =U ratio is relatively low). Panels B and C in
Table 7 verify that the estimated interaction terms are robust to including both MSA …xed e¤ects as well
as a wide range of interactions between unemployment duration and MSA characteristics (e.g., population,
GDP, income, fraction of population with Bachelor’s degree, fraction of employed workers in Information
industries). The robustness to including these additional interactions con…rms that the interaction e¤ects of
interest are not confounded by other metropolitan area characteristics that are correlated with labor market
tightness. In Appendix Table A3, we report results analogous to Panel A in Table 7 replacing the OLS (linear
probability) model with a Probit model and a …xed-e¤ects Poisson model.        The Probit results show that
the estimated marginal e¤ects are very similar to the OLS results, while the Poisson model provides results
which can be interpreted as “proportional e¤ects.” These results therefore verify that duration dependence
declines proportionally with the unemployment rate, which is consistent with the Figures 5, 7, and 9 that
show that the “relative” callback rate declines more sharply in tighter labor markets.
     Our …ndings indicate that duration dependence is stronger when the unemployment rate is relatively
low, consistent with the screening model. Interestingly, this implies that there are two competing e¤ects
of a higher unemployment rate: First, a higher unemployment rate has a direct e¤ect making it harder for
workers to match with …rms and causing longer spells. Second, a higher unemployment rate has an indirect
e¤ect since it leads to less screening by …rms, and less duration dependence in equilibrium.       In column
(1) in Panel A, the standardized e¤ect of the unemployment rate implies that a one standard deviation
increase in the unemployment rate reduces the callback rate by 0.77 percentage points (from a mean of 4.7
percent). This same change reduces the coe¢ cient on unemployment duration by 0:0044 (i.e., from        0:012
to    0:0076).
     One question we can ask to shed light on the relative importance of these two e¤ects is how long a
duration it takes the callback rate in a strong labor markets to fall to the level of that in a weak labor
market.. We use the standardized e¤ects in column (1) of Table 7 (Panel A) to solve for the unemployment
duration that equalizes expected callback rates across two labor markets that have unemployment rates one
standard deviation above and below mean, respectively.       We …nd that at roughly six months of unem-
ployment, expected callback rates are similar across these two labor markets, despite having di¤erences in
unemployment rates of roughly 5 percentage points and signi…cant di¤erences in expected callback rates for
newly unemployed workers (5.5 percent versus 3.9 percent). The callback rates equalize across weak and



                                                     22
strong markets because duration dependence is signi…cantly stronger in tight labor markets. After several
months of unemployment, the expected callback rate has fallen much more in the tight labor market as
compared to the weak labor market.


5.3     Heterogeneity by Resume Characteristics and Employer/Job Characteristics

Tables 8 and 9 explore whether duration dependence varies with resume characteristics and employer/job
characteristics, respectively. The point estimates in Table 8 suggest similar levels of duration dependence
across education categories (columns (4) and (5)) and skill groups (columns (6) and (7)), and somewhat
larger duration dependence estimates for women as compared to men (columns (2) and (3)), although this
di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant at conventional levels. Turning to employer/job characteristics in
Table 9, our estimates in columns (2) and (4) indicate that duration dependence is strongest for workers
applying to Sales jobs (as compared to Administrative/Clerical jobs and Customer Service jobs), although
these di¤erences are not statistically signi…cant.    In columns (5) through (7), we compare estimates of
duration dependence across industries, and we …nd that our overall duration dependence estimates are
concentrated in Construction, Manufacturing, and Wholesale and Retail Trade, with no signi…cant evidence
of duration dependence in Business/Financial Services or Professional/Personal Services.         The remaining
columns explore di¤erences according to whether the job posting mentions that experience is required and
whether the posting explicitly mentions that the employer is an Equal Opportunity Employer. In both of
these cases, there are no signi…cant di¤erences across the subsamples.
      Finally, we return to our suggestive evidence in Table 3 that an individual who is currently employed is
actually less likely to be called back for an interview than a newly unemployed individual. In discussions
with human resource professionals, we have learned that some employers express the concern that workers
who are currently employed are not serious job seekers, and as a result, are less likely to invite them in for an
interview, which would be consistent with these …ndings. Additionally, we speculate that our …ndings could
also be caused by the fact that some jobs require workers to start immediately. In this case, it’s possible
that the lag in recruiting a worker who is currently employed exceeds the lag in hiring a job seeker who is
currently out of work, which may be particularly relevant for the set of less-skilled jobs that are posted on
the online website that we use for the experiment.


6      Conclusion

This paper discusses results from a …eld experiment studying duration dependence. Our results suggest that
the likelihood of receiving a callback sharply declines with unemployment duration. This e¤ect is especially
pronounced during the …rst eight months after becoming unemployed. Our estimates suggest that this e¤ect
is quantitatively important, and, additionally, our results suggest that duration dependence is stronger when


                                                       23
jobs are relatively abundant.
    Our conceptual framework shows that these results are consistent with a model where employers statisti-
cally discriminate against workers with longer unemployment durations. Our results are not easily generated
by a model of human capital depreciation when the rate of human capital depreciation is steady and the
same across labor markets nor are they consistent with a model of duration dependence based on a simple
model of employer ranking (Blanchard and Diamond 1994). Although we emphasize that we do not rule
out the existence of these other mechanisms, our results are most consistent with employer screening playing
an important role in generating duration dependence.
    The results in our experiment suggest several additional areas for future research. Empirically, we think
it is important to examine whether our results generalize to the economy more broadly. Future audit studies
might explore whether duration dependence varies across occupations or over time. Such studies might also
expand the coverage to a broader segment of the economy where online job search is less prevalent.
    Theoretically, there are close connections between the screening model that is supported by our data
and the literature on rational herding that bear exploring.25 Our screening model assumes that employers
meet workers sequentially. Employers then use the information about prior actions of other …rms, embedded
in the duration of unemployment, to learn about worker productivity. However, they do not observe the
private signals received by the other …rms. This structure is very similar to the structure of the standard
rational herding model.26 In ongoing work, we are exploiting the insights of the rational herding literature
to study the policy implications of our …ndings. In herding models, if the public belief is su¢ ciently strong,
agents will ignore their private information and end up in informational cascades where no further learning
takes place. From the standpoint of social welfare, such cascades are sub-optimal, since they imply that
information does not aggregate. We study the conditions that give rise to informational cascades in our
setting and ask whether a social planner would want to distort …rms’hiring decisions to avoid such cascades.
We also explore the implications of the screening model for the optimal design of Unemployment Insurance
(UI) bene…ts, in order to examine the optimal time path of UI bene…ts in an environment with asymmetric
information and social learning.27
  2 5 For a review of herding models, see Bikhchandani et al (1998).
  2 6 The  main di¤erence is an asymmetry in the learning process that is present in our model: once a worker is hired by a …rm,
the public learning process stops.
  2 7 For related studies on the optimal design of UI bene…ts, see Shavell and Weiss (1979), Shimer and Werning (2006, 2008)

and Pavoni 2009.




                                                              24
References

    Acemoglu, Daron (1995). “Public Policy in a Model of Long-term Unemployment,”Economica, 62(246),
161-178.
    Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004) “Are Emily and Greg More Employable than
Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,” American Economic Review,
94(4), 991-1013.
    Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch (1998). “Learning from the behavior of others,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12: 151-170.
    Blanchard, Olivier J. and Peter Diamond (1994). “Ranking, Unemployment Duration, and Wages,”
Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 417-434.
    Chernozhukov, Victor, Ivan Fernandez-Val, and Alfred Galichon (2009). “Improving Estimators of
Monotone Functions by Rearrangement.” Biometrika, 96(3): 559-575.
    Congressional Budget O¢ ce (2012). “Understanding and Responding to Persistently High Unemploy-
ment.” http://www.cbo.gov/publication/42989.
    Eriksson, Stefan and Dan-Olof Rooth (2011). “Do Employers Use Unemployment as a Sorting Criterion
When Hiring? Evidence from a Field Experimen.” Unpublished manuscript.
    Felstein, Martin and James Poterba (1984). “Unemployment insurance and reservation wages,” Journal
of Public Economics, 23(1), 141-167
    Gonzales, Fracisco M. and Shouyong Shi (2010). “An equilibrium theory of learning, search, and wages.”
Econometrica, 509-537.
    Heckman, James J. and Burton Singer (1984). “The Identi…ability of the Proportional Hazard Model,”
Review of Economic Studies, 51(2), 231-241.
    Imbens, G. and L. Lynch (2006). “Re-employment probabilities over the business cycle,” Portuguese
Economic Journal, 5(2): 111-134.
    Krueger, Alan B. and Andreas Mueller (2011). “Job Search and Job Finding in a Period of Mass
Unemployment: Evidence from High-Frequency Longitudinal Data,” Unpublished manuscript, Princeton
University.
    Lahey, Joanna N. (2008). “Age, Women, and Hiring: An Experimental Study,” Journal of Human
Resources, 43(1), 30-56.
    Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998). “The European unemployment dilemma.” Journal of Political Economy,
106(3), 514-550.
    Lockwood, Ben (1991). “Information Externalities in the Labor Market and the Duration of Unemploy-
ment,” Review of Economic Studies, 58(4), 733-753.
    Machin, Stephen and Manning, Alan (1998). “The causes and consequences of long-term unemployment
in Europe,” CEPDP, 400. Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics and Political
Science, London, UK.
    Moscarini, Giuseppe (1997). “Unobserved heterogeneity and unemployment duration: a fallacy of com-
position”, Yale University Working Paper.
    Oberholzer-Gee, Felix (2008). “Nonemployment stigma as rational herding: A …eld experiment,”Journal
of Economic Behavior & Organization, 65, 30-40.
    Oreopoulos, Philip (2011) “Why Do Skilled Immigrants Struggle in the Labor Market? A Field Experi-
ment with Thirteen-Thousand Resumes.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy (forthcoming).
    Pavoni, Nicola (2009). “Optimal Unemployment Insurance, With Human Capital Depreciation, and
Duration Dependence,” International Economic Review, 50(2): 323-362.



                                                   25
   Petrongolo, Barbara and Christopher A. Pissarides (2001). “Looking into the Black Box: A Survey of
the Matching Function,” Journal of Economic Literature, 39: 390-431.
   Sahin, Aysegul, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni Violante (2011), “Measuring Mismatch in the
U.S. Labor Market”, NY Fed Working Paper.
   Shavell, Steven and L. Weiss (1979), “The optimal payment of unemployment insurance bene…ts over
time,” Journal of Political Economy, 87(6): 1347-62.
   Shimer, Robert and Ivan Werning (2008). “Liquidity and Insurance for the Unemployed,” American
Economic Review, 98(5): 1922-42.
   Shimer, Robert and Ivan Werning (2006). “On the Optimal Timing of Bene…ts with Heterogeneous
Workers and Human Capital Depreciation,” Unpublished manuscript.
   Van den Berg, Gerard J. and Jan C. van Ours (1996). “Unemployment Dynamics and Duration Depen-
dence.” Journal of Labor Economics, 14(1): 100-125.
   Vishwanath, T. (1989). “Job Search, Stigma E¤ect, and Escape Rate from Unemployment,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 7(4):487-502.




                                                 26
                                      Table 1
                                Descriptive Statistics

                                             N       Mean     Std. Dev.   Min       Max

Received callback for interview            12054      0.047     0.212       0        1
Received any phone call from employer      12054     0.126     0.331        0        1
Employed                                   12054     0.234     0.423        0        1
Months unemployed | Unemployed              9236     18.018    10.303       1       36
Associate degree                           12054     0.416     0.493        0        1
Bachelor's degree                          12054     0.386     0.487        0        1
High quality                               12054     0.502     0.500        0        1
Female                                     12054     0.637     0.481        0        1
Years of experience                        12054     5.381     2.012        1       15
Unemployment rate                          12054     9.364     2.481      5.07     17.03
Vacanices/Unemployed ratio                 12054     3.796     1.581      0.80     7.47
Administrative/Clerical job                12054     0.293     0.455        0        1
Customer Service job                       12054     0.306     0.461        0        1
Sales job                                  12054     0.401     0.490        0        1

Notes: The first row reports the primary dependent variable which is whether or not the
resume received a callback from the employer explicitly asking to set up an interview. The
experimental sample is split into resumes where the worker reports currently being employed
and resumes where the worker does not report currently being employed (with the gap
between when the worker last reported working and when the resume was submitted being
uniformly distributed between 1 and 36 months, inclusive). The omitted education category
is high school graduate.




                                            27
                                                 Table 2
                                            Randomization Tests
                                           Sample means       p-value of          Sample means     p-value of
                                                              difference     Unemployed Unemployed difference
                                      Employed     Unemployed in means       >18 months <18 months in means

Some college                            0.408         0.419        0.267         0.422         0.415        0.624
College degree                          0.402         0.381        0.217         0.389         0.373        0.276
High quality                            0.506         0.501        0.630         0.504         0.497        0.533
Female                                  0.629         0.639        0.335         0.630         0.648        0.062*
Unemployment rate                       9.382         9.359        0.971         9.348         9.370        0.749
Vacancies/Unemployed ratio              3.740         3.813        0.373         3.797         3.829        0.740
Administrative/Clerical job opening     0.298         0.291        0.553         0.293         0.289        0.735
Customer Service job opening            0.304         0.307        0.708         0.309         0.305        0.673
Sales job opening                       0.397         0.402        0.838         0.398         0.406        0.469

N                                       2818          9236                       4650          4586

Notes: This table reports means across subsamples of the experimental sample and presents simple randomization tests
based on t-tests.




                                                         28
                                Table 3
      The Effect of Unemployment Duration on Probability of Callback
                    Dependent variable: Received callback for interview
                                                             (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)

log(Months unemployed)                                       -0.011
                                                            (0.003)
                                                            [0.000]
1{Employed}                                                  -0.020    -0.004    -0.016    -0.035
                                                            (0.010)   (0.006)   (0.008)   (0.013)
                                                            [0.040]   [0.556]   [0.043]   [0.005]
Months unemployed / 12                                                 -0.008              -0.074
                                                                      (0.003)             (0.021)
                                                                      [0.002]             [0.000]
6 < Months unemployed < 12 | Unemployed                                          -0.032
                                                                                (0.009)
                                                                                [0.000]
12 < Months unemployed < 24 | Unemployed                                         -0.030
                                                                                (0.008)
                                                                                [0.000]
24 < Months unemployed | Unemployed                                              -0.029
                                                                                (0.008)
                                                                                [0.000]
Months unemployed / 12 × 1{Months unemployed > 8}                                           0.074
                                                                                          (0.022)
                                                                                          [0.001]

Joint significance of piecewise coefficients (p-value)                          [0.001]
F-test of equality across piecewise coefficiets (p-value)                       [0.933]

Average callback rate                                         0.047     0.047     0.047     0.047
N                                                            12054     12054     12054     12054
R2                                                            0.038     0.037     0.039     0.039

Metropolitan area fixed effects                              X          X         X         X
Baseline controls                                            X          X         X         X

Notes: All columns report OLS linear probability model estimates. Data are resume submissions
matched to callbacks from employers to request an interview. The baseline controls included are
the following: indicator variables for Associate degree, Bachelor's Degree, High quality resume,
Female gender, and three job categories. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary
variance-covariance matrix for each job posting, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.




                                                 29
                                                                          Table 4
                                                                      Robustness Tests
                                                                     (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)

log(Months unemployed)                                              -0.011    -0.012    -0.012    -0.010    -0.011    -0.011    -0.011    -0.011    -0.010    -0.014
                                                                   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.004)
                                                                   [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.001]   [0.000]   [0.001]   [0.001]
1{Employed}                                                         -0.020    -0.023    -0.025    -0.017    -0.020    -0.020    -0.019    -0.019    -0.017    -0.009
                                                                   (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.013)
                                                                   [0.040]   [0.019]   [0.012]   [0.005]   [0.002]   [0.041]   [0.045]   [0.048]   [0.063]   [0.491]

Average callback rate                                                0.047     0.047     0.047    0.047     0.047     0.047     0.047     0.047     0.044     0.126

N                                                                   12054     12054     12054     12054     12054     12054     12054     12054     11724     12054
 2                                                                  0.038     0.015     0.002                         0.039     0.054     0.093     0.036     0.069
R
Dependent variable: callback for interview                           X         X         X         X         X        X         X         X         X
Dependent variable: receive any callback                                                                                                                      X
Linear probability model                                             X         X         X                            X         X         X         X         X
Probit model (reported marginal effects at means of controls)                                      X         X
Baseline controls                                                    X         X                   X                  X         X         X         X         X
Metropolitan area fixed effects                                      X                                                X         X         X         X         X
Resume template and resume font fixed effects                                                                         X         X         X
Year × week fixed effects                                                                                                       X         X
Metropolitan area × job type fixed effects                                                                                                X
Year × week × job type fixed effects                                                                                                      X
Drop job postings from questionable employers                                                                                                       X

Notes: Data are resume-level submissions matched to callbacks from employers to request an interview. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-
covariance matrix for each employment advertisement, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.




                                                                                30
                                          Table 5
                Heterogeneity by Local Labor Market: Fixed Effects Estimates
                             Dependent variable: Received callback for interview
                                                                             Covariate X = …
                                                                                           Customer
                                                                                  High      service         Sales
                                                         log(d )       Female    quality      job            job
                                                           (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)

Point estimate on X                                        -0.011         0.002       0.011       0.029        0.057
 (From model without interactions)                        (0.003)       (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.006)      (0.007)
                                                          [0.000]       [0.529]     [0.010]     [0.000]      [0.000]

F-test of equality for interaction terms (p-value)        [0.001]       [0.311]     [0.910]     [0.000]      [0.000]
  (MSA fixed effect × X )
Correlation between MSA fixed effect and                   -0.790             0           0      -0.466        0.012
 MSA-specific interaction term (bias-corrected)           (0.187)                               (0.230)      (0.244)
                                                          [0.000]                               [0.043]      [0.961]

N                                                             12054      12054       12054       12054        12054
 2                                                             0.083      0.083       0.083       0.083        0.083
R

Notes: All columns report OLS linear probability model estimates. Data are resume-level submissions matched to
callbacks from employers to request an interview, restricting sample to unemployed workers. Each column
reports results from two separate regressions. The first row reports the point estimate on the covariate included in
the column heading, when the effect is constrained to be the same across all MSAs. The second and third row
report results from an alternative regression; specifically, it estimates a full set of interaction terms formed by
multiplying indicator variable for each MSA with the variable listed in the column heading. The second row
reports p-value from a test of equality across all of the estimated interaction terms, while the third row reports a
bias-corrected estimate of the correlation between the estimated interaction terms and the MSA fixed effects. All
regressions include same controls listed in Table 3. If a cell entry has "0" with no standard error or p-value, then
this implies that the model does not reject the null that the effect of the variable in the column is the same in all
MSAs. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each employment
advertisement, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.




                                                         31
                                      Table 6
      Heterogeneity by Local Labor Market: Correlated Random Effects Estimates
                           Dependent variable: Received callback for interview
                                                                         Covariate X = …
                                                                                       Customer
                                                                              High      service           Sales
                                                       log(d )     Female    quality      job              job
                                                         (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)

Mean of random coefficients for X                         -0.012       0.002        0.012        0.035       0.057
                                                         (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.006)     (0.006)
                                                         [0.000]     [0.400]      [0.007]      [0.000]     [0.000]

Standard deviation of random coefficient estimates         0.013            0           0        0.042       0.043
                                                         (0.003)                               (0.007)     (0.007)
                                                         [0.000]                               [0.000]     [0.000]

Correlation between random coefficients for X             -0.909            0           0       -0.481       0.272
and MSA-specific random effects                          (0.094)                               (0.169)     (0.327)
                                                         [0.000]                               [0.004]     [0.406]


Notes: All columns report correlated random effects estimates, where a random coefficicent on the variable
listed in the column is allowed to be flexibly correlated with a MSA-specific random effect parmaeter. The
random coefficients are allowed to vary across cities but are constant within a MSA. Data are resume-level
submissions matched to callbacks from employers to request an interview, restricting sample to unemployed
workers. Each column reports results from a separate regression. The first row reports the mean of the random
coefficients estimated on the variable in column heading. The second row reports the standard deviation across
the random coefficient estimates. The final row reports the correlation between the random coefficient estimates
and the MSA-specific random effect estimates. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-
covariance matrix for each employment advertisement, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets. If a cell
entry has "0" with no standard error or p-value, then this implies that the model does not reject the null that the
effect of the variable in the column is the same in all cities. In the case, the model does not estimate MSA-
specific random coefficients for variable in column, and instead only estimates MSA-specific random effects.




                                                        32
                                      Table 7
           How Does Duration Dependence Vary With Labor Market Conditions?
                            Dependent variable: Received callback for interview
                                                              Interaction term formed using proxy for
                                                               local labor market conditions, X = …
                                                                  u 2011 -
                                                        u          u 2008     log(u )      -V/U     - log(V/U )
                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)

                                   Panel A: Include baseline controls only
log(Months unemployed)                                   -0.012      -0.012      -0.012      -0.012       -0.012
                                                        (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)
                                                        [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]
log(Months unemployed) × X                                0.176       0.341       0.020       0.003        0.009
                                                        (0.066)     (0.124)     (0.007)     (0.001)      (0.004)
                                                        [0.008]     [0.006]     [0.002]     [0.001]      [0.011]
X     [Proxy for local labor market conditions]          -0.311      -0.532      -0.034      -0.005       -0.018
                                                        (0.114)     (0.214)     (0.012)     (0.002)      (0.007)
                                                        [0.006]     [0.013]     [0.004]     [0.005]      [0.006]
Standardized effect of interaction term                  0.0044      0.0043      0.0053      0.0055       0.0040
Standardized effect of X                               -0.0077     -0.0068     -0.0087     -0.0085      -0.0078
                           Panel B: Include baseline controls + MSA fixed effects
log(Months unemployed)                                  -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011       -0.011
                                                       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)
                                                       [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]
log(Months unemployed) × X                               0.168       0.329       0.020       0.003        0.009
                                                       (0.067)     (0.123)     (0.007)     (0.001)      (0.004)
                                                       [0.012]     [0.007]     [0.003]     [0.003]      [0.019]
Standardized effect of interaction term                 0.0042      0.0042      0.0051      0.0052       0.0037
    Panel C: Include baseline controls + MSA FEs + MSA characteristics × log(Months unemployed)
log(Months unemployed)                                  -0.011      -0.011      -0.011      -0.011       -0.011
                                                       (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)
                                                       [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]
log(Months unemployed) × X                               0.257       0.384       0.030       0.005        0.014
                                                       (0.101)     (0.169)     (0.010)     (0.002)      (0.006)
                                                       [0.011]     [0.023]     [0.003]     [0.005]      [0.022]
Standardized effect of interaction term                 0.0064      0.0049      0.0079      0.0079       0.0060
p-value of F-test of joint significance                [0.011]     [0.025]     [0.013]     [0.030]      [0.016]
 of set of MSA characteristic interaction terms

Notes: All columns report OLS linear probability model estimates. Data are resume-level submissions matched
to callbacks from employers to request an interview. The baseline controls included are the following: indicator
variables for Associate degree, Bachelor's Degree, High quality resume, Female gender, and three job categories.
In Panel C, MSA characteristics include population, GDP, average income, fraction of population with Bachelor's
degree, fraction of employed in "information industries", and fraction of population non-white. Standard errors,
adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each employment advertisement, are in
parentheses and p-values are in brackets.

                                                      33
                                            Table 8
         Heterogeneity in the Effect of Unemployment Duration: Resume Characteristics
                                     Dependent variable: Received callback for interview
                                                                                College       Non-           High         Low
                                          Full       Men         Women          Degree       College        Quality      Quality
                                         Sample      Only         Only           Only         Only           Only         Only
                                           (1)        (2)             (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)

log(d = Months unemployed)                 -0.011      -0.006          -0.014     -0.010           -0.011     -0.013           -0.009
                                          (0.003)     (0.005)         (0.003)    (0.005)          (0.004)    (0.004)          (0.004)
                                          [0.000]     [0.276]         [0.000]    [0.031]          [0.005]    [0.003]          [0.024]
1{Employed}                                -0.020       0.003          -0.032     -0.021           -0.017     -0.022           -0.018
                                          (0.010)     (0.016)         (0.011)    (0.016)          (0.012)    (0.014)          (0.013)
                                          [0.040]     [0.850]         [0.003]    [0.174]          [0.151]    [0.115]          [0.164]

log(d ) equal across cols. [p-val]                          [0.178]                     [0.982]                     [0.504]

Average callback rate in sample             0.047       0.057          0.041       0.048           0.047       0.050           0.044

N                                          12054        4380           7674        4653            7401        6049            6005
 2                                          0.038       0.043          0.046       0.045           0.050       0.045           0.044
R
MSA fixed effects                          X           X              X           X               X           X               X
Baseline controls                          X           X              X           X               X           X               X

Notes: All columns report OLS linear probability model estimates. Data are resume-level submissions matched to
callbacks from employers to request an interview. The controls included are the following: indicator variables for
Associate degree, Bachelor's Degree, High quality resume, Female gender, and three job categories. Standard errors,
adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each employment advertisement, are in parentheses and p-
values are in brackets




                                                                34
                                                                Table 9
                         Heterogeneity in the Effect of Unemployment Duration: Employer and Job Characteristics
                                                       Dependent variable: Received callback for interview
                                                                                                                                Job Posting          Job Posting
                                                                                   Jobs in                      Jobs in        Mentions that        Mentions Equal
                                               Admin / Customer                  Construct. or    Jobs in      Wholesale       Experience is         Opportunity
                                      Full     Clerical Service        Sales      Manufact.       Service      Trade or          Required             Employer
                                     Sample     Jobs     Jobs          Jobs        Sectors        Sectors     Retail Trade     Yes         No       Yes         No
                                      (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)        (9)      (10)        (11)

log(d = Months unemployed)            -0.011     -0.010       -0.003    -0.017          -0.023        0.000         -0.024      -0.019     -0.008    -0.011     -0.009
                                     (0.003)    (0.004)      (0.005)   (0.006)         (0.007)      (0.004)        (0.008)     (0.006)    (0.004)   (0.003)    (0.007)
                                     [0.000]    [0.007]      [0.464]   [0.005]         [0.001]      [0.933]        [0.004]     [0.001]    [0.046]   [0.001]    [0.194]
1{Employed}                           -0.020     -0.016        0.001    -0.036          -0.043        0.004         -0.054      -0.040     -0.013    -0.016     -0.024
                                     (0.010)    (0.011)      (0.014)   (0.019)         (0.023)      (0.012)        (0.027)     (0.018)    (0.012)   (0.010)    (0.021)
                                     [0.040]    [0.163]      [0.952]   [0.060]         [0.059]      [0.712]        [0.044]     [0.021]    [0.278]   [0.118]    [0.244]

log(d ) equal across cols. [p-val]                          [0.185]                                [0.017]                            [0.112]              [0.849]

Average callback rate in sample        0.047      0.016       0.044     0.072             0.032       0.053            0.049    0.032      0.053     0.030      0.085

N                                     12054       3531        3690      4833              2336        6278             2367     3299       8339      7975       3663
 2                                     0.038      0.066       0.057     0.048             0.077       0.081            0.067    0.074      0.051     0.040      0.123
R
MSA fixed effects                      X          X           X         X             X              X             X            X           X        X           X
Baseline controls                      X          X           X         X             X              X             X            X           X        X           X

Notes: All columns report OLS linear probability model estimates. Data are resume-level submissions matched to callbacks from employers to request an interview.
The controls included are the following: indicator variables for Associate degree, Bachelor's Degree, High quality resume, Female gender, and three job categories.
The observations do not add up to 12054 across the groups of columns in columns (5) through (11) because of missing or incomplete data in the job posting.
Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each employment advertisement, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.




                                                                                 35
                                                                    Figure 1: Callback Rate vs Unemployment Duration
                                                                                  Sample = Unemployed only


                                                      .1
                                                      .08
             Callback rate

                                                      .06
                                                      .04
                                                      .02
                                                      0




                                                                0        6        12         18          24      30    36
                                                                                Unemployment Duration (months)




                                                          Figure 2: (Relative) Callback Rate vs Unemployment Duration
                                                                                 Sample = Unemployed only
                                                     1
                                                     .9
             Callback Rate / Initial Callback Rate
                                                     .8
                                                     .7
                                                     .6
                                                     .5
                                                     .4
                                                     .3
                                                     .2
                                                     .1
                                                     0




                                                            0            6       12          18          24      30    36
                                                                                Unemployment Duration (months)


Notes: These figures are generated by computing the average callback rate for each 3-4 month bin in the
range [1,36]. Figure 1 reports the average callback rate in each bin, while Figure 2 divides the average
callback rate by the average callback rate in the first (lowest) unemployment duration bin [1,3]. The lines
show the 5-month moving averages computed at each month.




                                                                                          36
                                      Figure 3: Nonparametric results
                                           Sample: Unemployed only

                    .1
                    .08
              Callback rate
             .04     .06
                    .02
                    0




                              0   6       12          18          24           30          36
                                         Unemployment Duration (months)


Notes: This figure is generated by estimating a local linear regression on the experimental sample, limited
to the sub-sample of the unemployed. The nonparametric regression results are constrained to be mono-
tonic following the rearrangement procedure of Chernozhukov et al. (2009). The confidence intervals are
bootstrapped 95% uniform confidence intervals based on 1,000 replications.




                                                    37
                                                                Figure 4: Callback Rate by Unemployment Rate
                                                                               Sample = Unemployed only


                                                     .1
                                                     .08
             Callback rate

                                                     .06
                                                     .04
                                                     .02
                                                     0




                                                           0        6          12         18          24          30    36
                                                                             Unemployment Duration (months)

                                                                   High unemployment rate       Low unemployment rate




                                                           Figure 5: (Relative) Callback Rate by Unemployment Rate
                                                                              Sample = Unemployed only
                                                     1
             Callback Rate / Initial Callback Rate
                                                     .8
                                                     .6
                                                     .4
                                                     .2
                                                     0




                                                           0       6           12         18          24          30    36
                                                                             Unemployment Duration (months)

                                                                  High unemployment rate       Low unemployment rate



Notes: These figures are generated by computing the average callback rate for each 3-4 month bin in the
range [1,36] for two sub-samples of the experimental data: data from cities with low unemployment rates
(u < 8.8%), and cities with high unemployment rates. Figure 4 reports the average callback rate in each bin
for each sub-sample, while Figure 5 divides the average callback rate by the average callback rate in the first
(lowest) unemployment duration bin [1,3]. The lines show the 5-month moving averages computed at each
month.

                                                                                       38
                                                                    Figure 6: Callback Rate by V/U Ratio
                                                                           Sample = Unemployed only


                                                     .1
                                                     .08
             Callback rate

                                                     .06
                                                     .04
                                                     .02
                                                     0




                                                           0       6        12         18          24        30   36
                                                                          Unemployment Duration (months)

                                                                          Low V/U ratio     High V/U ratio




                                                               Figure 7: (Relative) Callback Rate by V/U Ratio
                                                                           Sample = Unemployed only
                                                     1
             Callback Rate / Initial Callback Rate

                                                     .8
                                                     .6
                                                     .4
                                                     .2
                                                     0




                                                           0       6        12         18          24        30   36
                                                                          Unemployment Duration (months)

                                                                          Low V/U ratio     High V/U ratio



Notes: These figures are generated by computing the average callback rate for each 3-4 month bin in the range
[1,36] for two sub-samples of the experimental data: data from cities with high vacancy-to-unemployment
ratios (V /U > 3.25), and cities with low V /U ratios. Figure 6 reports the average callback rate in each bin
for each sub-sample, while Figure 7 divides the average callback rate by the average callback rate in the first
(lowest) unemployment duration bin [1,3]. The lines show the 5-month moving averages computed at each
month.

                                                                                    39
                                                                   Figure 8: Callback Rate by Unemp. Rate Growth
                                                                                    Sample = Unemployed only


                                                     .1
                                                     .08
             Callback rate

                                                     .06
                                                     .04
                                                     .02
                                                     0




                                                           0             6          12         18          24           30            36
                                                                                  Unemployment Duration (months)

                                                               High unemp. rate growth, ’08−’11     Low unemp. rate growth, ’08−’11




                                                           Figure 9: (Relative) Callback Rate by Unemp. Rate Growth
                                                                                    Sample = Unemployed only
                                                     1
             Callback Rate / Initial Callback Rate
                                                     .8
                                                     .6
                                                     .4
                                                     .2
                                                     0




                                                           0            6           12         18          24          30             36
                                                                                  Unemployment Duration (months)

                                                               High unemp. rate growth, ’08−’11     Low unemp. rate growth, ’08−’11



Notes: These figures are generated by computing the average callback rate for each two-month bin in the
range [1,36] for two sub-samples of the experimental data: data from cities with low unemployment rate
growth (less than 3.6 percentage points between 2008 and 2011), and cities with high unemployment rate
growth. Figure 8 reports the average callback rate in each bin for each sub-sample, while Figure 9 divides
the average callback rate by the average callback rate in the first (lowest) unemployment duration bin [1,3].
The lines show the 5-month moving averages computed at each month.

                                                                                             40
                                                  Figure 10: Duration Dependence vs. Unemployment Rate


                           .05
            (Estimated) Duration Dependence
                 −.05      −.1    0




                                              4         6       8      10       12       14   16         18
                                                                     Unemployment Rate


Notes: This figure shows the correlation between the MSA-specific estimated coefficient on unemployment
duration (the duration dependence coefficient) and the MSA unemployment rate at the start of the exper-
iment (July 2011). The solid line is the weighted OLS regression line using the number of observations in
the MSA for the weights. The size of the circles are proportional to these weights.




                                                                         41
Appendix A: Proof of Proposition 2 and Composition Bias

Proof of Proposition 2
  Recall that r(d; x) and (d; x) are de…ned as follows:

                                                                          h(d; x)
                                                     r(d; x)       =
                                                                          h(0; x)
                                                                             (d; x)
                                                      (d; x)       =
                                                                          1     (d; x)

From the expressions above, it is clear that r ( (d; x) ; x) increases in (d; x): Therefore, to establish the
proposition, we need to establish the relationship between (d; x) and x. It is su¢ cient to sign the relation-
ship between (d; x) and x.
   First, note that (0; x) = (0; x0 ) for x 6= x0 . This follows from the assumption that (0; x) = 0 . Next,
from de…nition of (d; x), it is simple to show that

                            @ (d; x)
                                     =           m(x)          (d; x)         (lh ( (d; x))             ll ( (d; x)))
                              @d

                                                 @   (0;x0 )            @ (0;x)
Since m0 (x) > 0 and lh (   0)   > ll (   0 ),       @d        >          @d       . This establishes that for small " > 0, x0 > x
) ("; x) > ("; x0 ). In other words, the share of high types is initially lower in tighter markets. This is
intuitive as high types get selected out of unemployment relatively faster.
    To complete the proof, we need to show that 8 d > 0, x0 > x ) (d; x) > (d; x0 ). We will proceed by
contradiction. Suppose that this were not true. Then since (d; x0 ) initially lies below (d; x), 9 d > 0
                                                                                       @ (d ;x0 )
such that (d ; x) = (d ; x0 ) and (d + "; x) < (d + "; x0 ). By the de…nition of d ,      @d      > @ (d
                                                                                                       @d
                                                                                                          ;x)
                                                                                                              .
However, this would imply that (d + "; x) > (d + "; x0 ), a contradiction. Thus, it follows that a
single crossing property has to hold for (d; x) and (d; x0 ). And, since (0; x) = (0; x0 ), we have that
  (d; x) > (d; x0 ) and consequently r (d; x) > r (d; x0 ) for all d > 0.
    Composition Bias
    Recall equation (10)                           Z
                                                             d ( jd)
                                           c (d)      c( )            d
                                                                d
   Di¤erentiating with respect to d yields:
                                                               Z
                                                                              d2 ( jd)
                                                 c0 (d)            c( )                d                                      (16)
                                                                                d dd
   Note that

                                     ( jd) =          (d)      h   ( jd) + (1            (d))       l   ( jd)
                    Z
   where    (d) =       (d; ) d ( jd). Hence,

                                   d ( jd)                     d    h   ( )                         d     l   ( )
                                           =           (d)                    + (1        (d))
                                     d                             d                                     d

   Thus,
                                      d2 ( jd)   d (d)                    d    h   ( )    d     l   ( )
                                               =
                                        d dd      dd                           d              d

                                                                        A-1
   Plugging this back into (16), we get
                                                   Z                      Z
                                            d (d)
                            c0 (d)    =               c( )d      h( )           c( )d   l   ( )
                                             dd
                                            d (d)
                            c0 (d)    =           [Eh [c ( )]     El [c ( )]]
                                             dd

   By the proposition above, d dd(d) < 0. By …rst-order stochastic dominance and the fact that c0 ( ) > 0,
the expression inside the brackets is positive. This establishes that c0 (d) < 0.


Appendix B: Properties of Incomplete and Complete Spells
We distinguish between two duration concepts – “incomplete” and “completed spells”. That is, we de…ne
the random variable D as the length of an unemployed worker’s incomplete spell. This random variable is
to be distinguished from S, the length of a completed spell of unemployment. Clearly, realizations s and d of
these random variables satisfy s d. Denote the conditional distribution and density functions of completed
spells at time t as GSy (S) and gyS (S). For incomplete spells, we will use the notation GD           D
                                                                                          y (D) and gy (D).
    There is a connection between the distribution of completed and ongoing spells in the steady state. Salant
(1977) demonstrates that in the steady-state, the density of on-going spells is connected to the distribution
of completed spells as follows:
                                                   1 GSy ( )
                                         gyD ( ) =            for     0                                   (17)
                                                     E[S]
   We can also de…ne the escape rate conditional on spell length as the rate at which individuals leave
the population of unemployed at : This can be expressed as a function of the density and distribution of
completed spells:                                           21         3
                                                             Z
                                        gyS ( )       d
                              hy ( ) =           =       ln 4 gyS ( )d 5
                                       1 GSy ( )     dS

   Rewriting this, we get

                                                d
                                                  ln 1    GSy ( ) + hy ( )        =     0
                                               d
                                      d
                                        1    GSy ( ) + (1       GSy ( ))hy ( )    =     0
                                     d
   This is a …rst-order di¤erential equation with a variable coe¢ cient. The general solution of this equation,
the distribution function for completed spells, satis…es:
                                                                  Z
                                                   S
                               Pr(S > ) = 1 Gy ( ) = exp              hy ( )d                              (18)
                                                                           0

    This is simply the probability that the individual has not been hired up to S. And, this implies the
following density:                                        0           1
                                                            Z
                                     gyS ( ) = hy ( ) exp @   hy ( )d A                             (19)
                                                                   0


Appendix C: Model of Employer-Screening
In this section, we show that a model of search frictions with employer screening will satisfy the requirements
of the mechanical model of Section 2. We assume that (i) …rms open vacancies subject to a zero-pro…t


                                                         A-2
condition; (ii) workers and …rms meet according to a reduced-form meeting function; (iii) upon meeting a
worker, …rms receive a signal on the worker’s productivity (y = h or l, with h > l) and decide whether
or not to interview the worker at a cost; (iv) some applicants are called back for an interview (a costly
screen) where the …rm obtains additional information in the form of signal z. If the expected pro…t of …rm
is positive, then the individual is o¤ered the jobs. The expected pro…t depends on the wage and we need to
make an assumption on wage setting. In the simplest version of the model, we assume that wages o¤ered by
all …rms will equal the outside opportunity of workers which is denoted by b. As we show below, this model
maps into the mechanical structure discussed in Section 2 since (i) a matching function of the required type
is assumed to govern the rate at which …rms and workers meet; (ii) high type applicants are more likely to
be hired conditional on matching than low type applicants; and (iii) hiring rates conditional on matching
decline with (d; ).
    While we discuss the model for the simplest possible form of wage setting with w = b, it is also possible
to allow for more general forms of wage setting. For instance, we could assume that wages are set to be
equal to b plus a …xed share in the expected surplus from a given job. For instance, we might expect
that w = b + (E[yj (d; ) ; z] b) where 2 [0; 1] : In this case, …rms would invite fewer individuals for
interviews, since the expected surplus (1       ) (E[yj (d; ) ; z] b) going to the …rm would be smaller and
thus the interview costs would be covered in fewer cases. Therefore a model with surplus sharing will have
ine¢ ciently low interview rates. Notwithstanding the fact that the welfare implications would di¤er under
this form of wage setting, it is possible to show that the requirements (ii) and (iii) on hiring rates conditional
on matching will still be satis…ed and that therefore the predictions of the mechanical model still apply.

Model Setup
     Population Dynamics and Workers
    We maintain the assumptions on matching and on the life-cycle of individuals that we have described in
Section 2.1. In addition, we assume that workers receive bene…ts b when unemployed and we assume that
l < b < h. These bene…ts are constant with respect to productivity and they determine the outside option
of unemployed workers.28 ,29
    Firms / Vacancies
    There is no …xed cost to opening a vacancy, but each period that a vacancy is open a ‡ow cost c needs
to be paid. There is free-entry.30 Filling or keeping open the current vacancy does not a¤ect the ability
to open future vacancies, nor does it have any impact on the costs and bene…ts associated with any future
vacancies. Thus, …rms …ll vacancies as soon as they …nd a match such that the expected pro…t of the vacancy
is positive. Firms care only about the productive type of a worker.
    We assume that …rms o¤er a wage of b. O¤ering b represents a Nash equilibrium because we assume
that applicants accept job o¤ers with a pay-o¤ equal to the expected pay-o¤ from remaining unemployed. If
all …rms o¤er b, then the pay-o¤ from remaining unemployed is also b and workers accept these job o¤ers.
Further, no …rm has an incentive to make a higher o¤er.
    Once a vacancy is …lled, it generates an output stream y until the individual retires. Since the wage
b exceeds the productivity of the less able type, …rms have an interest in hiring only high productivity
workers.31 We assume that …rms hold rational expectations. Thus, …rms’beliefs about the probability that
  2 8 Type fully predicts productivity in this model. Another formulation would allow type to determine productivity proba-

bilistically. See Gonzales and Shi (2009) for a learning model.
  2 9 Krueger and Mueller (2011) …nd empirical support for the observation that the reservation wage does not vary with

unemployment durations. See also Kasper (1967) as well as Feldstein and Poterba (1984).
  3 0 The matching technology generates a rate of matching for a given vacancy that is independent of the number of vacancies

a …rm opens. Further, the ‡ow cost of maintaining a vacancy is likewise independent of the number of vacancies a …rm opens.
These constant returns to scale assumptions imply that the size of …rms is indeterminate. We will therefore treat each vacancy
as a …rm in its own right.
  3 1 We are assuming here that …rms hold onto non-pro…table workers (b > l) forever. In other words, ex ante pro…ts are driven

to 0 in eqm but ex post there will be workers on which …rms make losses. The assumption that relationships are maintained
regardless of their productivity is clearly ad-hoc. We have in mind that …rms incur losses on workers that are not productive



                                                             A-3
a worker of duration d and signals and z is of high type will equal the distribution that arises in equilibrium.
    The Signals
    We assume the same matching process as described above. Upon meeting, …rms observe how long an
individual has been unemployed (a draw d from the random variable D). The …rm also observes an additional
signal on the productivity of the worker - which we interpret to re‡ect the unobserved characteristics of the
CV as described in Section 2. Given this additional signal, the …rm can decide whether or not to interview
the worker at a …xed cost : If the …rm chooses to interview the worker, it then receives another signal z on
the worker type y. Without loss of generality, we assume that this signal represents new information about
the worker type that is orthogonal to the prior (d; ) that …rms hold about worker productivity when they
make callback decisions. For simplicity, we assume that distribution of the scalar signal only depends on the
type y and write the distribution function for z conditional on productivity y as Fyz (:) : Assume further that
Flz (:) and Fhz (:) satisfy a monotone likelihood ratio property. This captures the idea that z is informative
about the underlying type.
                                                                                                                    fhz (k)
Assumption 4 [Monotone Likelihood Ratio] Flz (.) and Fhz (:) satisfy the MLR property so that                       flz (k)   (strictly)32
increases in k.33

    Implied in this assumption is …rst-order stochastic dominance (Flz (k) Fhz (k) > 0 for all k). Continuous
distributions satisfying MLR include the exponential family and the normal distribution. This assumption
implies that …rms pursue a "reservation signal policy" for both callbacks and hiring decisions. When a …rm
has observed (Z = z; ; D = d), the …rm decides whether or not to hire the worker.

Equilibrium
We begin by de…ning an equilibrium and the pay-o¤ functions for …rms in this economy. Denote by Ju
the value of an open vacancy, by Jm the value of matching to an applicant before deciding on whether to
interview this applicant and by JI the value of having interviewed an applicant with duration d and signal z.
Equation (20) says that the return on an un…lled vacancy depends on the ‡ow cost of each vacancy, market
tightness x; and the joint distribution of duration and signals GD (d; ) in the population. At rate mv (x), a
vacancy meets with a worker, who is drawn from the joint distribution of incomplete spells (see Appendix
B) and signals : GD (d; ):
                                                     Z Z
                                  rJu = c + mv (x)       Jm (d; )dGD (d; )                               (20)
                                                               d

    The value of a match depends on the signal drawn for this match and the duration d of the appli-
cant. This value equals the maximum of the value of keeping the vacancy open and the expected value of
interviewing the worker net of interview cost 34 :
                                                   Z
                            Jm (d; ) = max Ju ; JI (d; z; )dF (zjd; )                             (21)
                                                               z

The distribution F (zjd; ) depends only on the prior                  (d; ) :

                                  F (zjd; )      =      (d; ) Fh (z) + (1         (d; )) Fl (z)
                                                 = F (zj (d; ))
and that they will therefore strive to avoid hiring low-productivity workers.

  3 2 By assuming that the likelihood ratio strictly increases, we ensure that as z increases, the posterior probability of being the
high type will approach 1.
  3 3 WLOG, because we can always reassign the support of z.
  3 4 Here we assume that to hire an applicant, an interview is always necessary. This assumption can be justi…ed by the fact

that workers in our experiment are always required to submit a CV to a vacancy and rarely are they o¤ered a job at this stage.



                                                                A-4
    Upon interviewing the candidate, the …rm updates its beliefs and obtains the value JI (d; z; ). JI (d; z; )
is the maximum of the expected present discounted value of pro…ts from hiring this interviewee and the value
of rejecting her and keeping the vacancy open. The expected ‡ow return to a …lled vacancy is the expected
productivity conditional on the observed signals net of the wage (b). Expected productivity depends on
the prior (d) as well as the signals and the signal z.35 With rate , individuals retire and the match is
consequently dissolved. Thus, the ‡ow return from a …lled vacancy is discounted using both the interest rate
r and the retirement rate :
                                                          1
                               JI (d; z; )   =    max Ju ;   (E [yjz; (d; )]             b)                             (22)
                                                         r+
                                             = JI (z; (d; ))                                                            (23)

    The rational expectations equilibrium consists of x = V =U , an interview rule, a hiring rule; and a joint
distribution GD (d; ; z; y) that satisfy:
                                            R
   1. Firms interview workers if and only if z JI (z; (d; )) dF (zj (d; ))      :

  2. Firms hire workers if and only if E [yj ; d; z]          b:

  3. Given x and implied mv (x) ; vacancies do not earn pro…ts in expectation: Ju = 0.

  4. Beliefs about the distribution of productivity ( ; d) equal the equilibrium realized distribution ( ; d) :

Characterizing Firm’s Behavior
It is easy to show the hiring rates in this model satisfy the two requirements of the mechanical model. We
will show this for a given : These properties of the hiring rates are maintained when we aggregate across :

  1. Conditional on ; hiring rate for high types exceeds that for low types.
     For a given (d; ) ; the interview rate is the same for high or low types. However, the expected
     productivity E [yj ; d; z] = E [yj ( ; d) ; z] increases in z. Since Fh (z) FOSD Fl (z), high types are
     more likely to receive high signals than low types. The equilibrium condition 2 on hiring is therefore
     satis…ed more often for high rather than low types.

  2. Conditional on type, hiring rates increase in
     By FOSD, we have that F (zj ) increases in and that JI (z; ) increases in z and : Therefore,
     R
        J (z; (d; )) dF (zj (d; )) increases in : Thus, callback rates for any type of worker (high or
      z I
     low) increase in ; satisfying the conditions of corrolary 1. Furthermore, we have again that E [yj ; z]
     increases in : Since the type-speci…c distribution Fy (z) does not depend on , hiring rates for a given
     type increase in :

    Thus, both conditions on hiring rates and the matching structure of the mechanical model are satis…ed by
this screening model. Furthermore, the condition of corollary 1 is satis…ed. It follows that the model exhibits
negative duration dependence and that the model implies that duration dependence worsens if markets are
tighter.


Appendix D: Model of Human Capital Depreciation
An alternative interpretation of duration dependence in unemployment is that workers skills depreciate
during unemployment. We present a simple model that captures this idea. Our main point is to illustrate
that this model does not imply that that duration dependence interacts with market tightness. We can
 3 5 To  form this expectation, …rms use the joint distribution of incomplete durations, signals, and productivity at time t:
GD   (D; Z; y; t) :


                                                            A-5
thus test this model based on human capital depreciation against the screening model using the interaction
between market tightness and unemployment durations.
    In contrast to the screening model, the idea of skill depreciation does not emphasize information problems
on the part of employers about the productivity of applicants. Instead, in human capital models, information
about the general skills of workers are known to employers. We therefore assume that, conditional on , all
individuals have the same market skills. Instead of introducing an additional variable, we will simply assume
that equals the human capital / productivity of a worker: Let at d = 0 be given by 0 and use                to
denote the distribution of 0 : 0       . We assume that individual human capital depreciates exponentially
at rate while unemployed. At d > 0, individual human capital is given by (d) = 0 exp ( d) :
    In addition to general human capital, we assume that the match between workers and …rms has a match-
speci…c component. That is, we assume that the output of any match is given by by + "ij where "ij is
independent of and drawn from distribution F" : The independence assumption on " captures the intuition
that this component does not depend on worker or …rm characteristics but is instead speci…c to each match.
    As above, the unemployed and vacancies are matched at rate m (x). Upon meeting, a …rm observes
and d;36 but needs to interview a worker in order to discover the match speci…c component ": As before,
we assume that interviews are costly and for simplicity we assume that …rms cannot hire a worker without
interviewing her …rst.
    The value function for an open vacancy is very similar to that of the screening model given in eq. (20) :
                                                         Z Z
                                                                                D
                                  rJu =        c + mv (x)    Jm (d;        0 )dG (d;   0)                       (24)
                                                           d    0


   Upon meeting, the …rm again has to choose whether to interview the worker with characteristics and
pay the interview cost of : The problem is similar to the one above, except that the expectation is taken
over the match speci…c component ":
                                                   Z
                             Jm (d; 0 ) = max Ju ; JI ( 0 ; d; ")dF (")                              (25)
                                                                "

    We maintain the wage setting assumption that workers are paid their outside option b. The value of a
…lled vacancy is therefore

                                                            1
                            JI (d;   0 ; ")   = max Ju ;      (      0   exp (   d) + "     b)
                                                           r+

   Imposing the free entry condition, we have that a job is …lled if

                                                  "   b    exp (     d)    0                                    (26)

     Thus, conditional on matching and interviewing, the rate at which interviewees with ( 0 ; d) are hired
is l ( 0 ; d) = 1 F" (b exp ( d) 0 ) : This rate declines in d. Now, since JI (d; 0 ; ") increases in 0 and
decreases in d, we have that the callback rate c ( 0 ; d) increases in 0 and decreases in d. We thus have that
the hiring rate is given by h ( 0 ; d) = m (x) c ( 0 ; d) l ( 0 ; d) and satis…es @h(@d0 ;d) < 0:
     Thus, the model generates true duration dependence in hiring rates and our experiment will …nd true
duration dependence in callback rates c ( 0 ; d) : However, consider the functions r (d; x) = h(d;x;     )
                                                                                                  h(0;x; ) and
rc (d; x) = c(d;x; )
            c(0;x; ) that we have used to generate a testable implication for models following the structure of
the mechanical model described in Section 2. For the model based on human capital depreciation, these two
 3 6 We
      assume that the …rm knows the relationship (d) = 0 exp ( d) so, given and d, it can recover 0 . Thus, observing
 and d is equivalent to observing 0 and d. We adopt this convention when de…ning the value functions below.




                                                               A-6
functions are:
                                                              c(   0 ; d) l ( 0 ; d)
                                          r (d; x;   0)   =
                                                              c(   0 ; 0) l ( 0 ; 0)
                                                              c(   0 ; d)
                                         rc (d; x;   0)   =
                                                              c(   0 ; 0)

   Neither of them depend on market tightness x. Therefore, it is possible to distinguish the depreciation
model from the screening models described above exploiting the functions rc (d; x; ) : Crucial however is
again that the distribution of characteristics is adequately controlled for – and as we argue above, this
requires experimental data of the type we exploit below.


Appendix E: Ranking as an Alternative Model of Employer Generated Duration
Dependence
As an alternative to screening, Blanchard and Diamond (1994) (BD) developed a model of employer driven
duration dependence building on the idea of ranking. According to the ranking model, vacancies accept
multiple applications over a discrete, positive duration of time and then rank all applications against each
other according to their duration. The ranking hypothesis is that …rms hire the applicant with the shortest
duration. Naturally, this model as discussed by BD generates duration dependence.
    In each period, workers are assumed to send out an application with probability a. BD further assume
that markets are large in the sense that U (d) and V ! 1, where U (d) is the number of unemployed with
duration less than d.37 Given this assumption, the probability that any vacancy receives an application of
                                                             aU (d)
an individual with duration d or less is equal to 1 exp        V    .
    Since applications are independently assigned to vacancies, this probability is also the probability that
an applicant of duration d will …nd himself applying to a vacancy for which another individual with a shorter
duration also applies. The probability that an unemployed individual of duration d …nds a job is therefore
equal to the product of the probability that he sends an application times the probability that nobody
of shorter duration applies to the same vacancies. Denoting by hR (d) the hazard function from leaving
unemployment in BD’s model, we obtain38 :

                                                                   aU (d)
                                             hR (d) = a exp                                                          (27)
                                                                    V

   In this model, the probability a worker matches with a …rm, mu (x) = a, does not depend on market tight-
                                                                                                    aU (d)
ness.39 Conditional on a worker matching with a …rm, the probability he gets hired is l(d) = exp     V     .
Thus, the job …nding rate hR (d) has a similar structure to the mechanical model above; namely the match
probability times the hiring probability.
   Since U (d) is by construction an increasing function, we have that @h@d
                                                                          R (d)
                                                                                < 0. Thus, the ranking and
the screening models both generate true duration dependence and it is not possible to distinguish between
them on the basis of this …nding. However, as we will argue below, the models di¤er fundamentally in how
labor market conditions a¤ect duration dependence – screening predicts that tighter markets lead to more
duration dependence, whereas ranking predicts that tighter markets lead to less duration dependence.
 3 7 We  do not fully develop the BD model here, but refer the reader to the original work.
 3 8 This  is equation (15) in BD.
  3 9 Blanchard and Diamond note that in a more realistic model, a would depend on the state of labour market. They do not

consider this possibility.




                                                          A-7
Interaction Between Duration Dependence and Market Conditions
                                     hR (d)
Consider the function rR (d) =       hR (0)   obtained from the ranking model:

                                                       U (d)       U (0)                U (d)
                                    rR (d) = exp( a                        ) = exp( a         )                                (28)
                                                               V                         V
    where we use the fact that in continuous time there is no mass of individuals with durations less than
or equal to d = 0. Thus, we see directly how duration dependence as measured by rR (d) depends on a
particular measure of market conditions: the ratio of the currently unemployed with durations shorter than
d to the total number of vacancies. If market conditions tighten in the sense that this ratio declines, then
rR (d) increases.40 Thus, in this sense tighter labor markets are associated with less duration dependence.
    Therefore, we can distinguish the screening, human capital depreciation and the ranking model by either
(i) examining whether durations vary with current or with past market conditions or (ii) by examining
whether duration dependence is more or less negative in permanently tighter labor markets. It is this second
implication that we use to motivate the design and implementation of our resume audit study.


Appendix F: Measuring Salience of Resume Characteristics Using Web-Based
Survey of MBA Students
Our experiment assumes that employers are aware of (and can therefore respond to) information about a
job applicant’s unemployment spell. To test this assumption, we designed and conducted a web-based
survey. We recruited 365 …rst-year MBA students at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business by
e-mail on April 9, 2012, and the web-based survey was successfully completed by 90 MBA students.41 The
students did not receive any compensation for participation, and they took roughly 5-10 minutes on average
to complete the survey.42
    The survey took place in three stages. In the …rst stage (Appendix Figure A1), respondents were asked
to read a hypothetical job posting and consider two resumes for the job opening. The job posting was
chosen at random from one of three candidate job postings. These job postings were designed based on
real job postings from our …eld experiment, each one correponding to one of the three job categories used
in the …eld experiment (i.e., Administrative/Clerical, Sales, Customer Service). We created six candidate
resumes for each of the three possible job postings, and the two resumes presented to the respondent are
chosen randomly from the appropriate set of six (and ordered randomly on the web page). These resumes
were designed based on the …ctitious resumes actually used in our …eld experiment. After being presented
with the job posting and the two resumes, the respondent was then asked to select one of the two resumes
to contact for an in-person job interview.
    In the second stage (Appendix Figure A2), the respondent was required to perform two tasks. First,
she was asked to recall speci…c information on each of the two resumes, such as total work experience,
tenure at last job, level of education, current employment status, and the length of unemployment spell.43
Importantly, the respondent was precluded from viewing the resumes after making her selection. If the
respondent attempted to click the “Back”button on her browser, she was warned that this would invalidate
her survey response. Second, the respondent was asked to indicate which two resume attributes were most
important in evaluating the job applicant’s resume, and to rank these two attributes by importance.44 In
the third stage of the survey (Appendix Figure A3), the respondent is asked several demographic questions.
 4 0 We                                                                                               U (d)
          refer the reader to Blanchard and Diamond who show more directly that h(d) = a exp      a    V
                                                                                                              is decreasing in labor
                   U
market tightness, .V
  4 1 There were 91 students who completed the survey, but one of the responses contained missing responses for most of the

requested information and so was dropped from the analysis.
  4 2 We measure time-to-completion by treating the IP address of the respondent as a unique identi…er.
  4 3 The ordering of these questions was chosen at random for each respondent.
  4 4 The ordering of these attributes was chosen at random for each respondent.




                                                               A-8
    We use the responses to the “recall”questions in the second stage to measure the salience of the various
resume characteristics. The results are reported in Appendix Table A1. The full sample used to measure
salience comprises all of the resumes evaluated by all of the respondents, which is N = 180, since each of
the 90 respondents had to recall information for two resumes.
    In Panel A of Appendix Table A1, we report results which compute how often the respondent correctly
recalled the information, and we repeat this for each resume characteristic. The …rst row shows that
respondents were able to correctly recall the level of education on the resume 65% of the time. This
is similar to 66% of the time that the respondents were able to correctly recall whether or not the job
applicant was currently employed. The respondents were particularly likely to recall the number of jobs
that the applicant held; this information is correctly recalled 85% of the time. The last three rows of Panel
A report results for the length of the unemployment spell, total work experience, and tenure at previous
job, respectively. For these cases, we de…ne the respondent as correctly recalling the information if the
response is within a given window around the “actual” value, where the window varies by characteristic
(and roughly scales with the average value of the characteristic across the resumes used in the survey).45
Using this de…nition, respondents correctly recall length of unemployment spell 52% of the time, total work
experience 64% of the time, and tenure at previous job 47% of the time. The second column of Panel A
reports analgous results for the subsample of respondents who report “high experience”in reviewing resumes
(corresponding to a 4 or a 5 on a 5-point scale, which comprises roughly 19% of the full sample). The results
are broadly similar for this subsample, with more respondents in this subsample correctly recalling the length
of unemployment spell and whether job applicant was currently employed.
    Next, in Panel B we report an alternative measure of salience: the correlation between the “recalled”
information and the “actual”resume characteristic. This correlation is based on the variation across resumes
in the values of these characteristics. Across all of the rows in the table, the two values are strongly and
signi…cantly correlated, suggesting that the respondents were able to recall information. Additionally, the
correlations are generally higher among the subsample of respondents with “high experience”. Consistent
with the results in Panel A, the correlation for length of unemployment spell is similar in magnitude to the
correlations for the other variables. We also report the “mean % error” (de…ned as the average percentage
di¤erence between the “recalled” and “actual” values across all survey responses). This number is similar
across characteristics, con…rming that the respondents are not substantially biased on average in recalling
speci…c information. We interpret the results in Panel A and Panel B as being broadly consistent with
students being aware of employment status and length of unemployment spell, in addition to the other
resume characteristics that they were asked to recall.
    Lastly, in Panel C we report results from the subjective survey question which asked respondents to
list the two most important attributes in evaluating the job applicant’s resume. Interestingly, there is
overwhelming preference for the resumes to have “relevant work experience”, with very few respondents
indicating employment status or length of unemployment spell as being one of the two most important
attributes.46 These results may shed light on why resume audit studies typically explain so little variation
in callback rates: if employers are primarily trying to gauge whether the work experience is speci…cally
relevant for the job, and this information is not being measured or manipulated by researchers, then the
ability of the other covariates to explain variation in callback rates will be limited.
    Overall, the results of this survey are consistent with our assumption that employers in our experiment
   4 5 The resumes in the survey have 84 months of work experience on average (std. dev. 18 months). For job tenure, the mean

is 51 months (std. dev. 20 months). Finally, for length of unemployment spell, the mean (conditional on not being currently
employed) is 20 months (std. dev. 9 months). The unemployment spells are chosen from set f8; 14; 20; 27; 36g. One reason
why we choose the 4-month window for the length of unemployment spell is that there is a clear mass of respondents who
respond with 12 and 24 months when true value of unemployment spell is 8 and 20, respectively. More than half of the survey
respondents only provide year (and no month) for experience, job tenure, and unemployment spell. This could be consistent
with a memory-based “heuristic” that rounds to the nearest year, or alternatively the respondents wanted to complete the
survey more quickly and did not bother to guess the exact month for these characteristics.
   4 6 In pilot survey, we did not have “relevant work experience”, and every student taking pilot survey responded that this

would have been their …rst choice.



                                                            A-9
are aware of the employment status and the length of the unemployment spell, at least to the extent that
they are aware of other information on the resume, such level of education, total work experience, and tenure
at last job. While there is an important caveat that the survey respondents are not a representative sample
of the individuals evaluating resumes in our …eld experiment, we are reassured that our results persist in the
subsample of MBA students with high levels of experience actually reviewing resumes.


Appendix G: Covariance Between City Fixed E¤ects and City-Speci…c E¤ect of
Unemployment Duration
Recall the following estimating equation from the main text:
                                                          c           c
                                  yi;c =    1 Ei;c   +        +           log(di;c ) + Xi;c + "i;c

where c is a metropolitan area …xed e¤ect and c is a MSA-speci…c estimate of the e¤ect of unemployment
duration. We test for whether duration dependence varies with labor market conditions by treating c
as a proxy measure of labor market tightness and then estimating the covariance between c and c ; i.e.
         c c                                                                                         c
E[( c     ) ]. We compute this by …rst computing the covariance between the estimates; i.e., E[^ ^ c ].
                                    c        c
De…ning ^c as estimation error for ^ (i.e., ^ = c + ^c ) and ^c as estimation error for ^ c , then we can
            c c
compute E[^ ^ ] as follows:

                                         C
                        c             1 X ^c c
                     E[^ ^ c ]   =          ^
                                      C c=1
                                         C
                                      1 X       c
                                 =          (        + ^c )(      c
                                                                      + ^c )
                                      C c=1
                                         C                   C                        C                     C
                                      1 X       c c       1 X              c c     1 X c         c       1 X c c
                                 =                    +                     ^ +          ^           +         ^ ^
                                      C c=1               C c=1                    C c=1                 C c=1

where C is the total number of cities in the sample.                        We can re-write this using expectations as follows
(using the fact that Ec [^c ] = 0 and Ec [^c ] = 0):

                                                                                C
                                          c                                  1 X
                                       E[^ ^ c ] = E[         c c
                                                                      ]+           Ec [^c ^c ]
                                                                             C c=1

Next, we can compute Ec [^c ^c ] using standard statistical results:

                                                                       2
                                                                             Ec [log(d)]
                                            Ec [^c ^c ] =              c
                                                                      Nc    V ar(log(d))

where 2c is the residual variance for MSA c, and N c is the number of observations in the MSA. Combining
the above gives us the following expression for the unbiased estimate of E[ c c2 ]:

                                                        C         C
                                  c    c             1 X ^c c  1 X ^ 2c Ec [log(d)]
                            E[(            ) c] =          ^ +                                                            (29)
                                                     C c=1     C c=1 N c V ar(log(d))

    In other words, there is a negative bias in estimated covariance if one simply computes empirical covariance
                                      c
based on the regression estimates ^ and ^ c . Intuitively, this bias comes from the fact that the sampling
errors in the estimates for these two parameters for a given MSA are negatively correlated. While this
bias goes away asymptotically, it requires both that C ! 1 and N C ! 1. In Monte Carlo simulations



                                                                  A-10
resembling our experimental data, we …nd substantial bias unless we use the bias correction above.
    We conduct inference on the estimated covariance by computing the following standard error estimate,
and we have veri…ed that these standard errors are reliable using Monte Carlo simulations:
                                                v                         !
                                                u
                                                u1 1 X     C
                                                                c
                                     \c ]) = t
                                 se(E[ c
                                                              (^ )2 (^ )2
                                                                      c
                                                  C C c=1


Appendix H: Data Sources
This section describes the various MSA-level data used in the empirical analysis:
    Vacancy Data: We purchased vacancy data from Wanted Analytics (WA), which is part of Wanted
Technologies. WA collects hiring demand data and is the exclusive data provider for The Conference Board’s
“Help-Wanted OnLine Data Series”, which is a monthly economic indicator of hiring demand in the US. WA
gathers its data from the universe of online vacancies posted on internet job boards or online newspapers.
In total, it covers roughly 1,200 online job boards, although the vast majority of the ads appear on a small
number of major job boards. When the same job ad appears on multiple job boards, WA uses a deduplication
procedure to identify unique job ads on the basis of company name, job title and description and MSA or
State. Sahin et al (2011) document potential measurement issues related to these data: …rst, the dataset
records a single vacancy per ad, although it is possible that multiple positions are listed in a single ad;
second, it is possible that multiple locations within a state are listed in a single ad for a given position. The
data we received contains the total number of job postings by MSA, 6-digit occupation code, and year. Our
sample spans 2008 through 2012.
    MSA Unemployment Data: Source: United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. Link: http://data.
bls.gov/cgi-bin/dsrv?la. Description: Monthly data on number of unemployed persons, number of
persons in the labor force, the number of employed persons and the unemployment rate in the given MSA.
    GDP in 2010: Source: US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. Link: http://
www.bea.gov/newsreleases/regional/gdp_metro/gdp_metro_newsrelease.htm for original press release.
Now can be reproduced at http://www.bea.gov/itable. Description: Real US GDP by metropolitan area.
This is advanced GDP data, and was released in September 2011. The numbers used are chained 2005
dollars.
    Median Income in 2011: Source: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, posting data
from the Department of Housing and Urban Development. Link: http://www.ffiec.gov/cra/censusproducts.
htm\#MSAincome. Description: Median Income in 2011 for MSAs in real dollars.
    Metropolitan Population Density, Median Age, Share of Population (25 Years and Above)
with Bachelor’s Degree, Share of Civilian Employed Population in Information Industries,
Fraction of Population Non-White: Source: 2010 Census. Link: http://www.census.gov/compendia/
statab/2011/tables/11s0023.pdf




                                                   A-11
                                       Appendix Table A1
                Measuring salience of resume characteristics: MBA student survey
                                                                                        Only resumes reviewed by
                                                                 All resumes            "High experience" students
                                                                  (N = 180)                     (N = 34)

                             PANEL A: DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FROM SURVEY
                                                   % answering correctly % answering correctly
What is the level of education of the applicant?       65%  correct          65% correct
 [Bachelors, Associate Degree, GED, High School Grad]
Is the job applicant currently employed?                        66% correct                    82% correct

How many jobs has the applicant held?                            85% correct                   86% correct

How long is the applicant currently unemployed?                 52% correct                    74% correct
 [Sample limited to not currently employed]                    (within 4 months)              (within 4 months)
What is the applicant's total work experience?                  64% correct                    71% correct
                                                               (within 24 months)            (within 24 months)
How long did the applicant hold his/her last job?               47% correct                    50% correct
                                                               (within 12 months)            (within 12 months)


                           PANEL B: CORRELATION AND MEAN % ERROR
                  COMPARING "RECALLED" AND "ACTUAL" RESUME CHARACTERISTICS
                                                        Correlation     Mean % error    Correlation   Mean % error
How many jobs has the applicant held?                     0.710            3.4%           0.647          5.9%
                                                         (0.054)          (1.5%)         (0.135)        (3.8%)

How long is the applicant currently unemployed?            0.499            -13.3%         0.757          -14.3%
 [Sample limited to not currently employed]               (0.067)           (6.0%)        (0.115)         (7.5%)
What is the applicant's total work experience?             0.419            -13.0%         0.664          -11.4%
                                                          (0.070)           (2.3%)        (0.132)         (3.8%)

How long did the applicant hold his/her last job?          0.447            -11.1%         0.771          -9.7%
                                                          (0.069)           (5.2%)        (0.113)         (9.3%)


                      PANEL C: RANKING RESUME ATTRIBUTES BY IMPORTANCE
Which two attributes were most important in evaluating the job applicant's resume?
                                                        1st choice     2nd choice  1st choice           2nd choice
Years of work experience                                    4%               29%           11%              28%
Length of time at most recent job                           0%               13%            0%              17%
Level of education                                          9%               28%           11%              39%
Number of jobs held by applicant                            0%               12%            0%               0%
Relevant work experience                                   84%               8%            74%               6%
Current employment status                                  1%                2%            0%                0%
Length of time out of work                                 2%                7%            5%               11%

Notes: This table reports results from a web-based survey administered to first-year MBA students at the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business. Details of the survey are given in the Appendix. The table reports results for
entire sample as well as a subsample of survey respondents who reported high experience in reviewing resumes
(either a 4 or 5 on a 5-point scale). Standard errors are reported in parentheses in Panel B.

                                                        A-12
                          Appendix Table A2
               The Effect of Unemployment Duration on
                        Probability of Callback
            Dependent variable: Received callback for interview
                                                              (1)       (2)

log(Months unemployed)                                        -0.011    -0.012
                                                             (0.003)   (0.003)
                                                             [0.000]   [0.000]
1{Employed}                                                   -0.020    -0.023
                                                             (0.010)   (0.010)
                                                             [0.040]   [0.019]
Unemployment rate                                                       -0.003
                                                                       (0.001)
                                                                       [0.007]
Some college                                                  -0.014    -0.016
                                                             (0.006)   (0.006)
                                                             [0.017]   [0.006]
College degree                                                -0.014    -0.018
                                                             (0.008)   (0.008)
                                                             [0.065]   [0.022]
High quality                                                   0.011     0.012
                                                             (0.004)   (0.004)
                                                             [0.010]   [0.005]
Female                                                         0.002     0.003
                                                             (0.004)   (0.004)
                                                             [0.529]   [0.502]
Customer service job                                           0.029     0.029
                                                             (0.006)   (0.006)
                                                             [0.000]   [0.000]
Sales job                                                      0.057     0.057
                                                             (0.007)   (0.007)
                                                             [0.000]   [0.000]

Average callback rate in estimation sample                     0.047     0.047

N                                                             12054     12054
 2                                                             0.038     0.016
R
MSA fixed effects                                              X
Baseline controls                                              X         X

Notes: All columns report OLS linear probability model estimates. Data are
resume-level submissions matched to callbacks from employers to request an
interview. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-
covariance matrix for each employment advertisement, are in parentheses and p-
values are in brackets.




                                     A-13
                                 Appendix Table 3
          How Does Duration Dependence Vary With Labor Market Conditions?
                              [Linear Probability Model Alternatives]
                           Dependent variable: Received callback for interview
                                                             Interaction term formed using proxy for
                                                              local labor market conditions, X = …
                                                                 u 2011 -
                                                        u         u 2008     log(u )      -V/U     - log(V/U )
                                                       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)

                                 Panel A: Results from Probit Regressions
log(Months unemployed)                                  -0.009      -0.009       -0.009      -0.009       -0.009
                                                       (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)
                                                       [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]
log(Months unemployed) × X                               0.135       0.269        0.014       0.002        0.007
                                                       (0.061)     (0.111)      (0.005)     (0.001)      (0.003)
                                                       [0.028]     [0.015]      [0.007]     [0.003]      [0.031]
X   [Proxy for local labor market conditions]           -0.282      -0.478       -0.029      -0.004       -0.016
                                                       (0.107)     (0.198)      (0.010)     (0.002)      (0.006)
                                                       [0.009]     [0.016]      [0.004]     [0.004]      [0.006]
Standardized effect of interaction term                 0.0034      0.0034       0.0037      0.0037       0.0031
Standardized effect of X                              -0.0070     -0.0061      -0.0074     -0.0068      -0.0069
N                                                       12054       12054        12054       12054        12054

                        Panel B: Results from Fixed-Effects Poisson Regressions
log(Months unemployed)                                  -0.215      -0.216      -0.212      -0.213       -0.217
                                                       (0.052)     (0.052)     (0.052)     (0.052)      (0.052)
                                                       [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]     [0.000]      [0.000]
log(Months unemployed) × X                               2.615       5.891       0.286       0.048        0.135
                                                       (1.300)     (2.605)     (0.119)     (0.019)      (0.073)
                                                       [0.044]     [0.024]     [0.016]     [0.011]      [0.064]
Standardized effect of interaction term                 0.0665      0.0766      0.0756      0.0769       0.0595
N                                                        11229       11229       11229       11229        11229

Notes: All columns report models analogous to Panel A in Table 7 replacing the linear probability model with a
probit model and a fixed-effects Poisson model. Data are resume-level submissions matched to callbacks from
employers to request an interview. The controls included are the following: indicator variables for Associate
degree, Bachelor's Degree, High quality resume, Female gender, and three job categories. In Panel B, MSA
fixed effects are also included as controls and the sample size is reduced because MSAs without any callbacks
are dropped. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each employment
advertisement, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.




                                                     A-14
Appendix Figure A1




                     A-15
Appendix Figure A2




                     A-16
Appendix Figure A3




                     A-17
                                                                Figure A4: City Fixed Effect vs. Unemployment Rate
                                                      .3
                      (Estimated) City Fixed Effect

                                                      .2
                                                      .1
                                                      0
                                                      −.1




                                                            4        6         8     10       12       14       16   18
                                                                                   Unemployment Rate




                                                                    Figure A5: City Fixed Effect vs. V−U Ratio
                                                      .3
                      (Estimated) City Fixed Effect

                                                      .2
                                                      .1
                                                      0
                                                      −.1




                                                            0              2             4                  6        8
                                                                                      V−U Ratio


Notes: These figures show the correlation between the estimated city-specific fixed effects and two alternative proxies for
market tightness. The solid line is the weighted OLS regression line using the number of observations in the city for the
weights. The size of the circles are proportional to these weights.


                                                                                     A-18
