NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE UNITED STATES LABOR MARKET:
STATUS QUO OR A NEW NORMAL?
Edward P. Lazear
James R. Spletzer
Working Paper 18386
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18386

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. The research in this paper does not use any confidential Census
Bureau information. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛¸
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Edward P. Lazear and James R. Spletzer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The United States Labor Market: Status Quo or A New Normal?
Edward P. Lazear and James R. Spletzer
NBER Working Paper No. 18386
September 2012
JEL No. E24,J6,M5
ABSTRACT
The recession of 2007-09 witnessed high rates of unemployment that have been slow to recede. This
has led many to conclude that structural changes have occurred in the labor market and that the economy
will not return to the low rates of unemployment that prevailed in the recent past. Is this true? The
question is important because central banks may be able to reduce unemployment that is cyclic in
nature, but not that which is structural. An analysis of labor market data suggests that there are no
structural changes that can explain movements in unemployment rates over recent years. Neither industrial
nor demographic shifts nor a mismatch of skills with job vacancies is behind the increased rates of
unemployment. Although mismatch increased during the recession, it retreated at the same rate. The
patterns observed are consistent with unemployment being caused by cyclic phenomena that are more
pronounced during the current recession than in prior recessions.

Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and Hoover Institution
and also NBER
lazear@stanford.edu
James R. Spletzer
U.S. Census Bureau
James.R.Spletzer@census.gov

The recession of 2007-09 brought with it unemployment rates that peaked at 10% and 41
consecutive months of rates above eight percent, currently at 8.2%. At the same time, the
economy lost about twelve percentage points of output relative to trend.
The very large decrease in the number of workers employed, at this point still down by
about 5 million from its peak, led many to conclude that the labor market has changed
fundamentally during the past few years. They attribute changes to structural shifts that will
affect the labor market into the future. Others believe that changes in the labor market are cyclic.
Their view is that the labor market is suffering, but eventually, the pattern of wages and
employment will return to what it was in times past.
The purpose here is to analyze labor market data and especially unemployment in the
hope of shedding light on this issue. If the phenomenon is structural, then central bank policy is
limited in its effect. There is neither a theoretical nor empirical basis on which to believe that
most structural deficiencies can be remedied by monetary policy. But cyclical declines in
employment are the explicit target of the US Federal Reserve bank and at least implicitly are the
concern of the central banks of other countries as well.
There are a number of ways to define “structural.” One possibility is to define structural
in terms of the ultimate question for central bankers: structural causes of increased
unemployment are those factors that cannot be influenced by monetary policy. In some ways,
this is the most relevant definition, but it confounds two issues, namely, determining the causes
of unemployment and assessing whether those factors can be remedied by monetary policy. The
former is the subject of this analysis; the latter is not.

1

A second definition is related but somewhat broader. It defines structural causes of
increased unemployment as those that cannot be remedied by either monetary or fiscal policy.
This suffers from the same problem. First, the causes of unemployment must be identified.
Second, it necessitates determining whether those causes can be alleviated by fiscal or monetary
policy.
A third approach is to distinguish between supply and demand causes. Supply causes may
be labeled structural causes whereas demand causes are not. Behind this is the notion that
demand conditions tend to be short-lived and are inherently cyclic, whereas supply conditions
may reflect changes in demographic or other factors that will persist. Some of these changes
may be brought about by fiscal policy. For example, changes in the generosity of unemployment
insurance might induce workers to spend more time searching for jobs or taking more leisure.
Making housing subsidies income contingent would also lower the value of work and might
increase the proportion of individuals who are unemployed. This is the focus of the work by
Mulligan (2012), discussed in a bit more detail below.
Fourth, a structural change might be said to occur if the composition of unemployment
changes. For example, the proportion of long-term unemployed or the demographic make-up of
the unemployed might have changed. One of the noted characteristics of unemployment during
this recession is that the ratio of long-term unemployed to total unemployed has risen. The
percent of unemployed persons who have been unemployed for 27 weeks or longer has been
above 40% since December 2009; the previous peak for this series was 26% in 1983. But this
definition is indirect at best. It implies that a structural change has occurred when we see
changes in the pattern of unemployment, not when we see changes in the factors that caused the
pattern of unemployment to change. The mere existence of more long-term unemployed does

2

not imply that monetary policy has less power to affect unemployment than it did in the past.
Nor is this definition especially satisfying because it is a define-by-residual approach. If nothing
else can be found to explain an observed pattern, then it must be structural.
Another approach is simply to define a structural shift as one that is permanent (or at least
long lasting). A non-structural (perhaps called “cyclical”) shift is a change that is transitory.1
For example, a permanent change in the amount or nature of mismatch, which is discussed in
detail below, would be viewed as structural. The industrial composition of the economy may
have changed permanently. This change might mean that the skill requirements of the jobs that
are available today do not match the skill set of the workers who are searching for jobs because
they trained for an economic structure that has become obsolete. Monetary policy is not likely to
be of much assistance in remedying these kinds of structural changes.
In most of what follows, it is unnecessary to choose one definition or another. The data
are presented in a somewhat agnostic way. To the extent that a definition is adopted, it is the
last.
There are two facts that suggest that structural changes defined in this way are not the
major factors causing the fall of employment or the rise in unemployment that occurred during
the recent recession. First, the unemployment rate was 4.4% in the spring of 2007 and rose to
10.0% by October of 2009. Thus, in a little over two years, unemployment rates went up by over
5 ½ percentage points. Most structural changes do not occur so rapidly. For example, some
industries have higher long-term unemployment rates than others, but one would not expect
changes in the industrial structure to occur so rapidly that such changes could account for the
enormous rise in unemployment that occurred over this short period of time.
1

Of course, even here there is some ambiguity. A change that is transitory, but lasts for a prolonged period of time
before reverting to the pre-recession norm, could arguably be classified as a structural change.
3

Second, we have been here before. In the early 1980s, the unemployment rate peaked at
10.8%, higher than that of the last recession. There was discussion of a new natural rate of
unemployment at that time as well.2 Some suggested that changes in the economy’s structure
were causing the long-term rate of unemployment to exceed that of earlier days. Notions that the
structure had changed dissipated when the unemployment rate fell below 6% in the late 80s and
fell below 4% in 2000. Thoughts of structural changes in the labor market were replaced by the
perhaps premature idea that we had entered a great moderation.
At the same time, there are some obvious labor market trends that have occurred in the
past couple of decades and some that extend back earlier. The labor force participation rate of
females, which rose steadily throughout the second half of the 20th century, peaked in 1999.3
The skill differential that increased returns to education and stretched out the income distribution
began to increase three decades ago. The decline in manufacturing as a share of employment
dates back more than fifty years. Do these changes reflect a structural change that can explain
the significant rise in unemployment in the most recent recession and do they portend higher or
more cyclically sensitive unemployment rates in the future? Has the great moderation, at least at
it affects the labor market, come to an end?
There is already a literature that precedes this paper and attempts to document, refute, or
argue in favor of a structural shift as an explanation of the high rates of unemployment that have
prevailed since 2007. Almost all of this literature finds that structural factors explain little of the

2

See, for example, structural unemployment discussed as early as Clague (1935). More recent but still early
references are Lilien (1982) and Abraham and Katz (1986). Also see Loungani, Rush and Tave (1990), Brainard
and Cutler (1993), Groshen and Potter (2003), and Aaronson, Rissman, and Sullivan (2004).
3
Aaronson, Davis, and Hu (2012) argue that about half of the 3.3% decline in the labor force participation rate from
early 2000 to December 2011 is attributable to long-running demographic patterns. They forecast that the labor
force participation rate will decline a further 2.7 percent by 2020, with two-thirds of this decline resulting from the
aging of the labor force.
4

increase in the unemployment rate during the past several years.4 This finding that most of the
increase in the unemployment rate during the past several years is due to cyclical factors rather
than structural factors is also the conclusion drawn from the empirical analysis in this paper.
The analysis below considers a variety of potentially structural explanations. The goal is
to focus on those explanations that have already been put forward or those that appear most
plausible. Surely, there are others that are omitted and, as a consequence, it is impossible to rule
out all potential structural explanations. The goal is not to advocate for or against a particular
central bank policy. The scope of this work is more limited and seeks only to determine whether
there is any chance that such policy could be effective.
The first order of business is to document and decompose changes that actually occurred
in the labor market. This provides an initial picture of what actually happened and what requires
explanation.

I.

The Structure of the Labor Market

Consider some variable of interest, Y, which here denotes the aggregate unemployment
rate. One form of structural change comes from changes in the demographic or industrial
composition of the economy over time. Then,

(1)

Y  s i y i
i

4

Rissman (2009), Valletta & Kuang (2010), Daly, Hobijn, & Valletta (2011), Dickens (2011), Elsby, Hobijn,
Sahin, & Valletta (2011), Romer (2011), Bernanke (2012), Daly, Hobijn, Sahin, & Valletta (2012), and Rothstein
(2012). The two exceptions we know of are Kocherlakota (2010) and Estevao and Tsounta (2011).
5

where si is the share of demographic group or industry i in the economy and yi is the
demographic group specific or industry specific unemployment rate. A well-known
decomposition is
(2)

Δ

∑ Δ

∑ Δ
̅

Changes in the unemployment rate come about because of compositional shifts in the economy
(si, weighted by the average group specific unemployment rates), which might be deemed
structural, and changes in the group specific unemployment rates (yi, weighted by the average
group specific shares), which might be labeled cyclical.
Before examining this empirically, it is useful to make three points. First, changes in si
could be temporary and not permanent. For example, some industries like construction might be
more cyclically sensitive than others, which would lower their relative shares during downturns.
Second, some changes in yi might be structural as well as cyclic. For example, the average
unemployment rate might change permanently in every industry over some long time horizon as
a consequence of underlying structural changes like institutional or legal constraints on
employment.5 Third, central banks would not be particularly effective in altering the weights of
various groups or industries in an economy, but, under certain circumstances, they might be
better at influencing unemployment rates at the aggregate or even industry level.6
Those points notwithstanding, this section examines how changing weights of sectors
over the past several decades might affect the national unemployment rate. This is the most basic
kind of structural change that could account for changes over time.
5

Changes in European unemployment rates have been explained this way. See, for example, Lazear (1990) and
Bentolila and Bertola (1990).
6
For example, were the cause of unemployment stickiness of nominal wages, it is possible that monetary policy
could erase some of the harm through inflation that lowers the real wage.
6

Figure 1 presents the basic data on the labor force shares of the relevant variables used in
the analysis. All data in this section (Figures 1 and 2, and Table 1) are from the Current
Population Survey (CPS), and have been downloaded from the BLS website (www.bls.gov/cps).
All data are seasonally adjusted; we used SAS proc X11 to seasonally adjust those series that the
BLS makes available only in non-seasonally adjusted form. Labor force data by gender and age
date from 1975 forward, labor force data by education date from 1992 forward, and labor force
data by industry date from 2000 forward.7 Unemployment data by education are for aged 25+,
and unemployment data by industry are for the “experienced unemployed,” i.e., those workers
with previous work experience.8
There are several notable composition changes evident in Figure 1. The female share of
the labor force was increasing during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, and has been steady at 46.5%
during the 2000s and early 2010s. The labor force share of adults aged 25-54 rose in the 1980s
but has been falling since the mid-1990s. The labor force share of persons aged 55+ has risen
since the mid-1990s. The labor force share of college graduates has risen dramatically since
1992, whereas the labor force share of high school graduates has fallen steadily. The decline of
workers in the manufacturing sector and the increase in workers in education and health services
is also evident in Figure 1. Consistent with Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo (2012) is that there

7

The BLS website provides labor force data by gender and age back to 1948, but data prior to 1975 is not presented
in Figures 1 or 2, nor in Table 1. The BLS website does not provide labor force data by education prior to 1992 and
does not provide labor force data by industry prior to 2000. The former is because the CPS education question
changed in 1992, and the latter is due to the transition from SIC to NAICS. It is possible to use the CPS microdata,
combined with education or industry crosswalks, and create a longer time series of labor force data by education or
industry.
8
The industry assigned to unemployed persons in the CPS refers to the last job held. Persons with no previous
work experience or those whose last job was in the U.S. Armed Forces do not have an industry recorded.
Unemployed persons with previous work experience are called the “experienced unemployed.” The experienced
unemployed averages 92 percent of the total unemployed during the 2001 – 2011 time period.
7

is a slight rise in construction’s share during the mid-2000s that offsets some of the decline in
manufacturing.9
Figure 2 depicts the unemployment rates by demographic group and industry. Note that
the unemployment rate for men and women are similar during the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s. The
unemployment rate for men spiked in 2009, largely due to the heavy shares of men in the
construction and manufacturing industries, but the gender-specific unemployment rates return to
near parity by 2012. Figure 2 reveals a large increase in unemployment of construction workers
during the most recent recession, which has since quickly fallen (although not to pre-recession
levels). Figure 2 also shows the post-2008 rise in unemployment of government workers.
The results for the equation (2) decomposition are reported in Table 1. The first row in
each panel records the change in the unemployment rate across business cycle expansions and
recessions.10 For example, the unemployment rate increased by 4.8% during the December 1979
to November 1982 timeframe, and then fell by 5.5% during the November 1982 to June 1990
timeframe. The other numbers within each panel of table 1 report the proportion of the change in
the unemployment rate that can be explained by changing unemployment rates for a particular
group (ui, weighted by that group’s average share) and by changing compositional shifts for
that group (si, weighted by the group’s average unemployment rate). For example, 35.9% of

9

Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2012) argue that the construction boom disguised the unemployment that would
have resulted from declines in manufacturing employment. Although true, this is picked up in changes in structure
that are measured below. The question for the purpose of the current analysis is whether these changes can explain
changes in unemployment rates, not whether they have altered the wages or demand for particular types of labor,
which is the primary focus of Charles et.al. (2012).
10
The dates used in Table 1 refer to the end of the expansions as defined by the NBER, and the month of peak
unemployment during or immediately following a recession. The unemployment rate changes in the gender and age
panels are national topside numbers, changes in the education panel are for persons aged 25+, and changes in the
industry panel are for the experienced unemployed.
8

the increased unemployment rate between November 2007 and October 2009 can be explained
by the fact that the unemployment rate for women rose during that period.11
The amount of unemployment that can explained by changing the weight of one group in
the economy requires some explanation. Because the shares must add up, it makes no sense to
ask how much of the increased unemployment rate between, say, November 2007 and October
2009 can be explained by decreasing the proportion female without also taking into account the
implied increase in the proportion male. As such the question should be, “How much of the
change in the unemployment rate can be explained by the changes in the gender composition of
the workforce?” To answer that, it is necessary to add the two numbers, in this case, -.3% and
+.3%, the sum of which, in this case, equals zero. The two rows titled “sum” add the male and
female contributions of changing gender-specific unemployment rates and changing gender
composition. These two rows (whose sum may not add precisely to 100% due to rounding)
show that all of the change in the unemployment rate in each sub-period between December
1979 and March 2012 is accounted for by changes in the gender-specific unemployment rates,
and not by changes in the gender composition of the workforce.
The same question can be asked with respect to age. The changing age structure does not
explain changes in the unemployment rate well during any sub-period, being either small or
having the wrong sign (the row titled “sum” of the four si*ui effects). For example, the
decomposition results in Table 1 show that the change in the age structure of the workforce
explains -2.4 percent of the increasing unemployment rate in the most recent recession. The

11

The unemployment rate used throughout this section is the headline unemployment rate U3. Other
unemployment rates, such as U5 which includes discouraged workers and persons marginally attached to the labor
force, or U6, which adds those involuntarily working part-time for economic reasons, might be more relevant during
recession periods. The correlation between the headline unemployment rate and either U5 or U6 is >.995 at the
aggregate level over time.
9

number is negative because during the recession, the economy is moving towards older workers
who have lower unemployment rates (see Figures 1 and 2), while the aggregate unemployment
rate is rising. The changing age structure has a positive effect during expansions, explaining
some of the falling unemployment rate. Again, this reflects the shift in the labor force towards
older workers who have lower unemployment rates.
Although the changing composition effect during any given sub-period is small, the
cumulative effect of changing age composition since November 1982 is calculated to lower the
unemployment rate by eight-tenths of a percentage point (calculated as -5.5*5.6% - 2.6*4.0% … - 1.8*2.5% = -.8118). This calculation is similar to the age-adjusted unemployment rate in
Figure 5 of Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin (2010).
Education has risen over time and more educated workers have lower unemployment
rates. As such, changes in the educational composition of the workforce explain a long-run
decrease in the unemployment rate. The cumulative effect of shifts in educational shares during
the June 1992 to March 2012 time period is calculated to lower the unemployment rate of
persons aged 25 or older by five-tenths of a percentage point. The effect is negative in all subperiods (mitigating the rise in recessions, and contributing to the decline in expansions). Again,
the changing composition of the labor force towards more educated workers in all sub-periods
during the last several decades is directly opposite the effect needed to explain increases in the
unemployment rate.
Probably of greatest interest is the amount of unemployment that can be explained by
changing industrial composition. As the economy has shifted away from manufacturing toward
services, the unemployment rate might be expected to change. This may be even more important
during a construction-led recession because the unemployment rate in construction is higher than

10

that for the economy as a whole (see Figure 2). But here the effects move in the wrong direction.
The share of the labor force in construction declines during recessions, which would tend to
reduce the unemployment rate, not increase it. The truth is that this does not matter much,
because all of the numbers that reflect si*ui in the bottom half of the last panel of Table 1 are
very small relative to those in the top half. Almost all of the action is in increasing withinindustry unemployment rates, not in changes in the composition of different industries over time.
This conclusion is reinforced by other statistics in Table 1. There has been discussion
that the most recent recession has been characterized by a large increase in the unemployment
rate of construction workers and the unemployment rate will not decline to previously seen levels
until the housing market recovers and the unemployed construction workers find work again.
The data in Table 1 show that the construction sector had a large impact on the increase in the
unemployment rate between November 2007 and October 2009. During the recession, 19.4
percent of the increase in the national unemployment rate was accounted for by higher
unemployment among construction workers, even though construction workers make up less
than ten percent of the workforce (8.4% in 2007). During the 2001 recession, 9.9 percent of the
increase in the national unemployment rate was accounted for by higher unemployment among
construction workers. Construction is, not surprisingly, more important in explaining the rise in
unemployment in the 2007-09 recession than in the 2001 recession. But also note that 21.5
percent of the moderate decline in the unemployment rate since October 2009 is attributable to
the decline of the unemployment rate in the construction sector. In this sense, the symmetry
associated with the onset of and recovery from the 2007-2009 recession resembles the symmetry
associated with the onset and recovery of the 2001 recession.

11

Some care must be exercised in interpreting the symmetry, however. Recall that the
unemployed worker’s industry is defined as that industry from which the worker comes, not
necessarily the industry to which the worker goes. It is conceivable that unemployed workers
from construction or manufacturing experience reduced unemployment during 2009-12 because
they find new jobs in, say, health services. There is evidence that this occurred to some extent.
The monthly CPS data show an employment decrease of 480,000 in construction between
October 2009 and March 2012 at the same time that the number of unemployed construction
workers fell by 787,000.12 Worker mobility out of construction and manufacturing and into
health or other sectors might be the kind of adjustment that should be viewed as a natural
cyclical phenomenon. For example, if construction was too large because of over-building in
2005-07 relative to the long-term trend, it may be efficiency enhancing and part of normal
business cycle movements to see workers move from one sector to another as sectors grow and
shrink over the business cycle. However, the unemployment rate is still high among construction
workers, which might reflect permanent mismatch that requires retraining. The next section
presents an analysis of mismatch.
Can longer-term changes in demographics, education, and industry explain either longterm patterns of unemployment or the high unemployment rates of the recent recession? The
long-term changes point in the direction of lower unemployment rates, which is consistent with
the observed trend over the past several decades. As mentioned earlier, the cumulative effect of
the aging of the workforce since November 1982 is calculated to lower the unemployment rate
by eight-tenths of a percentage point, and the increasing education of the workforce has lowered
the unemployment rate of persons aged 25 or older by five-tenths of a percentage point since
12

In manufacturing, the monthly CPS data show a decrease of 864,000 unemployed manufacturing workers
simultaneous with an increase of 874,000 manufacturing jobs between October 2009 and March 2012.
12

June 1992. Similar calculations show that the movement in the direction of services away from
manufacturing has lowered the experienced unemployment rate by two-tenths of a percentage
point since February 2001.
None of these trends in demographics, education, nor industrial composition can explain
the sharp rise in unemployment over the 2007-2009 recession. The composition changes in
Table 1 are all consistent with lower unemployment rates (all else equal) in all sub-periods. The
economy is continuing to move toward demographic groups and industries with lower
unemployment rates, not higher ones.
Although recessions may be idiosyncratic in terms of which demographic groups or
industries lead the increase in the unemployment rate, there is no evidence in the simple time
series that suggests fundamental structural change. Specifically, the economy’s industrial and
demographic mix has not changed in a way that explains higher unemployment rates that have
persisted over the past few years. The changing composition of the economy, either industrial or
demographic, has not led to permanently higher rates of unemployment.13 It is possible that
another kind of structural shift has occurred, such that workers’ skills do not match those
demanded by the economy. That possibility is considered in the next section.

II.

Mismatch Unemployment

Mismatch occurs when the vacancies available in an industry, occupation, or location do
not match the skills of the workers available.14 When there is mismatch, a change in the skill
composition of the workforce (or skill requirements of the jobs available) is required to reduce
unemployment. Mismatch can take a number of forms. For example, the jobs may be in San
13
14

This is also the conclusion of Hoynes, Miller, and Schaller (2012) and Rothstein (2012).
The logic of our discussion traces its roots back to a suggestion made by Mincer (1966).
13

Francisco but the workers may be in Washington, D.C., or there may be many unemployed
construction workers but few vacancies in construction while there are few unemployed health
care workers but many vacancies in health care. If instead there are many vacancies in
construction and many unemployed workers in construction, while there are few vacancies in
health care and few unemployed heath care workers, the situation is not one of mismatch. In the
latter situation, changing the skill mix of the workforce would not remedy the problem.
A labor market mismatch seems to connote a structural problem, but the problem is not
necessarily structural if the situation is temporary. Structural shifts are usually taken to mean
changes that are permanent or at least long lasting enough so that retraining or changes in the
industrial composition would be appropriate and economically justified. But if the mismatch is
temporary, then major reinvestment, either in skills or in physical capital, is unwarranted. This is
particularly true if the situation is predictable. For example, construction workers know that
their industry is more cyclically sensitive than the health industry. There exists evidence of a
cyclical premium paid in construction relative to more stable industries and those in construction
may plan for alternative activity during slow periods.15
Conversely, structural problems may exist, even if there is no mismatch. It is possible
that every industry has the same ratio of unemployed workers to vacancies but that the ratio is
high and permanent, relative to past levels, perhaps because of labor market restrictions that
make employment costly. Fundamental changes in the economy, perhaps in government policy,
might be required to remedy the high unemployment situation, even in the absence of labor
market mismatch. Mismatch problems are not easily remedied by central banks, which cannot
bring about fundamental changes in the skill and/or industrial structure.

15

See Abowd and Ashenfelter (1981).
14

Defining Mismatch
What is a mismatch? If Ui is defined as the number of unemployed in industry,
occupation, or location i, and Vi is defined as the number of vacancies in the same industry,
occupation, or location i, then one possibility is to define mismatch as Ui ≠Vi. Although this is a
possibility, as an empirical matter, it would mean that the economy is always in a state of
mismatch because the measured number of unemployed workers always exceeds the measured
number of vacancies at the aggregate level.
There are also conceptual reasons why Ui = Vi is not the appropriate benchmark. First, if
the social cost of a worker waiting to find a job is lower than the cost of leaving a job unfilled, it
would be efficient to have workers queue for jobs rather than jobs queue for workers.16
Additionally, there may be measurement issues. As an empirical matter, vacancies are measured
as job openings on the last day of the month whereas unemployed workers are measured as of
the week of the 12th of the month. This difference in reference periods suggests that aggregate
unemployment should exceed aggregate vacancies.
Consequently, mismatch is defined as a situation where industries differ in their ratio of
unemployed to vacancies (we describe our mismatch index in terms of industries; we could also
use occupations or locations). Define λ as the ratio of total unemployed to total vacancies for the
economy as a whole. The policy community views λ with considerable interest and the BLS
updates its time series of  every month (see chart 1 at
http://www.bls.gov/web/jolts/jlt_labstatgraphs.pdf). A balanced economy is one in which each
industry i has Ui/Vi = λ. An economy has mismatch when industry specific unemployment Ui
16

Optimal inventory policy implies that the inventories are seen as the side of the market that has the lowest cost of
waiting.
15

deviates from that which would be predicted given the industry specific vacancy rate Vi and the
aggregate unemployment-to-vacancy ratio λ. For example, in the top graph of Figure 3, there are
two industries and the ratio of Ui / Vi in each of the two industries is equal to λ. The line
connecting the (U,V) points for each industry in the top graph of Figure 3 is the aggregate labor
market tightness line, and connects the origin and the aggregate (U,V) point. This aggregate
tightness line has a slope of (1/). In the bottom panel of Figure 3, the aggregate tightness line is
the same as in the upper panel, but now there is mismatch across the two industries, with one
industry having an excess of unemployed workers and the other having an excess of vacancies
relative to the economy-wide pattern. The horizontal dashed lines in the bottom panel of Figure
3 measure the number of unemployed persons that would need to be reallocated across industries
to result in Ui/Vi = λ for all i.
The index of mismatch that used here is a distance measure, defined as

(3)

∑|

where λ≡U/V,

|

≡∑

, and

≡∑

. In equation (3), the numerator measures the horizontal

distance of each industry, occupation, or location from the aggregate tightness line. The absolute
values ensures that the horizontal distance is positive for each i. Division by 2 is necessary to
avoid double-counting, and dividing by aggregate unemployment makes M the proportion of
unemployed workers who would need to be moved to make Ui/Vi = λ for all i.17 The logic of the
mismatch index M is that if each mismatch carries with it a constant social cost (e.g., retraining

17

Manipulation of this index results in

∑

. The idea for an index of this sort dates back at

least to Mincer (1966) and has been used by Jackman and Roper (1987), and more recently Dickens (2011) and
Sahin et.al. (2011). Sahin et.al. use a matching function and an aggregate job-finding rate to determine the number
of hires lost due to mismatch and the resulting counterfactual unemployment rate.
16

cost per worker), then a linear index in the number of mismatches captures the total social cost.
The numerator of (3) is proportional to the social cost of mismatch because it merely adds up the
total number of mismatches in the economy.
This mismatch index ranges from zero to one.18 It equals zero when every industry is in
perfect alignment so that the ratio of unemployed to vacancies in each industry equals the ratio of
unemployed to vacancies at the aggregate level. It equals one when industries are in complete
misalignment so that half the industries (weighted by size) have zero vacancies and positive
unemployment and half the industries have zero unemployed and positive vacancies.
The index has the property that increasing unemployment by a scalar in each industry
leaves M unchanged. This is a desirable property because increasing the number of unemployed
during a recession in a completely neutral way should not be interpreted as an increase in
mismatch.19

Measuring Mismatch
Measuring mismatch requires estimates of Ui and Vi. These are available for industries,
occupations, and locations. In this paper, we present estimates of industry mismatch and
occupational mismatch. Dickens (2011) and Sahin et.al. (2011) both find that geographical
mismatch is negligible. Consequently, no estimates of geographical mismatch are presented.

18

This is shown in the appendix, available on request.
Aggregate unemployment and vacancy data determine the location on the Beveridge curve at any particular point
in time. Recessions are characterized by increasing  (the aggregate U-to-V ratio) as the economy moves down and
right along the Beveridge curve. However, it is the underlying Ui and Vi, rather than the aggregate U and V, that
drives both M and λ. If shocks are highly idiosyncratic across industries, then M and λ will tend to be positively
correlated because a big positive shock in any particular Ui (or big negative shock to Vi) will raise M and increase λ.
However, if shocks are close to proportional across industries, then M and  would not be correlated because 
would move even though M does not. Thus it is possible for an economy to move along the Beveridge curve with
either an increase or no change to the mismatch index M.
19

17

To measure industrial mismatch, we use vacancy data by industry from the Job Openings
and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) and unemployment data by industry from the Current
Population Survey (CPS). The data are publicly available data from the BLS website.20 The
JOLTS data begin in December 2000. Monthly data from January 2001 to December 2011 are
used to estimate industrial mismatch.
Vacancy data by occupation are obtained from the Help Wanted Online Index (HWOL)
and unemployment data by occupation are taken from the CPS to measure occupational
mismatch.21 The HWOL data begin in May 2005 and occupational mismatch is calculated over
the period from May 2005 to December 2011.22

Industrial Mismatch
Figure 4 presents the year-specific vacancy-unemployment plots. Time series graphs of
the monthly levels of industry unemployment and vacancies from January 2001 to December
20

Seasonally adjusted vacancy data is available for 12 industries and non-seasonally adjusted vacancy data is
available for 24 industries (www.bls.gov/jlt). Non-seasonally adjusted unemployment data is available for 17
industries (www.bls.gov/cps). We download the non-seasonally adjusted JOLTS and CPS industry data and
seasonally adjust all series using SAS proc X11. A 1:1 correspondence for JOLTS and CPS industries is possible
for the following 12 industries: Mining, Construction, Manufacturing (we aggregated durable and nondurable
manufacturing), Wholesale & Retail, Transportation & Utilities, Information, Financial Activities, Professional &
Business Services, Education & Health Services, Leisure & Hospitality, Other Services, and Government.
21
We thank June Shelp of the Conference Board for providing us with the seasonally adjusted time series of
HWOL data by occupation. The Conference Board reports vacancies by occupation in Table 7 of their monthly
press release (see, for example, http://www.conference-board.org/data/helpwantedonline.cfm).
The seasonally adjusted HWOL vacancy data is available for 22 occupations. Non-seasonally adjusted
unemployment data by occupation is available (at www.bls.gov/cps) for 9 occupations and for persons with no
previous occupation. We seasonally adjust the unemployment by occupation data and define the experienced
unemployed. The experienced unemployed (measured by occupation) averages 91 percent of the total unemployed
during the 2001 – 2011 time period. The HWOL and CPS occupational series correspond for the following 9
occupations: Management, Business and Financial Operations; Professional; Services; Sales; Office and
Administrative Support; Construction; Installation and Maintenance; Production; and Transportation & Material
Moving.
22
A natural question is how the JOLTS and the HWOL compare in measuring vacancies. The correlation of these
two seasonally adjusted monthly series is 0.57. The JOLTS series is higher than the HWOL series prior to the
recession (by an average of 423 thousand per month during the May 2005 – January 2008 time period), and the
JOLTS series is lower than the HWOL series during and after the recession (by an average of 693 thousand during
the February 2008 through December 2011 time period). The JOLTS and HWOL are graphed in Figure 1 of Sahin
et.al. (2011).
18

2011 are presented in an appendix.23 The upper-left graph of Figure 4 is the annual averages of
Ui and Vi for 2006. The line that runs through the origin is the aggregate labor market tightness
line, the slope of which is 1/. In 2006, there are four industries characterized by relatively low
unemployment and relatively high vacancies: professional and business services, education and
health services, government, and financial activities. There are also four industries characterized
by relatively high unemployment and relatively low vacancies: wholesale and retail trade, leisure
and hospitality, manufacturing, and construction. The other four unlabeled industries (mining,
transportation and utilities, information, and other services) are small industries and are clustered
around the origin.
Obvious in Figure 4 is the changing slope of the aggregate tightness line as the recession
hits. The slope of this line is 0.741 in 2007, .479 in 2008, and .197 in 2009. (These statistics
correspond to the well-known U/V ratio of 1.4 in 2007, 2.1 in 2008, and 5.1 in 2009). Note that
the four industries to the left of the aggregate tightness line in 2006 are to the left in every year,
and the four industries to the right of the aggregate tightness line in 2006 are to the right in every
year.
Figure 5 shows how the mismatch index, M, varies over time. Mismatch is highly procyclic, rising during the 2001 recession, falling during the expansion of the mid-2000s, rising
through most of the 2007-2009 recession, and then falling since the end of the recession in June
2009. The lowest level of the industrial mismatch index M is .144 in January 2007, when 14.4
percent of unemployed workers would need to be reallocated across industries to put all
industries on the aggregate tightness line. The highest level of the index is .320 in April 2009.24

23

The appendix is available on request.
There is nothing mechanical about the increase in M during recessions. M goes up because certain industries tend
to experience large increases in the number of unemployed during recession. This changes the aggregate ratio of

24

19

Which industries are responsible for the increase in the index during the recession? The
top panel of Table 2 presents descriptive statistics describing the rise of the index from .188 in
December 2007 to .288 in June 2009.25 At the beginning of the recession (December 2007), the
construction industry and the education and health services industry were the furthest away (size
weighted) from the aggregate tightness line. However, the manufacturing industry is responsible
for one-third of the recessionary increase in the index, with Education and Health Services,
Government, and Construction being responsible for a combined 63 percent of the recessionary
increase in the index. As seen in the bottom panel of Table 2, these same four industries are
responsible for most of the decline in the industrial mismatch index between June 2009 and
November 2011. Most of the action results not from the vacancy side, but from the tripling in
unemployment in manufacturing and construction. This had the effect of putting these two
industries far off the V/U line and also of bringing that line down. Because of the latter,
education and health services and government move farther away from the line, not because they
had such large increases in unemployment, but because their increases in unemployment and
decreases in vacancies did not match those of the economy as a whole. As a result, those
industries are further from the V/U line during the recession than they are in 2007. It is still true,
however, that the level of unemployment went up in every industry so that the number of
unemployed exceeded the number of vacancies in every industry in 2009-2011.
Most important is that the industrial mismatch index in late 2011 is at the same level as
before the 2007-2009 recession. Even though the average level of unemployment in 2011 is
almost double the average level of unemployment in 2007, the percent of unemployed persons
unemployed to vacancies, but the distance of specific industries from the aggregate line increases because the shocks
are not balanced across industries.
25
We use 3-quarter moving averages of the monthly industrial mismatch index in Figure 5 to smooth large monthto-month movements. Shares and unemployment rates by industry can be inferred from Figures 1 and 2.
20

mismatched across industries is the same in the two time periods. Furthermore, in Table 2, the
industrial composition of mismatch is very similar in December 2007 and November 2011,
which indicates that the decline in mismatch during the past several years is symmetrical to the
rapid increase during the onset of the recession. There is no evidence that the recession resulted
in a long-lasting skills gap that would require retraining experienced workers to work in different
industries.
Another pattern that is apparent from figure 4 is that even as the U/V ratio moves over
time, the relative position of the industries is rather constant. In particular, manufacturing,
construction, wholesale and retail, and leisure and hospitality always lie below the line, with
education and health services, professional and business services, financial activities, and
government always being above the line. The other industries rest close to the aggregate V/U
line. These relationships are invariant with time period. The number of unemployed workersper-vacancy varies over the cycle, but in relative positions do not change much. Industries that
have high U/V ratios during good times continue to have high U/V ratios during bad times and
those with low U/V ratios during good times continue to have low U/V ratios during bad times.
The unemployment rate is higher in 2011 than it is in 2007, not because of industrial
mismatch, but because all industries have higher unemployment rates. In 2006, there are slightly
more vacancies than experienced unemployed in education and health services. In 2011, there
are about twice as many experienced unemployed as vacancies in education and health services.
Construction also has slightly more than twice as many unemployed workers in 2011 as in 2006.
Turning unemployed manufacturing and construction workers into nurses and teachers would not
provide those workers with immediate jobs; there is already a surplus of unemployed even in the
low unemployment industries.

21

The conclusion is that changes in industrial mismatch are cyclical, rather than structural.
The change over time does not seem to reflect any permanent shift in the labor market that
happened in an abrupt manner nor does the industrial mismatch analysis suggest that the shifts
will persist.

Occupational Mismatch
The same analyses can be performed using the distribution of unemployment across
occupations rather than across industries. The annual average graphs for occupation specific
unemployment and vacancies for 2006 to 2011 are presented in Figure 6.26 An examination of
the pre-recession years reveals that there are few vacancies in the traditional blue collar
occupations. Professional occupations have high vacancies and low unemployment, whereas
services occupations have high unemployment and low vacancies. Furthermore, the
management and professional occupations are to the left of the aggregate tightness line in all
years, whereas the construction, production, and services occupations are to the right of the
aggregate tightness line in all years. Figure 6 reveals the shortages of professional workers.
Only during the worst months of the recession does the number of experienced unemployed
exceed the number of vacancies in this occupation.
The monthly occupational mismatch index is given in Figure 7. For comparison
purposes, the industry mismatch index is also included in Figure 7. Two aspects of the
occupational mismatch index stand out. Occupational mismatch is always higher than industrial
mismatch, and occupational mismatch exhibits much less business cycle sensitivity than does
industrial mismatch. For example, in the average month of 2006, the industry mismatch index is
26

Time series graphs of monthly unemployment and vacancies for each occupation are given in the appendix,
available on request.
22

about half that of the occupation mismatch index. There are two immediate explanations for the
higher level of occupational mismatch. The first is that there are shortages of the traditional
white collar occupations (management and professional) that are not captured in the industry
data since managers and professional workers work in all industries. The second possible
explanation is measurement related. It is certainly possible that vacancies for the high-skilled
occupations are formally advertised and thus captured by the HWOL and the JOLTS, whereas
vacancies for the low skilled occupations might be informally advertised and missed in the data.
Whatever the cause, there appears to be a substantial amount of occupational mismatch relative
to industrial mismatch. But most important is that as with the industry data, the occupational
mismatch index has already returned to (actually fallen below) its pre-recession level. There
seems to be nothing structural, defined as permanent, about even the minor increases in
occupational mismatch that occurred during the last recession.

Mismatch Reversion and Policy
Defined either in terms of industry or occupation, the reversion of M to levels that
prevailed in the pre-recession period does not imply that all is well and that retraining would not
help alleviate the situation. A more fluid labor market, where individuals could move from one
sector to another sector more readily, or one in which workers were more aligned with vacancies,
could bring about a lower long run level of M. Although the current level of M approaches those
levels seen in the pre-recession mid-2000s, it is conceivable that the level of M could be even
lower. With respect to occupational mismatch, movement of workers from services into the
professional category, if it could be done, would have lowered M even in the robust labor market

23

of 2006. Similarly, in that same year a smooth conversion of construction workers into
education and health workers would have lowered M.
The fact that M appears to be retracing its footsteps does not imply that retraining is not
beneficial. It implies only that the increase in mismatch seen during the recent (and prior
recession) is a temporary phenomenon that tends to retreat as the economy recovers.

Summary of Mismatch
Increasing industrial mismatch is an important part of the recent recession, but the
increase was a transitory phenomenon. The industrial mismatch and occupational mismatch
indices have reverted to the pre-recessionary levels that prevailed in 2006 and 2007. Many who
believe that the labor market has fundamentally changed suggest that this is a consequence of
jobs being unavailable for certain kinds of workers, most often those who were employed in
manufacturing and construction. However, the analysis presented here shows that the most
recent recession has not resulted in any long-run increase in mismatch across industries or
occupations. The unemployment rate is higher now, not because skills available are less in line
with skills desired than they were in the past, but because unemployment rates are higher
generally across all industries and occupations.

III.

Other Possible Structural Shifts

The evidence from the previous two sections makes clear that the high unemployment
rates that are prevalent today and that have persisted for the past few years are not a result of
changes in the occupation or industrial structure or of changes in relative demand and supply by
sector or demographic group. Although it is true that the different sectors of the economy have

24

not been hit uniformly by the recession, the lack of uniformity in increasing unemployment rates
by industry has been matched by similar asymmetry in the decreasing unemployment rates thus
far. Furthermore, the historic pattern of more cyclic sensitivity in certain industries like
construction and manufacturing is repeated in the recent recession.
The continuing high unemployment rate at the national level reflects elevated
unemployment in general and seems to be consistent with cyclic phenomena. But
unemployment rates are still elevated significantly and there remains the possibility that the
increase is long-lasting and in this sense, structural.

Making Work Less Valuable
Higher unemployment rates in all industries and many demographic groups might result
if wages are distorted as suggested by Mulligan (2012). Mulligan argues that the decrease in
employment that occurred during the recession was a result of a higher implicit tax on work,
which he defines as “the extra taxes paid, and subsidies foregone, as the result of working,
expressed as a ratio to the income from working.” He documents large increases in this ratio that
occurred as a result of stimulus legislation, which lengthened the insured unemployment period,
increased food stamp subsidies, and initiated programs related to health and mortgage assistance
that required low income status, among others. Mulligan concludes that most of the decline in
work hours that resulted during the recession was a result of government-induced distortions that
reduced the value of work.
If one accepts the Mulligan view, then the forecast for the future depends on forecasts
about fiscal policy. If transfers revert to previous levels, presumably labor supply behavior will

25

return to its pre-2009 pattern. Instead, if at least some of the changes are permanent or are
exacerbated by new legislation, we can expect the lower levels of work hours to persist.
Rothstein (2012) disputes the Mulligan view by providing evidence to show that wages
have fallen rather than risen during the relevant period. The Mulligan story is one of reduced
supply, which, Rothstein argues, should increase wages rather than decrease them. As a result,
Rothstein concludes that the shift is non-structural, at least insofar as structural is defined by
supply shifts.
It is certainly possible that the supply changes that Mulligan documents are real, but are
merely swamped by declines in demand that occurred during the recent recession. If so, wages
would fall in the short run, but unless the programs are eliminated (as some will be), supply
decreases may persist.

Housing- lock
Some have suggested that problems in the housing market may be responsible for higher
rates of unemployment, by locking individuals into communities in which jobs are absent. For
example, Oswald (1996) finds that countries with more potential for housing lock have higher
rates of unemployment, and Ferreira, Fernando, Gyourko, and Tracy (2011) find that
homeowners with negative equity are less likely to move.27 However, the failure by Dickens
(2011) and Sahin et.al. (2011) to find any increase in geographic mismatch during the recent
recession is macroeconomic evidence that is inconsistent with this view.

27

Herkenhoff and Ohanian (2011) use a model to estimate the effect of housing program distortions on
unemployment. These work by lowering the value of work (the Mulligan effect) rather than through traditional
housing lock, where there is negative equity in the house. They estimate this effect could raise the unemployment
rate by .5 percent.
26

In addition, others, notably Farber (2012), have found that mobility data are inconsistent
with this view as well. Farber finds that although geographic mobility declined during the
recession for both owners and renters, the fall was primarily among renters, not owners. If the
housing-lock view were correct, one would expect the mobility of owners to fall relative to
renters, not the other way around. Thus, while the story is a plausible one, there seems to be
little support for it as an explanation of persistently high unemployment rates in the recent
recession.

Recent Shifts in the Beveridge Curve
The Beveridge curve plots the relationship over time between the unemployment rate on
the horizontal axis and the job openings rate on the vertical axis.28 The BLS publishes an
updated Beveridge curve every month (see chart 5 at
http://www.bls.gov/web/jolts/jlt_labstatgraphs.pdf), using unemployment rates from the CPS and
job openings rates from the JOLTS. The most recent Beveridge curve is displayed in Figure 8.
With minor exceptions, the curve is negatively sloped. As the economy slows, the
unemployment rate rises and the vacancy rate falls.
Figure 8 makes clear two phenomena. First, the points that characterize the recent
recession are far outside the range of prior experiences mapped out by the CPS and JOLTS data
between December 1990 and November 2007. Second, the return from peak unemployment
does not follow the same path as the journey to peak unemployment. In particular, the ratio of
vacancies-to-unemployment is higher when unemployment rates are falling than it is when
unemployment rates are rising. In the current recession and recovery, the Beveridge curve
28

The job openings rate is defined as the number of job openings divided by the sum of employment and job
openings. See www.bls.gov/jlt for more information about JOLTS and job openings.
27

appears to have shifted out when comparing the October 2009 – May 2012 data to the December
2007 – June 2009 data.
Movements along the Beveridge curve are interpreted as cyclical movements in labor
demand, whereas shifts in the Beveridge curve up and to the right are typically interpreted as
structural shifts in unemployment, reflecting a reduced efficiency of matching workers to jobs.
The apparent outward shift in the Beveridge curve and the resulting increase in unemployment
may be consistent with a structural change that occurred after June 2009, but it is equally
consistent with the counter-clockwise dynamics observed in previous recessions and recoveries,
discussed in more detail in Valletta (2005) and Daly, Hobijn, Sahin, and Valletta (2012). The
intuition behind the dynamics is that the posting of vacancies increases before actual hiring
occurs, so there is a short-run increase in vacancies before unemployment declines. Extended
unemployment insurance benefits may contribute as the unemployed delay their return to work.
A decline in recruiting intensity by employers would also cause the Beveridge curve to
shift out. Recruiting intensity, as defined by Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2010), refers to
advertising, hiring standards, compensation packages, and other methods that employers use to
adjust the rate of hires per vacancy. Since vacancies are essentially costless for employers to
post on the internet, it is possible that employers have recently increased the number of vacancy
postings, some of which have low probabilities of being filled. Empirical evidence in support of
declining recruiting intensity during the recent recession is provided by Davis, Faberman, and
Haltiwanger (2012).29 Furthermore, relative to its pre-recessionary levels, recruiting intensity
29

The decline in recruiting intensity is important in explaining the Beveridge curve gap, which is defined as the
higher unemployment rate at a given level of vacancies when comparing two Beveridge curves -- see Barnichon,
Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin, (2012). Barnichon et.al. show that the post-recessionary level of hires per vacancy is 38
percent less than predicted by the pre-recession data, and this low level of the vacancy yield more than fully explains
the Beveridge curve gap. Barnichon et.al. also find that the construction industry contributes most to this Beveridge
curve gap.
28

remains low in the 2009-2011 period. This is consistent with the counter-cyclical dynamics of
the Beveridge curve evident in previous recessions. Unemployment rates need to fall to their
pre-recessionary levels before any definitive conclusions can be drawn about a long-run shift in
the Beveridge curve. This is consistent with the view expressed by Bernanke (2012).

Employment and Hours Trends
Most of the analysis thus far has focused on unemployment rather than employment for
two reasons. First, the unemployment rate is often the focus of policymakers and the public.
Second, unemployment and employment are closely related, but changes show up more
dramatically (although this is a mere scaling issue) in unemployment. The seasonally adjusted
unemployment rate and the employment-to-population ratio have a correlation of -.87 during the
1975-2012 time period (see Figure 9). Still, it is useful to take a quick look at employment to
verify that nothing is happening there that is not mirrored in unemployment. As is evident in
Figure 9, the employment-to-population ratio trended up from 1975 until it peaked in 2000, and
like the unemployment rate, the employment-to-population ratio is cyclic. However, the
employment-to-population ratio has been essentially flat during the two most recent nonrecessionary time periods (rising by 0.6 percentage points from June 2003 to November 2007,
and neither rising nor falling during the October 2009 to March 2012 time period). Because the
denominator is either zero or close to zero for these recent time periods, it is not meaningful to
present the employment-to-population decompositions in a format similar to Table 1. For the
recent recessions, the decompositions of the employment-to-population ratios show similar
results as for the decomposition of the unemployment rate – the effects of composition shifts in

29

demographic characteristics are small in all sub-periods, and most of the explanatory power is in
changes in the employment-to-population ratio within demographic groups.30
The flattening of the employment-to-population ratio in the two most recent nonrecessionary time periods warrants further discussion. Measured from trough-to-peak, average
monthly net employment growth was 221,000 during the 1975 to 1980 time period, was 213,000
during the 1982-1990 time period, was 209,000 during the 1992-2000 time period, and was
135,000 during the 2003-2008 time period.31 This post-2000 slowdown in average monthly net
employment growth is also reflected in total hours worked, which grew by an annual average of
0.5% over the 2000-2007 period, compared to an annual average of 2.1% over the 1990-2000
period.32 At the same time, output has been rising, with real GDP at the end of 2007 being about
18% higher than it was in 2000. This means that changes in productivity account for the
increase in output. These trends are shown in Figure 10, using data from the BLS Major Sector
Productivity and Costs database.
Productivity growth seems to have substituted for hours over the 2000s decade. Firms
seem to be making do with fewer workers.33 In the short run, changes in the number of workers
demanded that are not coupled with declining wages show up as unemployment or as declining
labor force participation. It is too early to conclude that this reflects long run structural change.

Duration of Unemployment

30

It is not possible to decompose the cyclical movements in the employment-to-population ratio by industry, since
the weights are the population shares (rather than labor force shares, as in Table 1), and industry is not defined for
persons out of the labor force.
31
Expressed as an annual growth rate, measured from trough-to-peak, average net employment growth was 4.3%
during the 1975 to 1980 time period, was 3.5% during the 1982-1990 time period, was 2.8% during the 1992-2000
time period, and was 1.5% during the 2003-2008 time period.
32
The hours tabulations use data from Table 6.9 of the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ national accounts.
33
See Lazear, Shaw and Stanton (2012) and Choi and Spletzer (2012).
30

One factor that differentiates this recession from others is that the duration of
unemployment has gone up dramatically (see Figure 11). In June 2012, those unemployed for 27
weeks or more accounted for 41.9% of the unemployed, and the percentage of long-term
unemployed has exceeded 40% for 31 consecutive months. Prior to the recent recession, the
highest proportion of long-term unemployed was 26%, which occurred in 1983. Rothstein
(2012) concludes that structural factors cannot explain the unprecedented rise in long-term
unemployment, arguing that the shifts that have occurred during the recent recession seem to be
temporary and cyclic. He claims that much of the increase in the proportion of long-term
unemployment can be explained by pre-existing trends and by the fact that the unemployment
rate is so high and has been for a long time. Still, it is troubling that the proportion of long-term
unemployment is so much higher than it was at the previous record level of 26% in 1983 when
unemployment rates were similarly high and for a similar amount of time.
It is possible to decompose the rise in duration in unemployment into that which results
from within-industry increases in unemployment duration and that which results from changing
weights of industries in the economy. The result is that the increase in unemployment durations
today relative to the 2001 recession are entirely due to changing within-industry durations.
Unemployment durations increased within every industry when comparing the 2007-2009
recession to the 2001 recession. Although construction has a larger share of unemployment in
the most recent recession than in 2001, this composition change has no effect on the
counterfactual unemployment durations.
There has been a shift in the reason for unemployment over the last three decades. When
unemployment was at its peak of 10.8% in November and December 1983, temporary job losers
accounted for 20.7% of the unemployed and permanent job losers accounted for 41.7% of the

31

unemployed.34 The seasonally unadjusted percent of unemployed who were unemployed for
more than 26 weeks was 19.6% in November and December 1983. At the unemployment peak
in October 2009, temporary job losers were 8.1% of the unemployed and permanent job losers
were 55.0% of the unemployed (and the seasonally unadjusted percent of unemployed who were
unemployed for more than 26 weeks was 38.0%). These statistics show that temporary layoffs
were more important in the early 1980s than now. But performing a decomposition analogous to
the one described above reveals that only a small amount of today’s higher unemployment
durations can be explained by the changing reason for unemployment. Instead, it is the higher
unemployment durations within almost every reason category that is driving today’s higher
unemployment durations.

IV.

Conclusion

During the recent recession, unemployment rates rose to very high levels and then started
to retreat. At the same time, some industries, like construction, manufacturing, and retailing,
experienced disproportionately large increases in unemployment. But the patterns observed on
the way up were mirrored on the way down. Those industries that contributed much to the
increase in unemployment between 2007 and 2009 were the same that accounted for decreases in
unemployment since 2009.
The same is true for mismatch, which measures the difference between vacancies and
unemployed in an industry, occupation, or location. Industrial mismatch rose substantially
during the recent recession, but retreated just as quickly even as unemployment rates have
remained high. What happened on the way up happened symmetrically on the way down.

34

Additionally, 6.6% of the unemployed were job leavers, 21.2% were re-entrants, and 9.8% were new entrants.
32

Additionally, the current recession does not appear fundamentally different from prior
ones, except that it is worse. Indeed, the recovery has been weak overall. Since the end of the
recession in spring 2009, the economy has grown at a rate of 2.2% per year. The historical
relationship suggests that this relatively low GDP growth should result in 2.9 percent job growth
since the employment trough in 2009:Q4. This prediction is precisely the reality of 3.8 million
jobs created between 2009:Q4 and 2012:Q2. The problem is not that the labor market is under
performing; it is that the recovery has been very slow.
There are trends in the labor market, some of which began many decades ago. But the
trends cannot explain the sharp increase in unemployment that occurred between 2007 and 2009.
The timing does not fit and in most cases, the changes go in the wrong direction, implying lower
and less volatile unemployment rates, not higher ones.
One exception is that the ratio of long-term unemployed to total unemployed is higher
than it was in prior recessions including recessions with comparable unemployment rates.
However, this is not due to any observed structural change, but rather to the depth of the current
recession. Another possible exception is that there are more vacancies per unemployed person at
high levels of unemployment than was the case a couple of years ago. Whether this apparent
outward shift in the Beveridge curve is a permanent change cannot be known until
unemployment returns to normal levels.
The analysis in this paper and in others that we review do not provide any compelling
evidence that there have been changes in the structure of the labor market that are capable of
explaining the pattern of persistently high unemployment rates. The evidence points to primarily
cyclic factors.

33

References
Aaronson, Daniel, Jonathan Davis, and Luojia Hu. 2012. “Explaining the Decline in the U.S.
Labor Force Participation Rate.” Chicago Fed Letter #296, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Aaronson, Daniel, Rissman, Ellen R., and Sullivan, Daniel G. 2004. “Can Sectoral Reallocation
Explain the Jobless Recovery?” Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Abowd, John, and Orley Ashenfelter. 1981. “Anticipated Unemployment, Temporary Layoffs,
and Compensating Wage Differentials.” In Sherwin Rosen, ed., Studies in Labor Markets.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 141–
70.
Abraham, Katharine, and Lawrence Katz. 1986. “Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral Shifts or
Aggregate Disturbances?” Journal of Political Economy 94, pp. 407–22.
Barnichon, Regis, Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2012. “ Which Industries
are Shifting the Beveridge Curve?” Monthly Labor Review, June 2012, Vol. 135, No. 6, pp. 2537.
Bentolila, Samuel and Giuseppe Bertola. 1990. “Firing Costs and Labour Demand: How Bad is
Eurosclerosis?” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 57, No. 3 (Jul., 1990), pp. 381-402.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2012. “Recent Developments in the Labor Market” Remarks to the National
Association for Business Economics, Washington, D.C., March 26, 2012,
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20120326a.pdf.
Brainard, Lael, and David Cutler. 1993. “Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, pp. 219–243.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2012. “Manufacturing Busts,
Housing Booms, and Declining Employment: A Structural Explanation.” Unpublished paper,
University of Chicago. Available at
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/erik.hurst/research/charles_hurst_noto_manufacturing.pdf
Choi, Eleanor J. and James R. Spletzer. 2012. “ The declining average size of establishments:
evidence and explanations.” Monthly Labor Review, March 2012, Vol. 135, No. 3, pp. 50-65.
Clague, Ewan. 1935. “The Problem of Unemployment and the Changing Structure of Industry,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 30, no. 189, Supplement, pp. 209-14.
Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, and Rob Valletta. 2011. “The Recent Evolution of the Natural Rate of
Unemployment.” IZA Discussion Paper #5832, http://ftp.iza.org/dp5832.pdf.

34

Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta. 2012. “A Search and
Matching Approach to Labor Markets: Is the Natural Rate of Unemployment Rising?”
Forthcoming, Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger. 2010. “The EstablishmentLevel Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring.” NBER Working Paper No. 16265.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger. 2012. “Recruiting Intensity
during and after the Great Recession: National and Industry Evidence.” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 102(3), pp. 584-588.
Dickens, William T. 2011. “Has the Recession Increased the NAIRU?” Unpublished paper,
Brookings Institution. http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/papers/2011/6/
29%20recession%20nairu%20dickens/0629_recession_nairu_dickens.pdf.
Elsby, Michael, Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin. 2010. “The Labor Market in the Great
Recession.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 1-48.
Elsby, Michael, Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta. 2011. “The Labor Market
in the Great Recession: An Update” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 353-371.
Estevao, Marcello and Tsounta Evridiki. 2011. “Has the Great Recession Raised U.S. Structural
Unemployment?” IMF Working Paper #11/105.
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp11105.pdf.
Farber, Henry S. 2012. “Unemployment in the Great Recession: Did the Housing Market Crisis
Prevent the Unemployed from Moving to Take Jobs?” American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 102(3), pp. 520-525.
Ferreira, Fernando, Joseph Gyourko, and Joseph Tracy. 2011. “Housing Busts and Household
Mobility: An Update.” NBER Working Paper #17405.
Groshen, Erica and Simon Potter. 2003. “Has Structural Change Contributed to a Jobless
Recovery?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Vol.
9, Number 8.
Herkenhoff, Kyle F. and Lee E. Ohanian. 2011. “Labor Market Dysfunction During the Great
Recession.” NBER Working Paper #17313.
Hoynes, Hilary W., Douglas L. Miller, and Jessamyn Schaller. 2012. “Who Suffers During
Recessions.” NBER Working Paper #17951.
Jackman, R. and S. Roper. 1987. “Structural Unemployment.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics. 49(1), pp. 9-36.

35

Kocherlakota, Narayana. 2010. “Inside the FOMC.” Available at
http://www.minneapolisfed.org/news_events/pres/kocherlakota_speech_08172010.pdf.
Lazear, Edward P. 1990. “Job Security Provisions and Employment.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 105, No. 3 (Aug., 1990), pp. 699-726.
Lazear, Edward P., Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher T. Stanton. 2012. “The Value of
Bosses.” Unpublished working paper, Stanford University.
Lilien, David. 1982. “Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment.” Journal of Political
Economy 90, pp. 777–793.
Loungani, Prakash, Mark Rush, and William Tave. 1990. “Stock Market Dispersion and
Unemployment.” Journal of Monetary Economics (June) pp. 367–388.
Mincer, Jacob. 1966. “Comment on ‘The Concept of Job Vacancies in a Dynamic Theory of the
Labor Market’” in “The Measurement and Interpretation of Job Vacancies,” Columbia
University Press. Available at http://www.nber.org/books/unkn66-2.
Mulligan, Casey B. 2012. The Redistribution Recession. Forthcoming, Oxford University
Press, 2012.
Oswald, Andrew. 1996. “A Conjecture on the Explanation for High Unemployment in the
Industrialized Nations: Part I,” University Of Warwick Economic Research Paper #475,
available at http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/1664/1/WRAP_Oswald_475_twerp_475.pdf.
Rissman, Ellen R. 2009. “Employment growth: Cyclical movements or structural change?”
Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Romer, Christina D. 2011. “The Continuing Unemployment Crisis: Causes, Cures, and
Questions for Further Study.” Speech given at Washington University, available at
http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~cromer/Washington%20University%20final.pdf.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2012. “The Labor Market Four Years Into the Crisis: Assessing Structural
Explanations.” NBER Working Paper #17966.
Sahin, Ayşegül, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2011 (July).
“Measuring Mismatch in the U.S. Labor Market.” Unpublished Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, available at http://nyfedeconomists.org/topa/USmismatch_v14.pdf.
Valletta, Robert G. 2005. “Why Has the U.S. Beveridge Curve Shifted Back? New Evidence
Using Regional Data.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper #2005-25.
Valletta, Rob and Katherine Kuang. 2010. “Is Structural Unemployment on the Rise?” FRBSF
Economic Letter #2010-34.

36

Figure 1: Labor Force Shares by Gender, Age, Education, and Industry, 1975-2012
Source: CPS data downloaded from www.bls.gov/cps

65

55

45

Labor Force Share Men

2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

35

Labor Force Share Women

75

50

25

Labor Force Share 16‐19

Labor Force Share 20‐24

Labor Force Share 25‐54

Labor Force Share 55+

37

2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

0

Figure 1 (continued)

40

30

20

10

Labor Force Share < HS

Labor Force Share HS Grads

Labor Force Share Some Coll

Labor Force Share Coll Grads

2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

0

Age 25+.

25
20
15
10
5

Construction
Manufacturing
Retail Trade
Transport & Utilities
Prof & Bus Services
Educ & Health Services
Other Services
Government
Experienced Labor Force. Mining and Information not in the graph.

38

Wholesale Trade
Financial
Leis & Hospitality

2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

0

Figure 2: Unemployment Rates by Gender, Age, Education, and Industry, 1975-2012
Source: CPS data downloaded from www.bls.gov/cps

12

9

6

U rate Men

U rate Women

2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

3

U rate Total

30

20

10

U rate 16‐19

U rate 20‐24

U rate 25‐54

39

U rate 55+

2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

0

U rate Total

Figure 2 (continued)

18

12

6

U Rate < HS

U Rate HS Grads

U Rate Coll Grads

U Rate Total

2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

0

U Rate Some Coll

Age 25+.

20%
16%
12%
8%
4%

Construction
Manufacturing
Retail Trade
Transport & Utilities
Prof & Bus Services
Educ & Health Services
Other Services
Government
Experienced Labor Force. Mining and Information not in the graph.

40

2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

1995

1993

1991

1989

1987

1985

1983

1981

1979

1977

1975

0%
Wholesale Trade
Financial
Leis & Hospitality
Total Experienced

Table 1: Unemployment Rate Decomposition by Gender, Age, Education, and Industry
u = i [si*ui + si*ui]
Dec 79 Nov 82

u

Nov 82 Jun 90

Jun 90 Jun 92

Jun 92 Feb 01

Feb 01 Jun 03

Jun 03 Nov 07

Nov 07 Oct 09

Oct 09 Mar 12

4.8

-5.5

2.6

-3.6

2.1

-1.6

5.3

-1.8

69.0%
30.4%
99.4%

58.7%
40.2%
98.9%

64.0%
37.0%
101.0%

60.4%
39.8%
100.2%

62.1%
38.4%
100.5%

63.7%
38.0%
101.7%

64.4%
35.9%
100.3%

84.2%
15.3%
99.5%

-1.6%
1.6%
0.0%

2.6%
-2.4%
0.2%

-0.5%
0.5%
0.0%

2.1%
-1.9%
0.2%

-0.5%
0.5%
0.0%

-1.2%
1.1%
-0.1%

-0.3%
0.3%
0.0%

1.4%
-1.2%
0.2%

4.8

-5.5

2.6

-3.6

2.1

-1.6

5.3

-1.8

14.0%
19.9%
62.6%
7.9%
104.4%

12.5%
19.5%
56.6%
6.3%
94.9%

19.7%
13.8%
60.0%
11.4%
104.9%

14.4%
11.8%
62.9%
8.6%
97.7%

13.5%
14.7%
64.3%
10.9%
103.4%

8.4%
13.4%
56.6%
14.4%
92.8%

8.7%
13.8%
66.1%
13.4%
102.0%

4.2%
13.7%
71.7%
7.5%
97.1%

-6.1%
-1.1%
3.3%
-0.5%
-4.4%

5.2%
6.3%
-7.2%
1.3%
5.6%

-4.6%
-1.7%
2.5%
-0.2%
-4.0%

-0.6%
3.1%
0.5%
-1.6%
1.4%

-5.7%
0.6%
-2.4%
3.1%
-4.4%

3.9%
1.9%
5.5%
-6.0%
5.3%

-2.5%
-0.7%
-0.6%
1.4%
-2.4%

3.3%
-2.8%
8.1%
-6.1%
2.5%

-3.0

1.8

-1.3

4.9

-1.7

16.7%
34.0%
26.1%
15.0%
91.8%

10.7%
34.1%
31.9%
25.9%
102.6%

12.5%
27.3%
33.4%
22.5%
95.7%

14.2%
39.0%
31.0%
17.4%
101.6%

13.6%
49.5%
20.7%
10.1%
93.9%

7.5%
7.1%
-3.3%
-3.3%
8.0%

-1.6%
-2.3%
-0.5%
1.9%
-2.5%

4.8%
3.9%
-0.3%
-3.3%
5.1%

-0.5%
-1.4%
0.2%
0.7%
-1.0%

3.8%
6.7%
-1.5%
-3.5%
5.5%

si*ui
Male
Female
Sum

si*ui
Male
Female
Sum

u
si*ui
16-19
20-24
25-54
55+
Sum

si*ui
16-19
20-24
25-54
55+
Sum

u
si*ui
< HS
HS Grad
Some Coll
Coll Grad
Sum

si*ui
< HS
HS Grad
Some Coll
Coll Grad
Sum

41

Table 1 (continued)
Dec 79 Nov 82

Nov 82 Jun 90

Jun 90 Jun 92

Jun 92 Feb 01

u

Feb 01 Jun 03
1.9

Jun 03 Nov 07
-1.6

Nov 07 Oct 09
4.9

Oct 09 Mar 12
-1.9

0.3%
9.9%
18.6%
3.9%
11.9%
4.6%
5.4%
3.6%
14.6%
8.1%
7.6%
4.2%
9.1%
101.8%

0.9%
11.5%
19.9%
5.6%
13.1%
2.3%
4.2%
3.3%
19.5%
7.3%
2.9%
4.5%
4.4%
99.4%

1.0%
19.4%
18.5%
2.3%
12.6%
4.0%
2.0%
5.7%
10.3%
9.1%
8.8%
3.9%
3.9%
101.5%

2.0%
21.5%
30.9%
1.3%
8.2%
6.5%
1.0%
6.0%
6.6%
1.2%
11.8%
2.0%
-2.2%
96.8%

0.0%
0.6%
-4.8%
0.6%
0.8%
-0.4%
-0.3%
-0.1%
-0.2%
1.1%
0.2%
0.5%
0.0%
-2.0%

-0.2%
-2.4%
4.0%
1.0%
1.6%
-1.1%
1.4%
-0.3%
-2.2%
-0.6%
-0.6%
-0.2%
0.1%
0.5%

0.1%
-1.7%
-1.5%
-0.3%
0.0%
-0.5%
0.0%
-0.3%
0.3%
0.8%
1.1%
0.1%
0.1%
-1.8%

-0.8%
6.8%
0.2%
0.1%
-0.9%
0.1%
0.8%
0.1%
-3.0%
-0.3%
-0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
3.0%

si*ui
Mining
Construct
Manufact
Wholesal
Retail
Tran & Ut
Informat
Financial
Prf & Bus
Ed & Hlth
Leisure
Oth Serv
Govt
Sum

si*ui
Mining
Construct
Manufact
Wholesal
Retail
Tran & Ut
Informat
Financial
Prf & Bus
Ed & Hlth
Leisure
Oth Serv
Govt
Sum
Source: CPS data downloaded from www.bls.gov/cps
Education results are for the population aged 25+.
Industry results are for the Experienced Unemployed.
Percentages may not add to 100% due to rounding.

42

Figure 3: Example of Mismatch

Vacancies

0

Unemployed

0

Vacancies

0

Unemployed

0

43

Figure 4: Unemployment and Vacancies, by Industry and by Year
Unemployment (in thousands) on X-axis, Vacancies (in thousands) on Y-axis

2006
Prof & Bus
Services

800

800

Educ & Health
Services

600

Leisure &
Hospitality

Government

400

Financial
Activities

Manufacturing

200

Wholesale &
Retail

600

Leisure &
Hospitality

Financial
Activities

2007

Educ & Health
Services

Wholesale &
Retail

Government

400

Prof & Bus
Services

Manufacturing

200

Construction

0

Construction

0
0

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

0

500

1,000

2008
800

2009

Educ & Health
Services

Educ & Health
Services

600
Wholesale &
Retail

Government

400

Prof & Bus
Services

Leisure &
Hospitality

Financial
Activities

400

Manufacturing

200

2,000

800

Prof & Bus
Services

600

1,500

Government

Financial
Activities

200

Leisure &
Hospitality

Wholesale &
Retail
Manufacturing

Construction
Construction

0

0
0

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

0

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

2011

2010
800

800
Prof & Bus
Services

600

Educ & Health
Services

400

Prof & Bus
Services

600
Educ & Health
Services

400

Government
Financial
Activities

200

Leisure &
Hospitality

Wholesale &
Retail
Manufacturing

Wholesale &
Retail

Government

Leisure &
Hospitality

Financial
Activities

200

Manufacturing

Construction

Construction

0

0
0

500

1,000

1,500

0

2,000

500

1,000

1,500

2,000

Industries in graphs above but not labeled: Mining, Transportation and Utilities, Information, and Other Services.
The aggregate tightness line in each graph connects the origin and the aggregate (U,V) point.
Source data: CPS and JOLTS monthly data downloaded from BLS website and seasonally adjusted by authors.

44

Figure 5: Industrial Mismatch

0.34

0.23

0.12
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Industrial Mismatch

45

Table 2: Industrial Mismatch (3 quarter moving average)

Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Wholesale & Retail
Transport & Utilities
Information
Financial Activities
Prof & Bus Services
Educ & Health Serv
Leisure & Hospitality
Other Services
Government
Total

December 2007
Mi
Mi / M
0.0004
0.2%
0.0487
25.9%
0.0246
13.1%
0.0121
6.5%
0.0008
0.4%
0.0004
0.2%
0.0099
5.3%
0.0290
15.4%
0.0411
21.8%
0.0073
3.9%
0.0025
1.3%
0.0111
5.9%
0.1882
100.0%

June 2009
Mi
Mi / M
0.0027
0.9%
0.0642
22.3%
0.0579
20.1%
0.0002
0.1%
0.0070
2.4%
0.0035
1.2%
0.0103
3.6%
0.0245
8.5%
0.0685
23.8%
0.0085
3.0%
0.0091
3.2%
0.0313
10.9%
0.2878
100.0%

Dec 07 – June 09
Mi
Mi / M
0.0023
2.3%
0.0155
15.6%
0.0333
33.4%
-0.0119
-12.0%
0.0062
6.2%
0.0031
3.1%
0.0004
0.4%
-0.0045
-4.5%
0.0273
27.5%
0.0012
1.2%
0.0066
6.6%
0.0202
20.3%
0.0995
100.0%

Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Wholesale & Retail
Transport & Utilities
Information
Financial Activities
Prof & Bus Services
Educ & Health Serv
Leisure & Hospitality
Other Services
Government
Total

June 2009
Mi
Mi / M
0.0027
0.9%
0.0642
22.3%
0.0579
20.1%
0.0002
0.1%
0.0070
2.4%
0.0035
1.2%
0.0103
3.6%
0.0245
8.5%
0.0685
23.8%
0.0085
3.0%
0.0091
3.2%
0.0313
10.9%
0.2878
100.0%

November 2011
Mi
Mi / M
0.0010
0.6%
0.0432
25.2%
0.0198
11.5%
0.0112
6.5%
0.0028
1.6%
0.0059
3.4%
0.0040
2.3%
0.0316
18.4%
0.0359
20.9%
0.0022
1.3%
0.0067
3.9%
0.0076
4.4%
0.1718
100.0%

June 09 – Nov 11
Mi
Mi / M
-0.0017
1.5%
-0.0210
18.1%
-0.0381
32.9%
0.0110
-9.5%
-0.0042
3.6%
0.0024
-2.1%
-0.0063
5.5%
0.0071
-6.1%
-0.0326
28.1%
-0.0063
5.4%
-0.0024
2.1%
-0.0238
20.5%
-0.1159
100.0%

46

Figure 6: Unemployment and Vacancies, by Occupation and by Year
Unemployment (in thousands) on X-axis, Vacancies (in thousands) on Y-axis

2006

1,800

2007
1,800
Professional

Professional

1,200

1,200
Management
Management

600

600

Office & Admin

Office & Admin
Sales

Sales
Transportation
Production

0
0

700

2,100

0

2,800

Construction

Production

0

1,400

Services

Transportation

Services

Construction

700

1,400

2008

2,100

2,800

2009

1,800

1,800
Professional

1,200

Professional

1,200
Management

600

600

Office & Admin

Management

Sales

Sales

Office & Admin

Production

0
0

700

Services

Services

Transportation
Construction

Transportation

0

1,400

2,100

2,800

0

700

2010

Production

1,400

Construction

2,100

2,800

2011

1,800

1,800

Professional

Professional

1,200

1,200
Management

Management

600

Office & Admin
Transportation
Production

0
0

700

1,400

Sales

600

Sales

Office & Admin
Services

Construction

2,100

Services

Transportation
Production

0
2,800

0

700

Construction

1,400

2,100

Occupation in graphs above but not labeled: Installation & Maintenance.
The aggregate tightness line in each graph connects the origin and the aggregate (U,V) point.
Source data: CPS monthly data downloaded from BLS website and seasonally adjusted by authors, and
seasonally adjusted HWOL data provided by the Conference Board.
47

2,800

Figure 7: Occupational and Industrial Mismatch
0.45

0.34

0.23

0.12
January
2005

January
2006

January
2007

Industry Mismatch

January
2008

January
2009

January
2010

January
2011

Occupation Mismatch

Figure 8: Beveridge Curve
Source: http://www.bls.gov/web/jolts/jlt_labstatgraphs.pdf

48

Figure 9: The Unemployment Rate and the Employment-to-Population Ratio
Source: CPS data downloaded from www.bls.gov/cps

Unemployment Rate (left axis)

E/P Ratio (right axis)

49

2011

2009

2007

2005

2003

2001

1999

1997

55
1995

2
1993

57

1991

4

1989

59

1987

6

1985

61

1983

8

1981

63

1979

10

1977

65

1975

12

Figure 10: Productivity Indices (nonfarm business sector, 1990=100)
Source: data downloaded from www.bls.gov/lpc

200

150

100

50

Hours

Output

Labor Productivity (Output Per Hour)

50

2010

2007

2004

2001

1998

1995

1992

1989

1986

1983

1980

1977

1974

1971

1968

1965

1962

1959

1956

1953

1950

1947

0

Figure 11: Percent of Unemployed who are Unemployed 27 Weeks or More
Source: CPS data downloaded from www.bls.gov/cps

50

40

30

20

10

1948
1951
1954
1957
1960
1963
1966
1969
1972
1975
1978
1981
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011

0

51

