                                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE JOINT IDENTIFICATION OF UTILITY AND DISCOUNT FUNCTIONS FROM STATED CHOICE DATA:
                     AN APPLICATION TO DURABLE GOODS ADOPTION

                                                Jean-Pierre H. Dube
                                                  Günter J. Hitsch
                                                   Pranav Jindal

                                                Working Paper 18393
                                        http://www.nber.org/papers/w18393


                             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           September 2012




       We thank Kilts Center for Marketing, Booth School of Business, University of Chicago, The Initiative
       on Global Markets, Booth School of Business, University of Chicago Research grant #4-1525 from
       the Marketing Science Institute The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
       reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

       NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
       reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
       NBER publications.

       © 2012 by Jean-Pierre H. Dube, Günter J. Hitsch, and Pranav Jindal. All rights reserved. Short sections
       of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
       credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Joint Identification of Utility and Discount Functions From Stated Choice Data: An Application
to Durable Goods Adoption
Jean-Pierre H. Dube, Günter J. Hitsch, and Pranav Jindal
NBER Working Paper No. 18393
September 2012
JEL No. C14,D12,D9,M31

                                             ABSTRACT

We present a survey design that generalizes static conjoint experiments to elicit inter-temporal adoption
decisions for durable goods. We show that consumers’ utility and discount functions in a dynamic
discrete choice model are jointly identified using data generated by this specific design. In contrast,
based on revealed preference data, the utility and discount functions are generally not jointly identified
even if consumers’ expectations are known. The separation of current-period preferences from discounting
is necessary to forecast the diffusion of a durable good under alternative marketing strategies. We
illustrate the approach using two surveys eliciting Blu-ray player adoption decisions. Both model-free
evidence and the estimates based on a dynamic discrete choice model indicate that consumers make
forward-looking adoption decisions. In both surveys the average discount rate is 43 percent, corresponding
to a substantially higher degree of impatience than the rate implied by aggregate asset returns. The
estimates also reveal a large degree of heterogeneity in the discount rates across consumers, but only
little evidence for hyperbolic discounting.


Jean-Pierre H. Dube                                 Pranav Jindal
University of Chicago                               Penn State
Booth School of Business                            Smeal College of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                          210 Business Building
Chicago, IL 60637                                   East Park Avenue
and NBER                                            University Park, PA 16802
jdube@chicagobooth.edu                              Pranav.Jindal@PSU.edu

Günter J. Hitsch
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
guenter.hitsch@ChicagoBooth.edu
1    Introduction
Predicting the adoption of a durable good is one of the most important tasks of marketing
research. Modeling such adoption decisions is difficult because of the inherent inter-temporal
tradeoff between buying now or buying at some future date. This tradeoff arises, for example,
because durable goods often become cheaper over time or because the availability of comple-
mentary goods increases. Because of this inter-temporal tradeoff, consumers’ adoption decisions
depend not only on their static preferences among alternative products, but also on the extent
to which they discount future utility flows and on their subjective expectations about future
market conditions. In this sense, adopting a durable good is a dynamic decision problem.
    The new product diffusion literature, a key contribution to marketing that originated with
the seminal work of Bass (1969), directly addresses the question of when consumers will adopt
a new product and attempts to predict the dynamic adoption path. New product diffusion
models typically fit the historical sales evolution of a new product well. Diffusion models have
also been successfully applied to help a firm predict new product sales over time (Bass, Gordon,
Ferguson, and Githens 2001). However, traditional diffusion models are not based on a model
of consumer choice that allows for the inherent tradeoff between buying now or in future that
we described before. Hence, an analysis of how individual preferences, discount factors, and
expectations affect the adoption of a new product is not directly possible. This is not only a
conceptual limitation, but more importantly it also limits the applicability of diffusion models
to some important marketing tasks. For example, firms need to decide on the initial price level
when a product is launched and the subsequent schedule of price changes over time. Without
a model that captures both consumers’ product preferences and the degree to which they are
willing to trade off buying today for buying tomorrow, an evaluation of how different pricing
strategies affect the adoption path is generally not possible.
    In contrast, a more recent diffusion literature, beginning with the work of Horsky (1990),
has recognized the necessity of predicting the aggregate sales evolution from individual con-
sumer decisions. During the last decade, this literature has adopted the dynamic discrete choice
approach of Miller (1984), Pakes (1986), and particularly Rust (1987) to model and estimate
durable goods demand (e.g. Melnikov 2001, Song and Chintagunta 2003, Nair 2007). Dynamic
discrete choice models allow for inter-temporal tradeoffs, and clearly lay out how discounting
and expectations affect consumers’ decision making. Hence, these models are conceptually
attractive and are now widely used in marketing and economics (see the discussions in Bron-
nenberg, Dubé, Mela, Albuquerque, Erdem, Gordon, Hanssens, Hitsch, Hong, and Sun 2008
and Arcidiacono and Ellickson 2011).
    A weakness of dynamic discrete choice models is that they suffer from a fundamental iden-
tification problem if estimated from revealed preference data. Using data on discrete choices
only, consumers’ utility functions, discount factors, and subjective beliefs about future market


                                                1
conditions are not jointly identified (Magnac and Thesmar 2002). Hence, with few exceptions,
researchers using field data on consumer choices assume a value for the discount factor, typically
to reflect some aggregate asset return, and assume that consumers have rational (self-fulfilling)
expectations1 . We consider this approach unsatisfactory and expect that these assumptions
are likely to be wrong in many empirical contexts. Numerous studies in psychology and be-
havioral economics have shown that the rate at which consumers discount the future can vary
tremendously across individuals and can differ substantially from the economy-wide asset re-
turns (Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’Donoghue 2002). Also, to our knowledge it is unknown
if consumers are able to form mutually-consistent, self-fulfilling beliefs about future market
outcomes such as prices in new durable goods markets.
      In this paper we propose a new approach that retains the attractive structure of dynamic
discrete choice models but allows us to infer consumers’ discount functions and utility functions
jointly. Our approach is based on stated choice data and, thus, is similar to conjoint analysis.
Conjoint analysis, originating with Green and Rao (1971), is another key contribution to mar-
keting and has often been applied to durable goods purchases (see Green and Srinivasan 1990,
Green, Krieger, and Wind 2001, and Huber 1997 for recent surveys). However, even though
the inter-temporal aspect of durable goods adoption decisions is well-understood in marketing,
it has largely been ignored in the conjoint literature. Implicitly, the past conjoint literature
has assumed that consumers are myopic. This assumption, if wrong, can lead to severe bias in
the preference estimates since non-purchase is entirely ascribed to preferences rather than to
beliefs about more favorable future market conditions.
      Our approach extends the conjoint literature to account for inter-temporal decision making
by forward-looking consumers. Our proposed experimental design elicits product adoption
choices conditional on a prediction of future market conditions (states) that are relevant for
the consumer’s decision. We prove that data sampled from this design non-parametrically
identify consumers’ discount factors and, more generally, discount functions. Intuitively, we
can observe how changes in the market conditions, such as a price cut, impact consumer
choices at different points in time. The difference in the reaction to such changes at different
dates identifies how future utilities are discounted. By providing the subjects with a forecast of
future market conditions we implicitly control for their subjective expectations when estimating
preferences and discount functions. However, we do not attempt to estimate how the subjects
form expectations about the future, which is a topic beyond the scope of this paper. A similar
survey-based approach to estimating discount factors has recently been proposed in Viscusi,
Huber, and Bell (2008) to estimate the subjects’ time preferences for environmental quality.
Our papers differ both in the substantive application and in many details of the survey design.
In particular, two key contributions of this paper over Viscusi, Huber, and Bell (2008) are the
  1
    Two exceptions are Chung, Steenburgh, and Sudhir (2011) and Yao, Mela, Chiang, and Chen (2012) who
have tried to devise approaches to estimate discount factors using field data.



                                                  2
formal discussion of the fundamental identification problem in dynamic discrete choice models
and the proof of non-parametric identification of discount factors (discount functions) from
stated choice data obtained from a specific survey design.
   The ability to identify discount factors is a key conceptual advantage over traditional ap-
proaches to estimating dynamic discrete choice models using revealed preference data. But our
approach also has an important practical advantage for the purpose of forecasting the diffusion
of a new product.Similar to conjoint analysis, the approach can be implemented before sales
data from a new product are available.
   To illustrate the applicability of our survey design we conduct two studies using subjects
from a panel maintained by a large U.S. marketing research company. The survey elicits
dynamic adoption choices of Blu-ray players under different predictions of future product prices
and availability of Blu-ray movies.
   A model-free analysis of the raw data provides direct evidence that the subjects system-
atically change their adoption timing in response to price changes across choice tasks. These
changes occur in a manner that is largely consistent with forward-looking behavior. In par-
ticular, the subjects tend to delay the adoption of a Blu-ray player if prices decrease in the
more distant future, and accelerate the adoption if prices decrease closer to the present period.
However, some of the stated choices cannot be easily rationalized, possibly reflecting mistakes
made by the survey respondents.
   We then separately estimate discount factors and utility functions based on a dynamic
discrete choice product adoption model. We obtain three key results. First, the data provide
strong evidence for forward-looking behavior. The general dynamic adoption model fits the data
better than two alternative models where the subjects are either myopic or do not perceive a
trade-off between current and future adoption choices. Second, the population average of
the discount factor is 0.7, corresponding to an annual interest rate of 43 percent. In contrast,
researchers estimating adoption decisions from field data typically assume much larger discount
factors corresponding to aggregate interest rates. Third, we detect substantial heterogeneity
in discounting across subjects, in contrast to the standard assumption of homogenous discount
factors in the empirical dynamic discrete choice literature.
   We also fail to detect strong support for hyperbolic discounting. This finding is consistent
with Chevalier and Goolsbee (2005) who also estimate discount factors for a durable good
(textbooks). Hence, to the best of our knowledge, empirical evidence for hyperbolic discounting
has not been documented for durable goods adoption decisions.
   The remainder of the document is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the identi-
fication problems inherent to the estimation of dynamic discrete choice models using field data.
In Section 3 we propose a survey-based sampling mechanism that allows us to jointly identify
discount functions and utilities. Section 4 describes the two conjoint surveys. In Section 5, we
provide model-free evidence for forward-looking behavior in the stated choice data. In Section


                                               3
6 we discuss our estimation approach and the key results on discounting.


2    Dynamic discrete choice adoption models
Dynamic discrete choice model (e.g. Rust 1987) have been widely employed in the recent lit-
erature on durable goods demand estimation to predict adoption decisions. We first give a
general overview of dynamic discrete choice models and then discuss the topic of identification
of the model primitives from field data. We highlight some key identification challenges that
have been previously recognized in the econometrics literature (e.g. Rust 1994, Bajari, Cher-
nozhukov, Hong, and Nekipelov 2009 and Abbring 2010). These challenges are less well known
in the applied empirical literature and amongst practitioners. For this reason, we provide a
formal discussion of the model and its identification below. In Section 3 we propose a practical
solution to some of the identification problems.

General structure of dynamic discrete choice models

Below, we present dynamic discrete choice in a very general form as in Rust (1987). But we
interpret many model elements in the context of durable goods adoption decisions. The model
predicts the decisions of a consumer who decides to adopt one of J products in each period
t = 0, 1, . . . The consumer’s choice in period t is denoted by j ∈ A = {0, . . . , J}, where j = 0
(the reference alternative) is the decision to postpone adoption until some future period. In
each period, the consumer observes a state vector, xt ∈ X, which may include the prices of all
products, the availability of complementary goods, or whether a consumer has already made
an adoption decision in the past. The consumer also observes a latent utility component, jt ,
for each possible choice. The flow utility from choice j in period t is given by uj (xt ) + jt .
The latent utility components, jt , are i.i.d. with pdf p(), where  = (0 , . . . , J ). Following
the convention in the literature, we normalize the utility from the reference alternative, j = 0,
such that u0 (xt ) ≡ 0. The consumer believes that the state xt evolves according to a Markov
process with transition density p(xt+1 |xt , j).
   The consumer’s objective is to make adoption decisions over time (j(0), j(1), . . . ) to max-
                                                  P∞ t                         
imize the expected present value of her utility E  t=0 δ (uj(t) (xt ) + j(t) ) . δ ∈ [0, 1) is the
consumer’s discount factor. The adoption decisions, j(t), are functions of the current state and
the latent utility components. Under optimal behavior, the value of choosing action j, net of
the random utility component, jt , is given by the choice-specific value function of j,
                                             Z
                   vj (xt ) = uj (xt ) + δ       max{vk (x0 ) + k }p()p(x0 |xt , j)ddx0 .      (1)
                                                 k∈A

For example, if j = 0 this equation states that the value of delaying adoption is given by the
current flow utility, u0 (xt ) = 0, and the expected present value of making an optimal adoption


                                                        4
choice tomorrow given knowledge of the realizations of xt+1 and t+1 . To solve the model we
define the expected value function:
                                                Z
                                       v(x) ≡       max{vk (x) + k }p()d.                           (2)
                                                    k∈A


v(xt ) is the value that the consumer expects conditional on the state xt but before observing
t . Using the definition of the expected value function, the choice-specific value functions can
be written in simpler form as
                                                             Z
                                   vj (xt ) = uj (xt ) + δ       v(x0 )p(x0 |xt , j)dx0 .              (3)

Furthermore, the expected value function satisfies the recursive relationship
                               Z                                 Z
                    v(xt ) =        max{uk (xt ) + k + δ            v(x0 )p(x0 |xt , k)dx0 }p()d.   (4)
                                    k∈A


Under mild regularity conditions the right-hand side of the Bellman equation (4) defines a
contraction mapping. Thus, there exists a unique value function satisfying equation (4) and
correspondingly unique choice-specific value functions satisfying (3).
    In summary, the primitives of the dynamic discrete choice model are the utility functions,
uj (xt ), the distribution of latent utility components, p(), the consumer’s belief about the
evolution of the state vector, p(xt+1 |xt , j), and the consumer’s discount factor, δ. Given these
primitives, the expected value function is uniquely defined by equation (4) and the choice-
specific value functions are uniquely defined by equation (3). The model predicts that, under
dynamically optimal behavior, the consumer chooses action j, given xt and t , if and only if
vj (xt ) + jt ≥ vk (xt ) + kt for all k 6= j.
    In the econometric analysis of dynamic discrete choice models we assume that the researcher
observes some or all components of the state vector xt . However, the latent utility components
jt are not observed to the researcher and serve as the econometric error term to reconcile the
model predictions with the data. Hence, the model can only predict the probability but not
the exact identity of a choice. We define the probability of decision j, given the state xt , as

                          σj (xt ) = Pr{vj (xt ) + jt ≥ vk (xt ) + kt ,           ∀k 6= j}.

σj (xt ) is called the conditional choice probability (CCP) of j. If jt has the Type I Extreme Value
distribution, the conditional choice probabilities are given by the multinomial logit formula

                                                       exp(vj (xt ))
                                          σj (xt ) = PJ                 .
                                                      k=0 exp(vk (xt ))

We see that the predictions of dynamic discrete choice models are similar to static discrete choice


                                                             5
models, with the choice-specific value functions taking the place of the utility functions in a
static choice model. However, static and dynamic discrete choice models differ fundamentally
in the extent to which the model primitives are identified.

Structural and reduced form of the dynamic discrete choice model

To discuss identification we assume that we can observe the CCPs σ(x) = (σ0 (x), . . . , σJ (x))
without error for all states x ∈ X. This assumption embodies an idealized situation where
we have access to an arbitrarily large data set that was generated by the dynamic discrete
choice model. We do not attempt to infer the distribution of the latent utility terms, p () ,
from the data, but assume that this distribution is known. Our focus is on identification of all
other model primitives, including the utility functions for each choice, the discount factor, and
the state transition densities. These primitives constitute the structural form of the model,
S = (uj (x), δ, p(x0 |x, j)).2 We also make the following assumption, which is satisfied by all
commonly employed distributions in empirical work, including the Type I Extreme Value and
multivariate normal distributions.

Assumption. The distribution of  has a density p() with respect to the Lebesgue measure on
RJ+1 and is everywhere strictly positive.

      We first present an important auxiliary result. Define dj (x) ≡ vj (x) − v0 (x) for all j ∈ A.
dj (x) is the difference between the choice-specific values for choice j and the reference alternative
0. Note that σj (x) is as a function of d(x) = (d1 (x), . . . , dJ (x)) only. Now hold the state x
fixed and define the function φ(d) with components j ∈ A :

                                  φj (d) = Pr{dj + j ≥ dk + k ,        ∀k 6= j}.                (5)

φ : RJ → ∆J maps choice-specific value function differences into choice probabilities in the
unit simplex ∆J = {(ξ0 , . . . , ξJ ) ∈ RJ+1 : Jj=0 ξj = 1 and ξj ≥ 0 for all j}. Indeed, if p() is
                                              P

positive then all choice probabilities are positive and φ(d) will be in the interior of ∆J , denoted
by int(∆J ). The following proposition summarizes results by Hotz and Miller (1993) and Norets
and Takahashi (2012):

Proposition. Under the assumptions on the distribution of  stated above, φ has an inverse
function φ−1 : int(∆J ) → RJ .

      A key implication of this proposition is that we can directly infer the choice-specific value
functions differences if we observe the CCPs for all x ∈ X: vj (x) − v0 (x) = φ−1
                                                                               j (σ(x)). We call
R = (vj (x) − v0 (x)) the reduced form of the model. If the CCPs are observed without error,
as we assume for the discussion of identification, and if the distribution of the latent utility
  2
      The notation uj (x) refers to the function u : A × R → R, and similarly for p(x0 |x, j).


                                                          6
terms is known, then the reduced form of the model R is non-parametrically identified. In a
static discrete choice model, knowledge of R allows a firm to predict the effect of a marketing
action, such as a price change, on consumer demand. In contrast, in a dynamic discrete choice
model, most marketing actions of interest cannot be evaluated based only on knowledge of the
reduced form R . For example, a firm may systematically change the dynamic pricing policy
for a durable good. If consumers anticipate this shift in the pricing strategy their beliefs about
future prices, captured by the transition density p(x0 |x, j), will change. Since the choice-specific
value functions depend on the transition density, the new pricing strategy will also change the
reduced form of the model. Thus, demand predictions based on past data will not correctly
reflect the change in consumer demand caused by the change in the pricing policy. Instead, the
firm needs to know the structural form of the model, S, to predict accurately the effect of the
new pricing policy on demand.

Identification of dynamic discrete choice models

The following proposition contains the key identification result.

Proposition 1. Let the distribution of the random utility components, p(), the discount factor,
δ, and the consumer’s beliefs about the evolution of the state vector, p(x0 |x, j), be given. Suppose
we observe the CCPs, σj (x), for all states x ∈ X and all choices j ∈ A. Then:

(i) We can infer the unique choice-specific value functions, vj (x), consistent with the dynamic
discrete choice model.

(ii) The utilities, uj (x), are identified for all states x ∈ X and all choices j ∈ A.

Proof. The proof follows Bajari, Chernozhukov, Hong, and Nekipelov (2009). As discussed
above, we can infer the choice-specific value function differences directly from the CCPs:

                               dj (x) = vj (x) − v0 (x) = φ−1
                                                           j (σ(x)).                             (6)

To see why the proposition holds, first re-write the expected value function:
                                     Z
                          v(x) =         max{vk (x) + k }p()d
                                         k∈A
                                     Z
                                 =       max{dk (x) + k }p()d + v0 (x).                       (7)
                                         k∈A


Using equation (7) and the inversion (6), we can express v0 (x) in the following form (remember




                                                  7
that u0 (x) ≡ 0):
                              Z
       v0 (x) = u0 (x) + δ v(x0 )p(x0 |x, 0)dx0
                 Z                                        Z
              = δ max{dk (x ) + k }p()p(x |x, 0)ddx + δ v0 (x0 )p(x0 |x, 0)dx0
                              0               0       0
                     k∈A
                 Z                                           Z
                           −1
              = δ max{φk (σ(x )) + k }p()p(x |x, 0)ddx + δ v0 (x0 )p(x0 |xt , 0)dx0
                                 0               0        0
                                                                                                     (8)
                        k∈A


Note that the first term on the right-hand side of the equation above is known given p(),
p(x0 |x, j), and the CCPs. It is straightforward to show that (8) satisfies Blackwell’s conditions
and thus defines a contraction mapping with a unique solution v0 (x). Hence, we can infer v0 (x)
along with all the other choice-specific value functions:

                                     vj (x) = φ−1
                                               j (σ(x)) + v0 (x).


Given the choice-specific value functions, we can calculate the expected value function (2) and
then infer the utility functions from the equation defining the choice-specific value functions:
                                                     Z
                               uj (x) = vj (x) − δ       v(x0 )p(x0 |x, j)dx.




The proposition says that if we are willing to treat p(), δ, and p(x0 |x, j) as known, the con-
sumer’s utility function is non-parametrically identified. However, the solution to the con-
traction mapping (8) depends on δ and p(x0 |x, j). If we assume a different discount factor, δ̃,
or a different transition density, p̃(x0 |x, j), we will infer a different set of choice-specific value
functions, ṽj (x), and utilities, ũj (x). The choice-specific value functions ṽj (x) also entirely ra-
tionalize the observed CCPs. We conclude that without further assumptions, the structural
form of the dynamic discrete choice model, S = (uj (x), δ, p(x0 |x, j)), is not non-parametrically
identified.

Assumptions to achieve identification

To overcome the identification problem the dynamic discrete choice literature has typically made
two assumptions. The first assumption is rational expectations. Under rational expectations,
the consumer’s subjective beliefs, p(x0 |x, j), coincide with the actual evolution of the state
vector. Thus, if x is observed, p(x0 |x, j) can be inferred directly from the data. However, as
we showed above, even if p(x0 |x, j) is known, the utility functions and the discount factor are
not jointly identified. The extant literature typically also assumes that the discount factor is
known, or rather that it can be calibrated to reflect some economy-wide interest rate or asset


                                                     8
return, r. For example, based on the consumption CAPM (see for instance the discussion in
Cochrane 2001), the risk-free rate r satisfies the following relationship:

                                  u0 (ct ) = δEt (1 + r)u0 (ct+1 ) .
                                                                 


Here, u0 (c) is the marginal utility of consumption. For example, at the time of writing, the
yield on 3-month U.S. Treasury bills, an essentially risk-free security, is 0.08 percent at an
annualized rate. Correspondingly, if consumers expect no change in consumption over the next
three months such that u0 (ct ) = Et [u0 (ct+1 )], the corresponding annual discount factor would
            1
be δ =   1+0.0008   = 0.9992. In practice, the identification problem is sufficiently severe that
researchers are typically unable to estimate δ even if a specific parametric form for uj (x) is
assumed.
    Both assumptions, for the discount factor and for beliefs, are highly problematic. First,
countless studies in psychology and behavioral economics cast doubt on the assumption of
a uniform discount factor that corresponds to some economy-wide asset return (Frederick,
Loewenstein, and O’Donoghue 2002). Second, there is no solid body of empirical research
that justifies the rational expectations assumption. A priori, particularly in the case of a new
product adoption where consumers have little or no prior experience with the category and
little or no access to past data, it is doubtful that consumers would know the exact process by
which prices and other components of the state variable xt evolve.
    The problem is particularly severe if the main purpose of the empirical analysis is to make
predictions about future product adoptions. Incorrect assumptions about the discount factor
and/or beliefs will generate incorrect inferences about the structural form of the model. How-
ever, as we highlighted above, an accurate prediction of future demand requires knowledge of
the true structural form. In the next section we will present an approach based on stated choice
data that allows us to identify jointly the consumer’s utility functions and the discount factor.
Our approach skirts the problem of belief estimation, which we leave for future research.
    As a final comment, the assumption that p() is known is standard in the applied discrete
choice literature and, in our view, substantially less severe than the assumptions on the discount
factor and beliefs. The inversion theorem above shows that, even for static discrete choice
models (δ = 0), the utility functions and the latent utility term distribution are not jointly
identified without additional restrictions on either uj (x) or p().


3    Identification of discount functions using stated choice data
As discussed in the preceding section, discount factors are generally not identified from revealed
choice data. We now introduce an approach based on stated choice data that overcomes this
identification problem. The approach allows us to identify discount factors non-parametrically



                                                  9
and, more generally, discount functions ρ(t) that allow future utilities to be discounted at
some arbitrary rate ρ(t) ∈ [0, 1]. The approach is based on a sampling mechanism that can
be implemented using a survey design that is similar, although slightly more involved, than a
typical conjoint design. We first describe this sampling mechanism and then show that discount
functions and utilities are identified from the resulting choice data.

Sampling mechanism

We present each subject with a sequence of choice tasks. In each choice task we provide
the subject with information about the current and future states over the time horizon t =
0, 1, . . . , T, where t = 0 is the present period. We instruct the subjects to take the values of
xt ∈ X as given such that they do not face uncertainty over the future states up to and including
period T. The subjects state that they will either adopt one of the J products in some period
t ≤ T, or that they will not adopt a product before period T +1. Delaying the adoption decision
until period T +1 or beyond includes the possibility of adopting at time t > T or never adopting
at all. We label the decision not to adopt before period T + 1 as 0, and the decision to adopt
product j in period t as (j, t). Hence, the choice set is A = {(1, 0), (2, 0), . . . , (J −1, T ), (J, T ), 0}
and includes J · (T + 1) + 1 options.
    We allow for a general discount function ρ(t), where ρ(0) = 1 and 0 ≤ ρ(t) ≤ 1 for all t. The
case of geometric discounting that we used before is a special case with ρ(t) = δ t . Hyperbolic
discounting with (β, δ)-preferences (e.g. Phelps and Pollak 1968) is another special case, where
ρ(0) = 1 and ρ(t) = βδ t for all t ≥ 1.
    The choice-specific value in period 0 from adopting product j in period t is

                                           ωjt (xt ) = ρ(t)uj (xt ),

and the value from choosing the reference alternative 0 is ω0 (xT ). Here we implicitly assume that
the subjects believe that xt follows a Markov process. Hence, xT contains all the information to
predict the value of delaying the product adoption until some period t > T . A key assumption
is that uj (x) is stationary in the sense that the utility from choosing alternative j depends only
on the state, but not generally on the period in which the adoption decision is made. Indeed,
if the utility function changed over time we would not be able to distinguish discounting from
changes in product preferences.
    We assume that the stated choice maximizes the subject’s utility. The utility from the
choice (j, t) is given by ωjt (xt ) + jt , where jt is a latent utility component. 0 denotes the
latent utility component from the reference alternative. Define X = ×Tt=0 X. Then for x ∈ X
the conditional choice probability for choice (j, t) ∈ A is

 σjt (x) = Pr{ωjt (xt ) + jt ≥ ωks (xs ) + ks and ωjt (xt ) + jt ≥ ω0 (xT ) + 0      ∀(k, s) 6= (j, t)}.


                                                      10
The CCP of choosing 0 is defined analogously. The latent utility terms,  = (10 , . . . , JT , 0 ),
have a distribution with a density p() that is measurable with respect to the Lebesgue measure
and everywhere positive. As in the previous section, we assume that this distribution is known.
    Because the future states up to period T are given to the subjects in our survey design,
and because we assume that consumers observe the latent utility terms, we have a model of
choice under perfect foresight. This model can be analyzed as a multinomial discrete choice
model, and no dynamic programming techniques are needed. We next show that the discount
function and the utilities are identified if our survey allows for sufficient variation in the states
presented to the subjects.

Identification of the discount function ρ(t)

Proposition 2. Suppose that we observe the CCPs σ(x) = (σ10 (x), . . . , σJT (x), σ0 (x)) without
error for x ∈ B ⊆ X (B is a subset of all possible sequences of current and future states
that can be presented to the subjects). Assume that p() is known. Assume that for period t,
1 ≤ t ≤ T, there are two states, x̄ and x̄0 , such that uj (x̄) 6= uj (x̄0 ) for some j ∈ {1, . . . , J}.
                                                                                                           (1)         (2)
Furthermore, assume that B contains four elements x(l) , l = 1, . . . , 4, such that: (i) xT = xT
      (3)          (4)         (1)   (3)                    (2)    (4)
and xT = xT , (ii) x0 = xt                 = x̄, and (iii) x0 = xt          = x̄0 . Then ρ(t) is identified.
                                                                                                  (l)            (l)
Proof. We can invert the conditional choice probabilities σ(x(l) ) to infer dks = ωks (xs ) −
     (l)
ω0 (xT ) = φ−1     (l)
            ks (σ(x )) for all k ∈ {1, . . . , J} and s ≤ T. Note that

             (1)         (2)                   (1)                           (2)
            dj0 − dj0 = (ωj0 (x̄) − ω0 (xT )) − (ωj0 (x̄0 ) − ω0 (xT )) = uj (x̄) − uj (x̄0 ),
             (3)         (4)                   (3)                           (4)
            djt − djt = (ωjt (x̄) − ω0 (xT )) − (ωjt (x̄0 ) − ω0 (xT )) = ρ(t)(uj (x̄) − uj (x̄0 )).

Because uj (x̄) − uj (x̄0 ) 6= 0 it follows that

                                                           (3)    (4)
                                                          djt − djt
                                                 ρ(t) =    (1)    (2)
                                                                        .
                                                          dj0 − dj0



The intuition for why the discount function can be identified is as follows. Our sampling design
presents a subject with a choice of product j at two different states x̄ and x̄0 , either now or in
some future period t > 0. Holding the value from delaying adoption beyond period T constant,
we can infer how the value of adoption differs across the two states x̄ and x̄0 . The extent to
which the difference in the value of adoption at time t > 0 is different (typically smaller) than
the difference in the value of adoption in the present period identifies the discount factor ρ(t).
    If we are willing to impose linearity on one component of the utility function the conditions
for identification can be weakened further. Suppose x = (ξ, z) where z ∈ RJ , and that the


                                                          11
utility function has the form uj (ξ, z) = µj (ξ) + αzj , α 6= 0.

Proposition 3. Suppose that we observe the CCPs σ(x) = (σ10 (x), . . . , σJT (x), σ0 (x)) without
error for x ∈ B ⊆ X , and that p() is known. Assume that B contains four elements x(l) ,
                                                                                           (1)         (2)     (3)     (4)           (1)          (2)
l = 1, . . . , 4, such that for some j ∈ {1, . . . , J}: (i) xT = xT and xT = xT , (ii) zj0 6= zj0
      (3)         (4)       (1)          (2)               (3)           (4)
and zjt 6= zjt , (iii) ξ0 = ξ0                  and ξt            = ξt . Then ρ(t) is identified.
                                                                                                                         (l)                (l)
Proof. As before invert the conditional choice probabilities σ(x(l) ) to infer dks = ωks (xs ) −
     (l)
ω0 (xT ) = φ−1     (l)
            ks (σ(x )) for all k ∈ {1, . . . , J} and s ≤ T. Note that

    (1)       (2)          (1)            (1)                    (1)                     (2)           (2)      (2)            (1)         (2)
   dj0 − dj0 = (µj (ξ0 ) + αzj0 − ω0 (xT )) − (µj (ξ0 ) + αzj0 − ω0 (xT )) = α(zj0 − zj0 ),
    (3)       (4)                  (3)               (3)                     (3)                         (4)     (4)           (4)
   djt − djt = (ρ(t)(µj (ξt ) + αzjt ) − ω0 (xT )) − (ρ(t)(µj (ξt ) + αzjt ) − ω0 (xT ))
                             (3)          (4)
                    = ρ(t)α(zjt − zjt ).

Hence
                                                                               (3)         (4)
                                                                             zjt − zjt
                                                            ρ(t) =             (1)         (2)
                                                                                                 .
                                                                             zj0 − zj0



For example, the empirical literature often assumes that utility is linear in price. Proposition
3 states that ρ(t) is identified as long as we have some price variation in the present period
and in period t > 0, holding constant both ξ within each period and the value from delaying
adoption beyond period T. However, unlike in Proposition 2, the within-period variation in
prices need not be the same across periods (Proposition 2 assumes that subjects are presented
with a choice at the same states x̄ and x̄0 both in the present period and at t > 0).

Identification of the utility functions uj (x)

Proposition 4. Suppose that we observe the CCPs σ(x) = (σ10 (x), . . . , σJT (x), σ0 (x)) without
error for x ∈ B ⊆ X , and assume that p() is known. Furthermore, suppose that there are two
periods t, t0 ≤ T such that ρ(t) 6= ρ(t0 ), and that the conditions in Proposition 2 (or Proposition
3) are met such that ρ(t) and ρ(t0 ) are identified. Assume that B contains two elements, x(1)
                                 (1)           (2)                                 (1)           (2)
and x(2) , such that (i) xT = xT and (ii) x = xt                                         = xt0 (the same state x is presented to the
subjects in two different time periods). Then uj (x) is identified for all j = 1, . . . , J.
                                               (l)                     (l)                 (l)
Proof. Invert σ(x(l) ) to infer dks = ωks (xs ) − ω0 (xT ) = φ−1     (l)
                                                              ks (σ(x )) for all k ∈ {1, . . . , J}
and s ≤ T. Note that

            (1)      (2)           (1)                     (1)                       (2)                (2)
           djt − djt0 = (ωjt (xt ) − ω0 (xT )) − (ωjt0 (xt0 ) − ω0 (xT )) = (ρ(t) − ρ(t0 ))uj (x).




                                                                              12
Because ρ(t) − ρ(t0 ) 6= 0 we have

                                                       (1)      (2)
                                                     djt − djt0
                                         uj (x) =                     .
                                                     ρ(t) − ρ(t0 )



This proposition shows that the utility functions are always identified unless the discount func-
tion ρ(t) never varies for t ≤ T, which is equivalent to the extreme situation of no discounting,
i.e. ρ(t) ≡ 1 for all t ≤ T.

Generalization

Consider the following generalization of the choice-specific value from adopting product j in
period t:
                                                     T
                                                     X
                       ωjt (x) = ρ(t)uj (xt , 0) +           ρ(s)uj (xs , 1) + ϕj (xT ).
                                                     s=t+1

To motivate this formulation, consider a case where xt contains information on the product
prices and the availability of complementary goods. At the time of adoption, t, the consumer’s
utility depends both on the price of product j and the available complementary goods, while
the utility after adoption, in periods s > t, is only affected by the complementary goods. This
difference in utility between the adoption period and later is captured by the state ι ∈ {0, 1}
in the utility function, uj (x, ι). ϕj (xT ) captures the value that the consumer derives from the
complementary goods beyond period T.
    It is straightforward to modify Propositions 2-4 to show that the discount function ρ(t) and
the utility functions uj (x, ι) are also identified for this more general model.

Discussion

Propositions 2-4 clearly indicate the variation in the data that is needed to identify the discount
function ρ(t) and the utilities uj (x). This variation is created by the states x = (x0 , . . . , xT ) ∈ B
and is entirely under the control of the researcher. Our results also indicate the data requirement
for the joint identification of the discount and utility functions. We need to present the subjects
only with a small subset of all possible sequences of states x ∈ X . To see this, suppose that the
state space X is finite and that it contains K elements. Then |X | = K T +1 , and the number of
possible sequences of states rises exponentially in T. However, Proposition 2 shows that we only
need information on the CCPs at 2 · (T + 1) sequences of states to identify the discount function
ρ(t) for t ≤ T. Proposition 4 shows that we can choose some state x0 ∈ X and identify the utility
functions uj (x0 ) from the CCPs at two state sequences. We then only need information on the
CCPs at K − 1 additional state sequences (holding xT constant) to infer uj (x) for all states


                                                     13
x. Thus, the discount and utility functions are identified from 2 · (T + 1) + K + 1 CCPs. In
particular, if T is small relative to K, the data requirement for identification of the discount and
utility functions is of the same order of magnitude as the data requirement for identification of
the utilities in a static discrete choice model. This question regarding the data requirement is
different from the question of how difficult it is for the subjects to understand and process our
survey design compared to a static conjoint design.
       The assumption on the latent utility terms is less innocuous. Our model assumes that
the subjects observe all current and future jt terms (and 0 ) at the time when the survey
is administered, or at least act as if they observed these latent utility terms. Due to this
assumption the stated choices can be analyzed as a multinomial choice model with a specific
structure on the adoption values due to discounting. An alternative assumption would be
that the subjects might face uncertainty over the future latent utility terms and incorporate
this uncertainty into their stated choice. Generally, the treatment and interpretation of the
econometric error term in a discrete choice model is of great importance, but the assumptions
in the extant literature are largely based on internal consistency (Rust 1987, Rust 1994) and
convenience, not on prior empirical work establishing how to best account for these error terms.
In this sense, the assumption made in this paper is not more arbitrary than the assumptions
in prior work. We view an exploration of alternative assumptions on the error term to be of
great importance, but beyond the scope of this paper.
       Our approach controls for the role of expectations in dynamic decision-making by providing
the subjects with a forecast of the sequence of future states. A much more ambitious task
would consist of estimating the process by which the subjects form expectations about the
future. This is also a topic of great importance that is beyond the scope of this paper.

Alternative approaches to achieve identification of discount factors

Another approach to the identification problem is based on an exclusion restriction. Suppose
that the state space X is discrete, and that there are two states xa 6= xb such that uj (xa ) =
uj (xb ) for all j ∈ A but p(x0 |xa , k) 6= p(x0 |xb , k) for some choice k. xa and xb provide variation
that does not affect current utilities but affects future payoffs through its impact on the state
transitions. Fang and Wang (2012) present a theorem stating that, under these assumptions,
the discount parameters in a hyperbolic model with (β, δ)-preferences are identified.34 A similar
claim is often attributed to Magnac and Thesmar (2002). Their paper, however, provides an
exclusion restriction that is based on the “current value function” which is not a model primitive
but requires knowledge of the solution of the dynamic discrete choice model and thus limits
   3
     The statement in Fang and Wang (2012) is actually somewhat more general and also allows for identification
of a third parameter that indicates the extent to which a decision maker anticipates her future present-bias.
   4
     Chung, Steenburgh, and Sudhir (2011) apply the same strategy to estimate discount factors for sales agents
anticipating future incentive bonuses, although no formal identification proof is provided.



                                                      14
the applicability of the result.
    This identification strategy is promising, but in the case of durable goods adoption decisions
it will generally be difficult to find a state variable that satisfies the exclusion restriction. States
that we typically observe include prices, the availability of complementary goods, and product
qualities. None of these variables are generally excluded from the utility functions.
    Another approach, proposed in Yao, Mela, Chiang, and Chen (2012), is to utilize data where
consumers are observed in two different choice situations. In both situations the consumers have
the same preferences. However, in one situation choices are made dynamically, while in the
other situation current choices do not affect future payoffs such that static decision making is
optimal. The paper presents an example where mobile phone customers were initially on a linear
usage plan and then later switched to a three-part tariff. Optimal decision making (placing and
accepting calls) is static under the linear plan but dynamic under the three-part tariff. Finite-
horizon choice problems provide a similar context because decision-making in the terminal
period is static. For the case of continuous controls Yao, Mela, Chiang, and Chen (2012) prove
that geometric discount factors are identified from data with this specific structure. No proof
is provided for discrete choices, although it seems plausible that the identification argument
would also hold in this more general context.
    This is also a promising approach, but unlikely to be applicable to the case of durable
goods adoption decisions. In particular, the adoption of a durable good always has dynamic
consequences, both because current product adoption affects future utility flows and because
there is an option value from delaying adoption unless the market is completely “static,” in the
sense that prices, the available products and qualities, etc., never change over time.


4    Survey and data
Survey design

We designed two surveys to elicit adoption decisions for Blu-ray players. At the time the surveys
were conducted, Blu-ray was a nascent technology providing high-definition video. Blu-ray had
just won a standards war against the competing HD DVD format and received much attention
in the press. Thus, the technology was likely of interest to many survey participants, making
this a good context in which to to implement and illustrate the sampling mechanism described
in the previous section. The two surveys differ in the complexity of the choice tasks faced by
the subjects. Below we provide a summary of the surveys. Additional details are contained in
Appendix A.
    In several introductory screens, we first give the subjects an overview of the Blu-ray tech-
nology and compare the benefits of Blu-ray over regular DVD movies. We then present the
subjects with the choice tasks. Figure 1 shows a screen in the first survey. The screen provides
the subjects with information about the evolution of prices for a medium quality Blu-ray player

                                                  15
from March 2009 (referred to as “Now” on the screen) to December 2011. We ask the subjects if
and when they would adopt the Blu-ray player. Subjects can choose the “Will not buy” option
which indicates that either they will never buy the Blu-ray player or that they might buy the
Blu-ray player after December 2011. On each screen, we remind the subjects of the number of
Blu-ray movie titles available in each period. In the first survey, the number of titles remains
the same across choice tasks.
       In the second survey, the subjects choose among two Blu-ray player brands (Sony and
Samsung). The left-hand side of the screen (Figure 3) provides the subjects with information
about the evolution of prices for the two brands from “Now” (December 2008) to December
2012. The right-hand side of the screen provides corresponding information on the number of
available Blu-ray movie titles. We ask the subjects if and when they would adopt one of the
available players.
       The subjects in these conjoint experiments face a complex task and need to process a large
amount of information. For this reason, we do not vary all product attributes (current and
future prices and movie titles) simultaneously across choice tasks. Instead, we vary one factor
at a time. The survey consists of two or more blocks. Blocks are randomly assigned to the
subjects. The first screen in each block presents a particular base scenario (Figure 1), defined
by a sequence of prices and the number of movie titles. In the subsequent screens, we randomly
vary current or future product prices in one time period only. For example, Figure 2 shows
a screen where the price of a medium quality Blu-ray player in December 2009 is lower than
in the base scenario in Figure 1, while all other prices remain constant. In the second survey,
we also vary the number of movie titles (in at most two time periods) across screens. Across
different blocks, we vary the sequence of prices in all time periods, and, in survey two, we also
vary the sequence of movie titles.
       The particular design features of our survey can also capture how the subjects change their
adoption timing decisions in response to future price or title changes within a given choice
scenario. This allows us to conduct simple, model-free tests of forward-looking behavior, which
we discuss in Section 5.

Data description

The data were collected using the online panel of Market Tools, Inc, a national market research
company. The panel is meant to represent the US population and is used by many large
companies such as Canon. Tables 1 and 2 summarize the survey. We conducted survey 1 in
February 2009, capturing the responses of 1000 subjects.5 A fraction was randomly sampled
from the Market Tools panel, while the remaining fraction was obtained using oversampling
based on expressed interest in high definition (HD) products. We oversampled on HD interest
   5
    The sampling was conducted to ensure that the age distribution of the respondents matched the correspond-
ing distribution in the U.S. population.


                                                     16
to ensure that our sample would contain sufficiently many potential costumers for the Blu-Ray
technology. Each respondent was exposed to two blocks and answered four questions in each
block, resulting in 8,000 choices. We conducted survey 2 in November 2008. 505 respondents
completed the survey. Again, we selected a fraction of the respondents using random sampling
and the remaining fraction based on expressed interest in HD products. Each respondent was
exposed to either two or three blocks and answered six questions in each block, resulting in
a data set of 6,576 choices. We ensured that there was no overlap in the subjects sampled
across the two experiments. Table 3 shows the distribution of the demographics and other
attributes across the subjects in both studies. Due to the oversampling scheme employed,
77% of respondents in the first survey and 82% of respondents in the second survey expressed
interest in high definition products.
    Tables 1 and 2 also report the distribution of the modal choices across subjects. The data
reveal a generally high purchase intent for a Blu-ray player—only 18% of subjects in survey 1
and 17% of subjects in survey 2 most frequently choose “Will not buy.” We observe subjects
with modes in all survey periods, but overall the modal choices are concentrated in the last two
periods in survey 1 and the middle two periods in survey 2.
    Within-subject variation in choices is important to document dynamic adoption timing
patterns in the data (see Section 5) and to estimate consumer heterogeneity. Tables 1 and 2
show the distributions of the number of distinct choices made by the subjects. For example, if
a subject chooses Sony in December 2009 once, Sony in December 2010 three times, and “Will
not buy” in all other choice tasks, the number of distinct choices made by that subject is three.
The highest possible number of distinct choices in the first experiment is 5 (4 periods and the
“Will not buy” option) and in the second experiment is 13 (a combination of 2 brands, 6 periods
and the “Will not buy” option). We find that about one third of the subjects never vary their
choice across tasks within a block. In survey 1, 48% of the subjects make two distinct choices
and 14% make three distinct choices. In survey 2, we observe 51% of the subjects making
two or three distinct choices and 12% making four or five distinct choices. While 73% of the
subjects always choose the same brand (or the “Will not buy” option), 63% make choices in at
least two different time periods.


5    Internal consistency of stated choices
In this section, we provide direct evidence for forward-looking consumer behavior and dynamic
adoption timing without resorting to a model that places more structure on consumer behavior.
Our survey design allows us to capture within-subject changes in the adoption time that directly
reveals whether subjects respond to price changes over time in a rational manner. Suppose a
subject is exposed to the price sequence P0 , . . . , PT in the base screen and chooses to adopt
the product in period t. In each subsequent task, exactly one of the T + 1 prices increases


                                               17
or decreases. If the subject is exposed to a price decrease or increase in period t, then we
classify the observation as exhibiting a current price increase or decrease. If the subject is
exposed to a price increase or decrease in any period s < t, then we classify the observation
as exhibiting a past price increase or decrease. We define future price increases or decreases
in the same manner. Suppose the subject’s indirect utility function is additively separable
across time periods, a standard assumption that we maintained throughout Sections 2 and 3,
and that the per-period utility function is decreasing in the product price. Rationality then
implies that the subject should not change her adoption choice if the current price decreases.
On the other hand, a current price increase is consistent with any choice, including a change
of the adoption time to another period or a switch to the “will not buy” option. If a past price
decreases, rationality implies that the subject either should not change her choice or should
adopt the product earlier, in period s < t. Conversely, if a future price decreases, the subject
either should not change her choice or should delay the adoption of the product to period s > t.
However, for both past and future price increases, the subject should not change her choice.
   These predictions only hold if the subject’s preferences do not vary across choice tasks, i.e.
if the random utility terms jt remain constant. Suppose these terms vary across tasks, for
example because the subject makes mistakes. If the mistakes are random, then the changes
in adoption times across periods should still be systematically related to the predictions of
rational behavior as discussed above.
   We first focus on survey 1, where the subjects can only substitute across time, but not across
products (although they can choose the outside option of not buying). Table 4 shows how the
subjects respond to current, past, and future price increases. Overall, 90% of all observations
are correctly classified, i.e. can be explained by rationality without having to resort to changes
in the error terms, jt , across tasks. For a past price decrease, 30% of the subjects buy the
product earlier than indicated in the base screen, while 7% buy the product later and 2% switch
to “no buy.” Conversely, for a past price increase, 5% buy earlier, 5% buy later, and 3% switch
to “no buy.” If there is a future price decrease, 42% of subjects delay their original purchase,
while 5% buy earlier and 1% switch to “no buy.” If there is a future price increase, on the
other hand, 16% buy later, while 4% buy earlier and 2% switch to “no buy.” Overall, with the
exception of future price increases, we see that the subjects mostly change their adoption times
in a manner that is consistent with the predictions of rational choice.
   In survey 2, where the subjects can substitute across brands and across time, we also find
the basic pattern of earlier adoption for past price decreases and later adoption for future
price decreases. However, compared to survey 1, a smaller fraction (84% of all observations)
is correctly classified. A possible reason for this difference is the higher complexity that the
subjects face when processing survey 2, which might lead to a higher incidence of mistaken
choices. In spite of this difference, subjects still mostly make choices that are consistent with
rationality.


                                               18
6     Estimation and results
Adoption model

The empirical model that we fit to the survey data is a special case of the general dynamic
discrete choice model outlined in Section 2. The state vector, xt = (Pt , Nt ), includes the
prices of all products considered, Pt , and the number of available movie titles, Nt . We present
the subjects with predictions of future prices and the number of available movie titles for the
periods t = 0, 1, . . . , T . The subjects either state that they will adopt product j in period
t ≤ T, a choice denoted by y = (j, t), or that they will not buy any product by period T , a
choice denoted by y = 0. The choice set is A = {(1, 0), (2, 0), . . . , (J − 1, T ), (J, T ), 0}.
    We specify the utility function as follows:

                                           uj (xt ) = γj + αPjt + ηt .

γj is the intercept for product j, which includes the consumer’s valuation of all tangible and
intangible product attributes. α is the marginal utility of income, and ηt is the utility derived
from watching some (or all) of the available movies from period t onwards:

                                                       ∞
                                                   1 X
                                           ηt =        ρ(k)(λNk ).
                                                  ρ(t)
                                                       k=t

The choice-specific value in the survey period, t = 0, from adopting product j in period t is
then given by
                                       ωjt (xt ) = ρ(t)(γj + αPjt + ηt ).                                       (9)

The total utility from choice (j, t) is ωjt (xt ) + jt , and the total utility from the choice of
the reference alternative 0 is defined analogously. By assumption, the consumers anticipate
all random utility components, jt , for the survey periods t ≤ T, and also the random utility
component for the outside option, 0 .
    Define θ ≡ (γ1 , . . . , γJ , α, λ, ρ(1), . . . , ρ(T )), a vector indicating the subject’s preferences.
The choice-specific values are a function of θ. The consumer adopts product j in period t if and
only if ωjt (xt ; θ) + jt ≥ ωks (xs ; θ) + ks for all (k, s) 6= (j, t) and ωjt (xt ; θ) + jt ≥ ω0 (xT ; θ) + 0 .
Assuming that the random utility terms are i.i.d. Type I Extreme Value distributed, consumer
choices are given by a multinomial logit model with T · J + 1 options, where the adoption
probability of product j in period t is given by

                                                            exp(ωjt (xt ))
                   Pr{y = (j, t)|x, θ} =                                              .                       (10)
                                             exp(ω0 (xT )) + Ts=0 Jk=1 exp(ωks (xs ))
                                                             P     P

    We allow for preference heterogeneity across subjects. The preferences of subject h are
described by a subject-specific parameter vector, θh . The corresponding choice probabilities


                                                        19
describing the behavior of subject h are given by Pr{y|x, θh }. We assume that the subject-level
parameters are drawn from a normal population distribution: θh ∼ N (θ̄, Vθ ). The priors on the
hyper-parameters, θ̄ and Vθ , are specified as follows:

                                   θ̄|Vθ ∼ N (0, a−1 Vθ ),
                                     Vθ ∼ Inverse-Wishart(ν, νI).

The parameter choices a = 1/16 and ν = dim(θ)+3 ensure proper but very diffuse prior settings.
We estimate the model using a hybrid MCMC approach with a customized Metropolis step as
discussed in Rossi, Allenby, and McCulloch (2005) (Chapter 5) and applied in Dubé, Hitsch,
and Rossi (2010).

Comparison models

We estimate the model specification above assuming geometric discounting, ρ(t) = δ t . This
model is the dynamic analog of the multinomial logit (MNL) model, and we refer to it as the
Dynamic MNL model. To assess the role of discounting, we also estimate several alternative
specifications that modify some of the assumptions of the baseline Dynamic MNL model.
   The Dynamic MNL model nests the case of consumer myopia as a special case: δh ≡ 0.
For the purposes of comparison, we separately estimate a model in which the subjects are fully
myopic and refer to it as the Current Adoption MNL model. In this model, the choice-specific
value from product adoption in the current period, t = 0, is given by

                                    ωj0 (x0 ) = γj + αPj0 + λN0 ,

and ωjt (xt ) = 0 for all t > 0.
   The second comparison model, the MNL model, is a standard multinomial logit model in
which the inter-temporal choice aspect of durable goods product adoption is absent. Thus,

                                     ωjt (xt ) = γj + αPjt + λNt

for all periods t = 0, . . . , T. This model is equivalent to the case where the consumer has a
discount factor of δ = 1 for all future adoption values and a separate discount factor of δ = 0
on the expected future utility from watching movies. This specification captures the typical
approach to conjoint modeling of durable goods adoption decisions used by marketing research
practitioners.
   We also estimate a third specification for comparison, the Dynamic MNL with Hyperbolic
Discounting model, to test whether consumers exhibit a preference for immediate rewards (see
Frederick, Loewenstein, and O’Donoghue 2002 for examples). Following a specification that
is widely used in the literature, we parametrize the discount function using the specification


                                                  20
of Phelps and Pollak (1968): ρ(0) = 1 and ρ(t) = βδ t for t > 0. The parameter β reflects
a “present-bias” or inherent preference for immediacy if β < 1, which is a priori plausible
for products such as consumer electronics. δ is the standard long-run discount factor. This
specification nests the baseline Dynamic MNL model with geometric discounting when β = 1.
   We initially estimate all four model specifications using the assumption that the value from
not adopting by period T is 0, ω0 (xT ) ≡ 0. Later, we conduct a sensitivity analysis to check
the robustness of our results to this assumption. We also restrict the parameters δ and β to
lie between 0 and 1. We impose this restriction by expressing the parameters using a logistic
transformation based on an unrestricted parameter. For example, we estimate δ̃ and express
the corresponding geometric discount factor as δ = exp(δ̃)/(1 + exp(δ̃)).

Estimation strategy

The results in Section 3 show that the discount and utility functions are non-parametrically
identified from the data generated by our sampling mechanism for the case of homogeneous
utility parameters.
   The extension of these identification results to the case of heterogeneous utility parameters
requires no additional assumptions beyond those typically used for the case of a standard,
static discrete choice model. Therefore, the conditions required to identify the heterogeneous
analog of our adoption model are the same as in the extant choice modeling literature. For
a long panel with a large number of observations per individual, we could estimate separate
utility functions for each individual. In practice, researchers typically do not have access to a
long panel and, instead, have to resort to pooling observations from different cross-sectional
units. Under pooling, each subject’s parameter vector, θh , is assumed to be drawn from a
population distribution, F (θ). Fox, Kim, Ryan, and Bajari (2012) provide conditions for the
non-parametric identification of F (θ) using a random coefficients logit model estimated with
purely cross-sectional data. Identification requires the assumptions that the random utility
terms are additive and Type I Extreme Value distributed, that utility has the form uj (x; θh ) =
g(xT θh ), and that the state variables are continuous. Other approaches exist to obtain non-
parametric identification of a discrete choice model with unobserved heterogeneity (see the
survey by Matzkin 2007 for some of the early work in this area, as well as Briesch, Chintagunta,
and Matzkin 2010). However, these approaches do not typically nest the random coefficients
logit specification that we estimate herein.

Results

For each of the two surveys, we compare results for the four model specifications: Dynamic
MNL, Current Adoption MNL, MNL, and Dynamic MNL with Hyperbolic Discounting. For
each model we report results for homogeneous preferences and heterogeneous preferences with


                                               21
normally distributed taste parameters. We report quantiles of the posterior distribution of the
population parameters to assess the parameter magnitudes and precisions. We use the Newton
and Raftery (1994) approach to compute the log marginal likelihood of each model. To address
potential overflow concerns, we also report the trimmed marginal likelihood, dropping the upper
and lower 2.5 percentile draws. Comparing log marginal likelihoods across models is equivalent
to computing a Bayes factor to assess relative posterior model fit (see Rossi, Allenby, and
McCulloch 2005).

Survey 1 In survey 1, we focus on a simple choice context where subjects choose if and when
to adopt a single Blu-ray player of medium or average quality. Our goal is to test whether
subjects are forward-looking and the extent to which they discount future consumption. To
keep the survey simple, we do not vary the number of Blu-ray movies across tasks (although the
number of movies as reported to the subjects varies across periods). Hence, we do not attempt
to estimate the value of watching movies. Instead, we estimate a period-specific intercept to
control for the effect of movie titles on choices. Below, in survey 2, we will explicitly consider
the effect of movie availability on adoption choices. Results for the four model specifications
are reported in Table 5. Note that we estimate the sign of the price coefficient, α, freely.
   Comparing the log marginal densities of the four models we see that controlling for between-
subject heterogeneity strongly increases the model fit. Hence, below we will only focus on the
estimates for heterogeneous preferences.
   The Dynamic MNL specification fits better than the two comparison models, Current Adop-
tion MNL and MNL, that do not account for dynamic adoption timing. This is of course con-
sistent with the model-free evidence for forward-looking adoption behavior presented in Section
5. Since the Dynamic MNL model nests the Current Adoption model, a comparison of the log
marginal likelihoods provides strong evidence against the restriction that consumers are my-
opic, δh ≡ 0. Besides improving the model fit, we also see substantive changes in the estimated
preferences if we allow for dynamic adoption timing. The Dynamic MNL model exhibits a
larger degree of heterogeneity, as can be seen by comparing the population standard deviations
of taste parameters across models. The Dynamic MNL model also generates a posterior distri-
bution on the price coefficient that is centered around a larger (more negative) value than the
benchmark MNL specification.
   The Dynamic MNL model has a slightly better fit (based on a comparison of the log marginal
densities) than the Dynamic MNL model with Hyperbolic Discounting, in spite of the fact
that the latter includes one additional free parameter. The distribution of β̃, the parameter
determining the “present-bias” β = exp(β̃)/(1 + exp(β̃)), is centered close to 1 as can be seen
in Figure 6. Therefore, the two models generate substantively similar behavioral predictions.
   Our results provide strong evidence that the consideration of inter-temporal trade-offs in
adoption timing plays an important role in consumer decision-making. In Figure 4 we report


                                               22
the distribution of the posterior means of the subjects’ discount factors. Researchers estimating
dynamic discrete choice problems routinely assume that consumers discount the future with
a common discount factor corresponding to some aggregate interest rate or asset return. For
annual decision-making, this assumption would imply a discount factor of approximately 0.95
if the interest rate is 5 percent. However, the estimates in Figure 4 show that the behavior
of the subjects in our survey is characterized by discount factors that are much smaller than
typically assumed. The average subject has a discount factor of roughly 0.7, corresponding to
an annual interest rate of 43%. Moreover, there is a large degree of heterogeneity in discounting
across subjects.

Survey 2 The data from survey 2 allow us to check if the findings regarding discounting and
forward-looking adoption behavior are robust to a more complex and possibly more realistic
environment. In survey 2 we add a choice between Blu-ray players of two leading brands, Sony
and Samsung, and we also vary the number of available movie titles across choice tasks. Results
for the four model specifications are reported in Table 6. Our basic findings are consistent with
those from survey 1. In particular, allowing for preference heterogeneity strongly improves the
model fit, and the Dynamic MNL model fits much better than the two comparison models that
do not allow for dynamic adoption timing.
   We see the importance of allowing for an unrestricted discount factor even more strongly
in survey 2. For the Current Adoption MNL and the MNL models the posterior distribution
of the coefficient on titles, λ, is centered well below zero, implying that the majority of the
subjects prefer fewer available movie titles. However, we obtain a positive sign on the titles
coefficient once we free up the discount factor parameter in the Dynamic MNL model. Also,
as in survey 1, we find that the Dynamic MNL model predicts more preference heterogeneity
and that the posterior distribution of the price coefficient is centered around a larger (more
negative) value than for the two models that do not allow for dynamic decision making.
   Unlike in survey 1, the Dynamic MNL model with Hyperbolic Discounting has a slightly
better fit than the Dynamic MNL model. Thus, the comparison of log marginal likelihoods
implies that we reject the parameter restriction βh ≡ 1. However, the differences in the estimates
for the two models are very small. In Figure 7, the distribution of the posterior means of the
present-bias parameters β has most of its mass close to 1.
   In Figure 5, we report the distribution of the posterior means of the subjects’ discount
factors. Exactly as in survey 1, the average subject has a discount factor of approximately
0.7, corresponding to an interest rate of 43%, and we observe considerable heterogeneity in
discounting across the subjects.




                                               23
Model fit for assumed discount factors

We already highlighted that researchers estimating dynamic discrete choice problems using field
data typically assume a homogenous value for the discount factor based on some aggregate
interest rate or asset return. We now show how the preference estimates change if a specific,
homogenous discount factor is assumed. We re-estimate the Dynamic MNL model for the
discount factors δ = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 0.9 and report the corresponding posterior model fit
of the baseline Dynamic MNL specification in Table 7. The discount factors of δ = 0.6 and
δ = 0.8 provide a much better model fit than δ = 0.9, even though the latter more closely
corresponds to a realistic long-run annual interest rate of about 11 percent. A discount factor
of δ = 0.6 corresponds to an annual interest rate of about 66 percent, indicating a considerable
degree of impatience. Generally the Dynamic MNL model fits considerably better than any
of the assumed, homogenous discount factor models. Although not reported, we also find
that restricting the discount factor to a fixed value results in an upward bias in the degree of
heterogeneity in the model parameters.

Some tentative managerial implications

In Table 8, we report the estimated correlation matrix for the population distribution of
the taste parameters. We observe a strong negative correlation between δ̃ (recall that δ =
exp(δ̃)/(1 + exp(δ̃))) and the price coefficient. Thus, higher patience (i.e. a larger discount
parameter) is associated with higher price sensitivity (i.e. a larger price coefficient in absolute
value). To a lesser extent, we also observe a negative correlation between the discount param-
eter and the titles coefficient, implying that subjects with a relatively low utility from titles
exhibit more patience. Both these correlations have interesting managerial implications. Sup-
pose a monopolist was selling a Blu-Ray player to this population of consumers. Coase argued
that skimming (inter-temporal price discrimination) would unravel if high willingness-to-pay
consumers could anticipate future price discounts and wait until the price discounts became
available. In the limit case where consumers were perfectly patient (δ = 1), even a monopo-
list selling a durable good would lose all market power. As demonstrated by Nair (2007), if
consumers are impatient (δ < 1) price skimming is possible. But prices and profits decrease
for larger values of δ. Our findings indicate that high willingness-to-pay consumers (i.e. those
with a low sensitivity to prices and a high valuation for the number of available titles) are also
the most impatient, which works even more strongly against the Coasean view. We could not
have obtained this insight from an analysis based on field data, as field data do not allow us
to distinguish between early adoption due to a high intrinsic utility from the product versus
impatience.




                                                24
Sensitivity analysis

Movie consumption after period T                   We use the study 2 data to explore the sensitivity of
the key results to the assumptions about consumer beliefs after the final period T in the survey.
The Dynamic MNL model assumes that Nt = NT for all t > T. Suppose we assume instead
that subjects only consider movie consumption utility up until T : ηt = Tk=t δ k−t (λNk ). The
                                                                       P

posterior fit of this specification is better than that of our Dynamic MNL. However, the two
specifications produce very similar parameter estimates. For instance, in Figure 8 we show that
the distribution of the discount factor is statistically indistinguishable from the Dynamic MNL
case. Therefore our findings do not appear to be sensitive to the assumption of consumers
obtaining utility from the availability of movies beyond the last survey period, T .

Delaying adoption after period T In the model specifications above we assume that the
value from choosing the reference alternative 0 is ω0 (xT ) ≡ 0 regardless of the value of the
state in the final survey period. This assumption would be justified if the subjects thought of
the reference alternative as the choice of never adopting the Blu-ray technology. We relax this
assumption to allow for the possibility that subjects treat the no-purchase alternative as an
option to delay adoption to some period later than T. For example, a consumer might want
to delay the adoption of a Blu-ray player if she expects that prices decline after period T. To
capture this option value we assume that the subjects anticipate that they will make sequential
adoption decisions beyond period T according to the dynamic discrete choice model outlined
in Section 2. We restrict the analysis to the case of geometric discounting. The choice-specific
values from adopting product j or delaying the adoption, vk (xt ), are then given by equation
(1). Thus, at time t = 0 the option value from delaying the adoption decision beyond period
T is given by
                                                   Z
                           T                T +1
                ω0 (xT ) = δ v0 (xT ) = δ                max {vk (x) + k }p()p(x|xT )ddx.
                                                       k∈{0,...,J}


p(xt+1 |xt ) denotes the subjects’ expectations about the evolution of the states beyond period
T.
     We estimate three specifications of the model with delayed adoption. In the first specifi-
cation, we assume that the subjects believe that prices remain fixed after period T, such that
Pt = PT for all t > T. In this specification, the benefit from delaying adoption is due to the
option to re-draw the latent utility components, kt , in each future period. In two additional
specifications, we assume that the subjects anticipate that prices decline until they reach a
long-run, constant price level ten periods after T. These two specifications differ in the rate at
which prices decline. We hold the number of available movie titles fixed at Nt = NT for all
t > T.
     In Table 9, we compare the log marginal likelihood of the baseline Dynamic MNL speci-

                                                          25
fication and the three models allowing for delayed adoption. The baseline specification has a
higher posterior fit, and the estimates for the comparison models are qualitatively similar to
the results for the baseline model. For example, in Figure 9 we display the distribution of the
discount factor, δ, for the baseline and comparison specifications. The marginal densities for
the comparison model discount factors are largely within the 90 percent pointwise posterior
credibility region that envelopes the marginal density of the discount factor corresponding to
the baseline model. Only the marginal density corresponding to the model with fast price de-
cline puts more mass on smaller discount factors. In summary, the main results do not appear
to be sensitive to the assumption on the value from choosing the reference alternative.


7    Conclusions
The main focus of this paper is methodological. We describe a sampling mechanism that can
be implemented as a conjoint design to capture stated choices across options within a period
and across time. Based on data obtained from this sampling mechanism, the subjects’ discount
and utility functions are separately identified. Thus, this sampling mechanism overcomes a
fundamental identification problem for dynamic discrete choice models when estimated from
field data.
    Our method is intended to be a practical approach for durable goods demand estimation
when consumers are forward-looking and consider the tradeoff between buying now or buying
at some future date. It should be of interest both to marketing researchers studying durable
goods adoption and marketing practitioners who use conjoint studies to plan the launch and
other marketing activities for a new durable good.
    We illustrate our approach using two conjoint studies eliciting dynamic adoption choices of
Blu-ray players. Both the raw data patterns and the model estimates reveal that the subjects
in our survey make forward-looking adoption choices. However, the implied discount rates
corresponding to the estimated discount factors are around 43 percent and, thus, are much
larger than typically observed asset returns. Therefore, calibrating discount factors based
on aggregate interest rates or asset returns, a common and, due to the identification problem,
necessary practice in empirical work estimating dynamic discrete choice models from field data,
may result in biased and misleading preference estimates. The stated choice data also reveal a
large degree of heterogeneity in the discount rates, again casting doubt on the assumption of
a common, homogenous discount factor that is typically used in empirical work based on field
data. We find little evidence for hyperbolic discounting.
    The results from the two studies are insufficient to make general statements about dis-
counting in other dynamic discrete choice contexts, including but not limited to durable goods
adoption decisions. At a minimum, however, our findings suggest that discount factors should
ideally be estimated, not assumed, and that empirical work using dynamic discrete choice


                                              26
models would benefit from combining field and survey data.
   Although this paper makes some progress on a fundamental question in marketing and
economics, many issues are left unresolved. First, using our survey design, we can estimate
current-period preferences and discount functions by “endowing” the subjects with deterministic
beliefs. That the subjects indeed take these beliefs as deterministically given is an assumption
that we have not tested. In practice, consumers have to form non-deterministic beliefs based on
available information. How consumers form such beliefs is a question of great importance that
is largely unresolved. Second, the analysis of our stated choice data is based on very specific
assumptions on the latent utility shocks that serve as the econometric error term. The same
is of course true for all discrete choice models. How the utility shocks in our survey relate
to the utility shocks that might influence subjects when making “real world” decisions is also
unresolved. Third, our survey is fairly complex to process, and this poses the question of how
the survey design influences the quality of the stated choice data. For example, we saw that
the incidence of stated choices that are difficult to rationalize was lower in the simpler survey
1 than in the more complex survey 2. All three issues are important topics for future research.




                                               27
References
Abbring, J. H. (2010): “Identification of Dynamic Discrete Choice Models,” Annual Review
  of Economics, 2, 367–394.

Arcidiacono, P., and P. Ellickson (2011): “Measuring long-run marketing effects and their
  implications for long-run marketing decisions,” Annual Review of Economics, 3, 363–394.

Bajari, P., V. Chernozhukov, H. Hong, and D. Nekipelov (2009): “Nonparametric and
  Semiparametric Analysis of a Dynamic Game Model,” manuscript.

Bass, F. M. (1969): “A New Product Growth Model for Consumer Durables,” Management
  Science, 15(5), 215–227.

Bass, F. M., K. Gordon, T. L. Ferguson, and M. L. Githens (2001): “DIRECTV:
  Forecasting Diffusion of a New Technology Prior to Product Launch,” Interfaces, 31, 82–93.

Briesch, R. A., P. Chintagunta, and R. Matzkin (2010): “Nonparametric Discrete Choice
  Models with Unobserved Heterogeneity,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 28(1),
  291–307.

Bronnenberg, B. J., J. P. Dubé, C. F. Mela, P. Albuquerque, T. Erdem, B. Gor-
  don, D. Hanssens, G. Hitsch, H. Hong, and B. Sun (2008): “Measuring long-run mar-
  keting effects and their implications for long-run marketing decisions,” Marketing Letters, 19,
  367–382.

Chevalier, J., and A. Goolsbee (2005): “Are Durable Goods Consumers Forward Looking?
  Evidence from College Textbooks,” NBER Working Paper 11421.

Chung, D. J., T. Steenburgh, and K. Sudhir (2011): “Do Bonuses Enhance Sales Produc-
  tivity? A Dynamic Structural Analysis of Bonus-Based Compensation Plans,” manuscript.

Cochrane, J. H. (2001): Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Dubé, J.-P., G. J. Hitsch, and P. E. Rossi (2010): “State Dependence and Alternative
  Explanations for Consumer Inertia,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 47 (6), 998–1010.

Fang, H., and Y. Wang (2012): “Estimating Dynamic Discrete Choice Models with Hyper-
  bolic Discounting, with an Application to Mammography Decisions,” Manuscript.

Fox, J., K. Kim, S. Ryan, and P. Bajari (2012): “The Random Coefficients Logit Model
  Is Identified,” Journal of Econometrics, 166(2), 204–212.

Frederick, S., G. Loewenstein, and T. O’Donoghue (2002): “Time Discounting and
  Time Preference: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2), 351–401.

                                               28
Green, P. E., A. M. Krieger, and Y. Wind (2001): “Thirty Years of Conjoint Analysis:
  Reflections and Prospects,” Interfaces, 31(3), S56–S73.

Green, P. E., and V. R. Rao (1971): “Conjoint Measurement for Quantifying Judgmental
  Data,” Journal of Marketing Research, 8(3), 355–363.

Green, P. E., and V. Srinivasan (1990): “Conjoint Analysis in Marketing: New Develop-
  ments with Implications for Research and Practice,” Journal of Marketing, 54(4), 3–19.

Horsky, D. (1990): “A Diffusion Model Incorporating Product Benefits, Price, Income and
  Information,” Marketing Science, 9(4), 342–365.

Hotz, V. J., and R. A. Miller (1993): “Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation
  of Dynamic Models,” Review of Economic Studies, 60(3), 497–529.

Huber, J. (1997): “What We Have Learned from 20 Years of Conjoint Research: When to
  Use Self-Explicated, Graded Pairs, Full Profiles or Choice Experiments,” Sawtooth Software
  Research Paper Series.

Magnac, T., and D. Thesmar (2002): “Identifying Dynamic Discrete Decision Processes,”
  Econometrica, 70(2), 801–816.

Matzkin, R. (2007): “Heterogeneous Choice,” Advances in Economics and Econometrics:
  Theory and Applications, Ninth World Congress, III, Ch. 4.

Melnikov, O. (2001): “Demand for Differentiated Durable Products: The Case of the U.S.
  Computer Printer Market,” manuscript.

Miller, R. (1984): “Job Matching and Occupational choice,” Journal of Political Economy,
  92, 1086–1120.

Nair, H. S. (2007): “Intertemporal Price Discrimination with Forward-Looking Consumers:
  Application to the US Market for Console Video-Games,” Quantitative Marketing and Eco-
  nomics, 5, 239–292.

Newton, M. A., and A. E. Raftery (1994): “Approximate Bayesian Inference with the
  Weighted Likelihood Bootstrap,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 56(1),
  3–48.

Norets, A., and S. Takahashi (2012): “On the Surjectivity of the Mapping Between Utilities
  and Choice Probabilities,” Manuscript.

Pakes, A. (1986): “Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European
  Patent Stocks,” Econometrica, 54(4), 755–784.


                                             29
Phelps, E. S., and R. A. Pollak (1968): “On Second-Best National Saving and Game-
  Equilibrium Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 35(2), 185–199.

Rossi, P., G. Allenby, and R. McCulloch (2005): Bayesian Statistics and Marketing.
  John Wiley & Sons.

Rust, J. (1987): “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of Harold
  Zurcher,” Econometrica, 55(5), 999–1033.

        (1994): “Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes,” in Handbook of Econo-
  metrics, ed. by R. F. Engle, and D. L. McFadden, vol. IV, pp. 3081–3143. Amsterdam, London
  and New York: Elsevier, North-Holland.

Song, I., and P. K. Chintagunta (2003): “A Micromodel of New Product Adoption with
  Heterogeneous and Forward-Looking Consumers: Application to the Digital Camera Cate-
  gory,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 1, 371–407.

Viscusi, W. K., J. Huber, and J. Bell (2008): “Estimating discount rates for environmental
  quality from utility-based choice experiments,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 37, 199–220.

Yao, S., C. F. Mela, J. Chiang, and Y. Chen (2012): “Determining Consumers’ Discount
  Rates With Field Studies,” manuscript.




                                              30
A     Survey description
In several introductory screens, we provide subjects information about the Blu-ray player and
the design of the study. The objective of these screens is to educate the subjects about Blu-ray
players and familiarize them with the survey design and the choice tasks they will encounter.
First, we show subjects differences in picture quality when using a Blu-ray player versus a tra-
ditional DVD. We then provide an in-depth description of the Blu-ray technology. Specifically,
we provide the subjects information on how the Blu-ray discs and players work, the leading
manufacturers of Blu-ray technology, and similarities between a Blu-ray disc and a traditional
DVD. Subjects are then shown the Blu-ray player they will have the option of choosing across
different choice tasks. In the first survey, the subjects are told that they have the option of
choosing a mid-high quality Blu-ray player, while in the second survey, they have a choice
between a medium quality player (Samsung) and a state of the art top quality Blu-ray player
(Sony).
    In the subsequent screens, we provide subjects details on how to respond to the choice tasks
and navigate the survey. We ask the subjects about their current Blu-ray player ownership
status and test their understanding of the price (and number of titles) path over time using
graphs from a typical choice task. Based on their responses, subjects are provided feedback
about the graphs and the choice tasks to make sure they understand the trade-offs involved
across different choices. Figures 1 and 3 show typical choice tasks in the first and second survey,
respectively. In each choice task, subjects are provided with the prices (and number of titles)
of the Blu-ray player(s) over four (six) periods. Subjects are told that the prices and number
of titles shown are expert predictions and they should expect to see these prices in the future.
Additionally, they are asked to ignore changes in prices due to inflation. Further details about
the variation in prices and number of titles available across different choice tasks is present in
Section 4.




                                                31
                                      Table 1: Survey 1 Description
                 Survey Overview
                   Price variation over time
                     Across subjects                                           Yes
                     Within subjects                                           Yes
                   Variation in no. of titles over time
                     Across subjects                                           No
                     Within subjects                                           Yes
                   Adoption decision                               Only inter-temporal choice
                   No. products (brands)                                        1
                   No. of survey time periods                                   4
                   Total no. of choices(*)                                      5
                 Survey Summary
                   No. subjects                                               1,000
                   No. blocks per subject                                       2
                   No. questions per block (including baseline)                 4
                   No. of price manipulations                                   3
                   No. of title manipulations                                   0
                   Total number of choices in data                            8,000
                 Distribution of Choices
                   Mar-09                                                      3%
                   Dec-09                                                      11%
                   Dec-10                                                      27%
                   Dec-11                                                      41%
                   Will not buy                                                19%
                 Modal Choices
                   Mar-09                                                      2%
                   Dec-09                                                      11%
                   Dec-10                                                      28%
                   Dec-11                                                      41%
                   Will not buy                                                18%
                 Number of distinct choices
                   1                                                          36.5%
                   2                                                          48.3%
                   3                                                          14.2%
                   4                                                          0.7%
                   5                                                          0.3%

Note. The table summarizes the prices and titles variation over time, both within and across subjects, in survey
1. Additionally, the table summarizes the survey data and reports the distribution of choices, modal choices
and the number of distinct choices made by subjects in survey 1.




                                                      32
                     Table 2: Survey 2 Description
Survey Overview
  Price variation over time
     Across subjects                                   Yes
     Within subjects                                   Yes
  Variation in no. of titles over time
     Across subjects                                    Yes
     Within subjects                                    Yes
  Adoption decision                       Inter-temporal and brand choice
  No. products (brands)                                  2
  No. of survey time periods                             6
  Total no. of choices(*)                                13
Survey Summary
  No. subjects                                         505
  No. blocks per subject                              2 or 3
  No. questions per block (including
                                                        6
baseline)
     No. of price manipulations                          3
     No. of title manipulations                          2
  Total number of choices in data                      6,576
Distribution of Choices                       Sony             Samsung
  Dec-08                                       3%                 2%
  Jun-08                                       4%                 5%
  Dec-09                                       6%                11%
  Dec-10                                       8%                15%
  Dec-11                                       5%                 9%
  Dec-12                                       5%                10%
  Will not buy                                         18%
Modal Choices                                 Sony             Samsung
  Dec-08                                       3%                 1%
  Jun-08                                       4%                 5%
  Dec-09                                       9%                11%
  Dec-10                                       8%                16%
  Dec-11                                       4%                 7%
  Dec-12                                       5%                 9%
  Will not buy                                         17%
Number of distinct choices
  1                                                   34.3%
  2                                                   32.5%
  3                                                   18.8%
  4                                                    6.9%
  5                                                    4.8%
  6                                                    1.6%
  7                                                    0.8%
  8                                                    0.2%
  9                                                    0.2%
Number of distinct brands chosen
  1                                                    73%
  2                                                    25%
  3                                                    2%




                                     33
               Number of distinct time periods chosen
                1                                                            36.8%
                2                                                            33.9%
                3                                                            19.6%
                4                                                             7.7%
                5                                                             1.2%
                6                                                             0.8%

Note. The table summarizes the prices and titles variation over time, both within and across subjects, in survey
2. Additionally, the table summarizes the survey data and reports the distribution of choices, modal choices,
number of distinct choices, and the number of distinct brands and time periods chosen by subjects in survey 2.




                                                      34
                                    Table 3: Survey Demographics
                                                          Survey 1         Survey 2
                     Number of respondents                  1000             505
                     % Males                                49%              62%
                     Interest in HD products?               77%              82%
                     Age Distribution
                       20-25                                 8%                7%
                       26-30                                 12%              13%
                       31-35                                 16%              16%
                       36-40                                 11%              11%
                       41-45                                 11%              11%
                       45+                                   43%              41%
                     Ethnicity
                       White/Caucasian                       87%              84%
                       African American                      5%                5%
                       Hispanic                              2%                4%
                       Asian                                 4%                5%
                       Other                                 2%                2%
                     Education Level
                       Less than high school                 1%                0%
                       High school                           28%              22%
                       College                               48%              50%
                       Graduate degree                       21%              24%
                       Other                                 2%                3%
                     Household Income
                       Less than $25,000                     9%               10%
                       $25,000 - $50,000                     28%              28%
                       $50,000 - $75,000                     23%              22%
                       $75,000 - $100,000                    17%              16%
                       $100,000 - $150,000                   9%               13%
                       More than $150,000                    5%                4%
                     Future Income Expectation
                       Decrease in near future               14%              13%
                       No change                             70%              68%
                       Increase in near future               16%              19%
                     Ownership
                       TV                                    92%              91%
                       Satellite/Cable TV                    78%              78%
                       DVD player                            95%              92%
                       Flat panel                            47%              41%
                       Other HD                              22%              23%
                       DVR                                   40%              37%

Note. The table reports the distributions of different demographics and ownership status of subjects for both
surveys.




                                                     35
                        Table 4: Direct Evidence of Forward-Looking Behavior
                                   Current       Current       Past            Past        Future     Future
                                    Price          Price       Price           Price        Price      Price
                                   Decrease      Increase     Decrease       Increase     Decrease   Increase
   Survey 1
   No. obs.                           398          483           960           954          332         311

   No change                         89%           18%          62%           87%           53%        78%
   Buy earlier                        7%           19%          30%            5%           5%          4%
   Buy later                          3%           36%           7%            5%           42%        16%
   Switch to no buy                   1%           28%           2%            3%           1%          2%
   Correctly classified              89%          100%          92%           87%           95%        78%
   Total correctly classified                                          90%
   Survey 2
   No. obs.                           84            44           583           432          40          43

   No change                         63%           34%          63%           69%           35%        58%
   Buy same product earlier           7%            5%          20%            8%           13%        2%
   Buy same product later            19%           48%           7%           14%           33%        33%
   Switch to other product           11%           11%           9%            7%           20%        7%
   Switch to no buy                   0%            2%           2%           3%             0%         0%
   Correctly classified              74%          100%          92%           75%           88%        65%
   Total correctly classified                                          84%

Note. The table provides model free evidence that consumers are forward looking by analyzing internal con-
sistency of choices. The top (bottom) panel reports results from survey 1 (2). For each block of questions,
the columns detail changes in past, current, or future prices (in subsequent choice tasks) relative to the time
of adoption in the base screen/choice task. The rows summarize deviation in choices in the subsequent tasks
relative to the choice made in the base choice task. For each survey, we report the number of observations
in each price scenario (column), distribution of choice deviation patterns by type of price variation, and the
percentage of correctly classified responses. The correctly classified responses are choices which can be explained
by rationality, without having to resort to changes in error terms, jt , across tasks.




                                                         36
                                Table 5: Survey 1: Model Estimates
                                Homogeneous Tastes                       Heterogeneous Tastes
                                                                   Pop. mean                Pop. SD
                          2.5%     50%    97.5%            2.5%       50%     97.5%    2.5%    50%     97.5%
 Dynamic MNL Model
 γ1                        6.58    7.05    7.53           32.67       38.82    43.23   14.83   20.00   22.72
 γ2                        6.27    6.65    7.00           31.81       39.47    44.55   16.62   21.42   23.94
 γ3                        5.80    6.08    6.34           32.78       40.88    45.66   15.86   21.16   23.70
 γ4                        4.48    4.68    4.88           26.94       34.29    38.97   10.95   14.54   17.07
 Price (α)                -3.14   -2.97   -2.81           -22.32     -19.96   -15.87   7.51    9.87    11.28
 Discount (δ̃)             4.51    9.58   22.86            0.97        1.15    1.64     0.94    1.06   1.27
 Log marginal likelihood        -10334.69                                       -4009.70
 Trimmed log m. l.              -10331.46                                       -3933.54
 Current Adoption Model
 γ1                       -2.20   -1.93   -1.65            -7.35      -5.62    -4.38    2.99    3.71   4.62
 Price (α)               -36.59 -22.08 -10.99             -113.22    -81.01   -39.37    3.93   10.58   29.16
 Log marginal likelihood        -12293.19                                       -11785.32
 Trimmed log m. l.              -12292.01                                       -11774.41
 MNL model
 γ1                        6.56    7.04    7.49           14.77       16.99   19.55    12.27   13.89   15.71
 γ2                        6.29    6.64    6.97           17.70       19.10   20.67    11.50   12.87   14.36
 γ3                        5.78    6.06    6.33           18.11       19.37   20.89     9.51   10.54   11.77
 γ4                        4.48    4.67    4.86           14.09       15.03   16.14     6.17    6.94   7.80
 Price (α)                -3.12   -2.97   -2.81           -9.75       -9.04   -8.38     4.46    5.06   5.76
 Log marginal likelihood        -10333.08                                       -4291.01
 Trimmed log m. l.              -10331.39                                       -4216.51
 Dynamic MNL with Hyperbolic Discounting
 γ1                        6.57    7.33    7.50           25.53       36.07    41.54   12.92   17.35   20.12
 γ2                        6.25    6.83    7.04           26.43       36.13    41.00   14.52   19.52   22.23
 γ3                        5.74    6.20    6.41           26.91       37.37    42.39   13.37   19.39   22.47
 γ4                        4.47    4.75    4.91           21.42       31.40    35.81    8.37   12.72   14.53
 Price (α)                -3.14   -3.06   -2.80           -20.65     -18.25   -13.02   6.12    8.92    10.19
 Present bias (β̃)         3.24    7.93   20.56            5.54        7.49    8.78     1.56    4.02   5.02
 Discount (δ̃)             4.39    7.89   14.18            1.02        1.31    2.19     0.90    1.04   1.52
 Log marginal likelihood        -10334.02                                       -4065.00
 Trimmed log m. l.              -10331.36                                       -3998.43

Note. The table summarizes the parameter estimates from different models estimated using the survey 1
data. We report estimates from both, the homogeneous and the heterogeneous models. For the homogeneous
model, we report estimates corresponding to the 95% confidence region along with the median estimate. For
the heterogeneous model, we report the same statistics for both, the mean and the standard deviation of the
distribution of population heterogeneity.




                                                     37
                                Table 6: Survey 2: Model Estimates
                                Homogeneous Tastes                      Heterogeneous Tastes
                                                                  Pop. mean               Pop. SD
                           2.5%   50%     97.5%          2.5%       50%      97.5%    2.5%     50%     97.5%
   Dynamic MNL Model
   γSony                   3.50   4.51     5.59          30.66      37.26     45.27   40.32    45.96   52.06
   γSamsung                2.77   3.60     4.47          26.24      31.85     38.40   34.78    39.55   44.61
   Price (α)               -2.43 -2.18     -1.93         -22.98     -20.26   -18.22 13.71      15.46   17.79
   Titles (λ)              0.12   0.18     0.25           1.10       1.30     1.52     1.05    1.24     1.46
   Discount (δ̃)           0.03   0.16     0.29           0.72       0.88     1.04     0.93    1.05     1.19
   Log marginal likelihood      -10443.79                                       -4109.48
   Trimmed log m. l.            -10441.87                                       -4049.63
   Current Adoption Model
   γSony                   0.80   2.08     3.37          -5.13      3.07     12.97    4.14     8.11    12.01
   γSamsung                0.40   1.38     2.40          -4.05      1.79      8.62    4.21     7.02    9.77
   Price (α)               -1.17 -0.84     -0.48         -6.39      -3.10    -0.87    1.61     2.68    4.17
   Titles (λ)              -1.11 -0.60     -0.11         -2.50      -1.23    0.27     0.86     1.60    2.46
   Log marginal likelihood      -10827.43                                      -10299.89
   Trimmed log m. l.            -10826.12                                      -10279.34
   MNL Model
   γSony                   4.57   4.92     5.24          29.09      32.88    37.66   19.58     22.25   25.70
   γSamsung                4.09   4.37     4.64          26.40      29.72    33.89   16.82     19.22   21.98
   Price (α)               -1.78 -1.67     -1.56         -11.46     -10.27   -9.23    6.47      7.43   8.48
   Titles (λ)              -0.17 -0.16     -0.15          -1.27      -1.13   -1.00    0.89      1.00   1.13
   Log marginal likelihood      -10372.45                                      -4385.77
   Trimmed log m. l.            -10370.30                                      -4350.95
   Dynamic MNL with Hyperbolic Discounting
   γSony                   3.67   4.56     5.42          26.26      34.97     43.37    43.56   53.60   61.60
   γSamsung                2.92   3.61     4.26          22.81      29.81     36.61    37.84   46.24   52.71
   Price (α)               -2.42 -2.18     -1.93         -23.36     -20.43   -17.97 14.54      17.19   19.59
   Titles (λ)              0.11   0.19     0.25           1.10       1.32     1.61      1.01   1.24     1.52
   Present bias (β̃)       4.05   11.03   24.90           5.39       7.02      9.84     3.61    4.80   7.23
   Discount (δ̃)           0.06   0.16     0.30           0.89       1.05     1.22      0.94   1.06     1.20
   Log marginal likelihood      -10444.61                                        -4022.80
   Trimmed log m. l.            -10441.77                                        -3995.47

Note. The table summarizes the parameter estimates from different models estimated using the survey 2
data. We report estimates from both, the homogeneous and the heterogeneous models. For the homogeneous
model, we report estimates corresponding to the 95% confidence region along with the median estimate. For
the heterogeneous model, we report the same statistics for both, the mean and the standard deviation of the
distribution of population heterogeneity.




                                                    38
          Table 7: Impact of an assumed discount factor on model fit (Dynamic MNL)
                                                         Log Marginal Likelihood
                                    Dynamic MNL                -4109.476
                                        δ=0                    -10292.95
                                       δ = 0.2                 -5170.171
                                       δ = 0.4                 -4348.224
                                       δ = 0.6                 -4234.535
                                       δ = 0.8                 -4270.569
                                       δ = 0.9                  -4309.22

Note. The table compares the log marginal likelihoods from the Dynamic MNL model with alternate specifica-
tions estimated assuming a fixed discount factor.




Table 8: Survey 2: Correlation Matrix for Population Distribution of Tastes (Dynamic MNL
Model)
                            γSony         γSamsung              Price (α)       Titles (λ)     Discount (δ̃)
      γSony                   1
                            (1,1)
      γSamsung               0.93               1
                          (0.9,0.95)         (1,1)
      Price (α)             -0.90            -0.92                   1
                        (-0.93,-0.86)    (-0.94,-0.88)             (1,1)
      Titles (λ)            -0.14            -0.23                 0.12              1
                         (-0.3,0.01)     (-0.38,-0.08)         (-0.02,0.29)        (1,1)
      Discount (δ̃)          0.15             0.23                 -0.40           -0.34             1
                        (-0.01,0.33)      (0.06,0.39)          (-0.54,-0.25)   (-0.49,-0.18)       (1,1)

Note. The table reports the correlation matrix (along with the 95% confidence region) for the population
distribution of preferences from survey 2.




                      Table 9: Posterior Fit of the Delayed Adoption Specifications
                      Models                                         Log Marginal Likelihood
                      Dynamic MNL                                           -4049.63
                      Delayed adoption and slow price decline               -4066.61
                      Delayed adoption and fast price decline               -4080.11
                      Delayed adoption and no price decline                 -4074.31

Note. The table compares the log marginal likelihoods from the Dynamic MNL model with alternate specifica-
tions which allow for delayed adoption and different rates of price decline.




                                                          39
                                Figure 1: Survey screen: Base scenario

Note. The figure shows a sample base choice task from survey 1. The screen lists the number of titles available
over time, provides a forecast of the Blu-ray player prices over time, and allows subjects to choose the time of
Blu-ray player adoption.




                                                      40
      Figure 2: Survey screen: Price decrease in December 2009 relative to base scenario

Note. The figure shows a subsequent sample choice task from survey 1. The subsequent choice tasks differ
relative to the base screen (shown in 1) in the variation in prices over time.




                                                       41
                                Figure 3: Base screen in second survey

Note. The figure shows a sample base choice task from survey 2. The screen provides a forecast of the Sony
and Samsung Blu-ray player prices over time, a forecast of the number of titles available over time, and allows
subjects to choose the time of adoption and brand of Blu-ray player.




                                                      42
                                               Posterior Means of Subjects’ Discount Factors




                                         150
                             Frequency

                                         100
                                         50
                                         0




                                                        0.4             0.6           0.8     1.0

                                                                    Discount Factor




Figure 4: Survey 1: Distribution of Subjects’ Posterior Means of the Discount Factor (Dynamic
MNL Model)

Note. The figure plots a histogram of the posterior means of the subjects’ discount factors estimated using
survey 1 data. The horizontal axis indicates the estimated discount factor and the vertical axis indicates the
frequency of subjects.


                                               Posterior Means of Subjects’ Discount Factors
                                         80
                                         60
                             Frequency

                                         40
                                         20
                                         0




                                                  0.2         0.4             0.6       0.8   1.0

                                                                    Discount Factor




Figure 5: Survey 2: Distribution of Subjects’ Posterior Means of the Discount Factor (Dynamic
MNL Model)

Note. The figure plots a histogram of the posterior means of the subjects’ discount factors estimated using
survey 2 data. The horizontal axis indicates the estimated discount factor and the vertical axis indicates the
frequency of subjects.


                                                                      43
                                                              Posterior Means of Subjects’ Discount Factors




                                            800
                                            600
                                Frequency

                                            400
                                            200
                                            0




                                                        0.4        0.5      0.6        0.7      0.8         0.9   1.0

                                                                              Discount Factor




Figure 6: Survey 1: Distribution of Subjects’ Posterior Means of the Hyperbolic Discount
Factor β

Note. The figure plots a histogram of the posterior means of the subjects’ hyperbolic discount factor estimated
using survey 1 data. The hyperbolic discount factor is a measure of present bias. The horizontal axis indicates
the estimated discount factor and the vertical axis indicates the frequency of subjects.



                                                              Posterior Means of Subjects’ Discount Factors
                                            250
                                            200
                                            150
                                Frequency

                                            100
                                            50
                                            0




                                                  0.2               0.4             0.6               0.8         1.0

                                                                              Discount Factor




Figure 7: Survey 2: Distribution of Subjects’ Posterior Means of the Hyperbolic Discount
Factor β

Note. The figure plots a histogram of the posterior means of the subjects’ hyperbolic discount factor estimated
using survey 2 data. The hyperbolic discount factor is a measure of present bias. The horizontal axis indicates
the estimated discount factor and the vertical axis indicates the frequency of subjects.



                                                                                  44
                                                                  Discount Factor

                                          Dynamic MNL
                                          Dynamic MNL with no utility from titles after period T




                              3.0
                              2.5
                              2.0
                              1.5
                              1.0
                              0.5
                              0.0




                                    0.0             0.2            0.4            0.6              0.8   1.0

                                                                    Discount Factor




                 Figure 8: Robustness of the Discount Factor to Value of Titles

Note. The figure displays the pointwise posterior mean and 90% credibility region of the marginal density of
the discount factor. The results are based on the Dynamic MNL model. For comparison purposes, we also show
the results from the Dynamic MNL model with no utility from titles after period T.


                                                                  Discount Factor


                                          Dynamic MNL model
                              3.0




                                          Dynamic MNL with delayed adoption and slow price decline
                                          Dynamic MNL with delayed adoption and fast price decline
                                          Dynamic MNL with delayed adoption and no price decline
                              2.5
                              2.0
                              1.5
                              1.0
                              0.5
                              0.0




                                    0.0             0.2            0.4            0.6              0.8   1.0

                                                                    Discount Factor




                Figure 9: Robustness of the Discount Factor to Delayed Adoption

Note. The figure displays the pointwise posterior mean and 90% credibility region of the marginal density of
the discount factor. The results are based on the Dynamic MNL model. For comparison purposes, we also show
results from Dynamic MNL models with delayed adoption and slow, fast and no price decline.


                                                                         45
