NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHALE GAS DEVELOPMENT AND PROPERTY VALUES:
DIFFERENCES ACROSS DRINKING WATER SOURCES
Lucija Muehlenbachs
Elisheba Spiller
Christopher Timmins
Working Paper 18390
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18390

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

We thank Kelly Bishop, Jessica Chu, Carolyn Kousky, Alan Krupnick, Corey Lang, Joshua Linn,
Lala Ma, Jan Mares, Ralph Mastromonaco, Stefan Staubli, Randy Walsh, and Jackie Willwerth. We
thank the Bureau of Topographic and Geologic Survey in the PA Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources for data on well completions. We gratefully acknowledge support from the Cynthia
and George Mitchell Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Lucija Muehlenbachs, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Shale Gas Development and Property Values: Differences across Drinking Water Sources
Lucija Muehlenbachs, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 18390
September 2012
JEL No. Q4,Q53
ABSTRACT
While shale gas development can result in rapid local economic development, negative externalities
associated with the process may adversely affect the prices of nearby homes. We utilize a triple-difference
estimator and exploit the public water service area boundary in Washington County, Pennsylvania
to identify the housing capitalization of groundwater risk, differentiating it from other externalities,
lease payments to homeowners, and local economic development. We find that proximity to wells
increases housing values, though risks to groundwater fully offset those gains. By itself, groundwater
risk reduces property values by up to 24 percent.

Lucija Muehlenbachs
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street NW
Washington DC
20036
muehlenbachs@rff.org
Elisheba Spiller
Resources for the Future
1616 P St NW
Washington DC
20036
spiller@rff.org

Christopher Timmins
Department of Economics
Duke University
209 Social Sciences Building
P.O. Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
christopher.timmins@duke.edu

1

Introduction

A recent increase in the extraction of natural gas and oil using unconventional
methods has transformed communities and landscapes. This paper focuses on
shale gas extraction in Pennsylvania, which has grown rapidly in recent years
thanks to developments in hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling. Natural
gas provides an attractive source of energy. When burned, it emits fewer pollutants (e.g., carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide
and particulate matter) than other fossil-fuel energy sources per unit of heat produced, and it comes from reliable domestic sources. The extraction of natural gas
from shale, that had hitherto been economically unrecoverable, has resulted in
greatly expanded supply and in many landowners receiving high resource rents
for the hydrocarbons beneath their land. There are, however, many potential
risks that accompany the drilling and hydraulic fracturing process. The processes required to develop and produce natural gas from shale rock use a great
deal of water and require the injection of chemicals deep into the ground at high
pressure. Compared with conventional natural gas development, this may result
in greater risk to air, water, and health. Important for housing markets and
local tax revenues, the environmental impact of shale gas development and the
perception of the risks associated with these processes, as well as increased truck
traffic or the visual burden of a well pad, could depress property values.1
The risks associated with leasing one’s land to gas exploration and production companies are especially important for homes that depend on groundwater
as a source of drinking water. One of the most often discussed risks associated with shale gas development is the potential for groundwater contamination.
Faulty well casings or cement could provide a pathway for contaminants to reach
a drinking water aquifer [SEAB, 2011, Osborn et al., 2011]. Another arises if
hydraulic fracturing occurs too close to a drinking water aquifer [EPA, 2011] or
if there are naturally occurring hydraulic pathways between the formation and
the drinking water aquifer [Warner et al., 2012, Myers, 2012]. Even if shale gas
operations do not contaminate groundwater in the short run, the possibility of future groundwater contamination may be capitalized negatively into the property
1
The potential for reduction of property values is important given the current housing crisis,
as, in severe cases, it could cause homeowners to fall “under water” in terms of mortgage
repayment, potentially increasing the risk of loan default and foreclosure.

2

value, resulting in important long-term consequences for the homeowner.
However, there is also evidence that natural gas development creates jobs
and generates income for local residents [Weber, 2011, Marchand, 2011]. Upon
signing their mineral rights to a gas company, landowners may receive two dollars
to thousands of dollars per acre as an upfront “bonus” payment, and then a 12.5
percent to 21 percent royalty per unit of gas extracted.2
Although it is likely that property values will be affected by shale gas well
proximity (both positively and negatively), there has been little research into how
the presence of a natural gas well affects property values overall.3 In this paper,
we use a triple-difference, or difference-in-difference-in-differences (DDD) estimator, applied to properties that border the public water service area (PWSA), to
measure the effect of groundwater water contamination concerns from shale gas
development. Understanding both the positive and negative impacts of shale
gas exploration can help the government make decisions (such as implementing
increased regulation to ensure groundwater integrity or extending the reach of
the PWSA) that could protect homeowners from the negative effects of shale gas
development while allowing for the benefits associated with increased local economic growth, lease payments, and a cleaner source of fossil-fuel energy. State
regulators are currently debating such rules and regulations. In this paper we estimate the differential effect of shale gas development on properties that depend
on groundwater and those that have access to piped water, giving us valuable
insights into the capitalization of groundwater contamination risk.4
The key to estimating the concern for groundwater contamination is controlling for correlated unobservables that may bias estimates (e.g., unattractive
attributes of properties and neighborhoods that may be correlated with exposure
to drilling activity, and beneficial factors like lease payments and increased economic development). Even in the best data sets, these factors may be hard to
measure, and can lead to omitted variables bias.
We take several steps to overcome this bias. The intuition proceeds as follows. First, we use property fixed effects, comparing changes in the price of a
2

Natural Gas Forum for Landowners: Natural Gas Lease Offer Tracker, Available on:
http://www.naturalgasforums.com/natgasSubs/naturalGasLeaseOfferTracker.php.
3
Two notable exceptions are Boxall et al. [2005], Klaiber and Gopalakrishnan [2012].
4
Even if groundwater in Pennsylvania had been contaminated prior to drilling [Swistock
et al., 1993], our estimation strategy deals with this concern by using information on sales of
the same property before and after drilling.

3

particular property over time, controlling non-parametrically for anything about
that property that remains the same. Next, we see how those price changes differ
depending upon whether the property is located in a treatment or control area,
defined according to well proximity. Finally, we observe how the differences in
the change in price across proximity-based treatment and control groups differ
depending upon water source (i.e., groundwater versus piped water). In addition
to controlling for any time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity at the level of the
property, our approach will also control for two sources of potential time-varying
unobservable heterogeneity—(i) anything common to our proximity-based treatment and control groups (e.g., lease payments); and (ii) anything within one of
those groups that is common to both groundwater and PWSA households (e.g.,
increased local economic activity). Furthermore, we also geographically restrict
some of the specifications in our analysis to the smallest available neighborhood
that will allow us to observe differences in water source: a 1000 meter buffer
drawn on both sides of the PWSA boundary. This reduces the burden on our
differencing strategy to control for time varying unobservables, as homes located
within a few blocks of each other presumably are affected similarly by these time
varying unobservables. Using this identification strategy along with data on property sales in Washington County, Pennsylvania, from 2004 to 2009, we find that
properties are positively affected by the drilling of a shale gas well unless the
property depends on groundwater.

2

Application of the Hedonic Model for NonMarket Valuation

In the hedonic model (formalized by Rosen [1974]), the price of a differentiated
product is a function of its attributes. In a market that offers a choice from
amongst a continuous array of attributes, the marginal rate of substitution between the attribute level and the numeraire good (i.e., the willingness to pay for
that attribute) is equal to the attribute’s implicit (hedonic) price. The slope of
the hedonic price function with respect to the attribute at the level of the attribute chosen by the individual is therefore equal to the individual’s marginal
willingness-to-pay for the attribute; thus, the hedonic price function is the envelope of the bid functions of all individuals in the market. This implies that
4

we can estimate the average willingness-to-pay for an attribute (i.e., exposure to
groundwater risk from hydraulic fracturing) by looking at how the price of the
product (i.e., housing) varies with that attribute.
A vast body of research has examined the housing price effects of locally undesirable land uses, such as hog operations [Palmquist et al., 1997], underground
storage tanks [Guignet, 2012], and power plants [Davis, 2011] to name a few.
These estimates are then used to measure the disamenity value of the land use
(or willingness-to-pay to avoid it). This paper similarly uses hedonic methods to
model the effect of proximity to a shale gas well on property values.5 In particular, we use variation in the market price of housing with respect to changes in the
proximity of shale gas operations to measure the implicit value of a shale well to
nearby home owners, depending upon water source. As such, it should be able
to pick-up the direct effect of environmental risks - in particular, risk of water
contamination and consequences of spills and other accidents - while differentiating those risks from other negative externalities (e.g., noise, lights, and increased
truck traffic) and the beneficial effects of increased economic activity and lease
payments. The latter is analogous to the effect of a wind turbine [Heintzelman
and Tuttle, 2012], where the undesirable land use is also accompanied by a payment to the property on which it is located. In this paper, we focus on the hedonic
impact of groundwater contamination risk on property values, as it is generally
considered to be one of the most significant risks from shale gas development.6
The academic literature describing the costs of proximity to oil and gas drilling
operations is small. See, for example, Boxall et al. [2005], which examines the
property value impacts of exposure to sour gas wells and flaring oil batteries in
Central Alberta, Canada. The authors find significant evidence of substantial
(i.e., 3-4 percent) reductions in property values associated with proximity to a
well. Klaiber and Gopalakrishnan [2012] also examine the effect of shale gas wells
in Washington County, using data from 2008 to 2010. They examine the temporal
dimension of capitalization due to exposure to wells, focusing on sales during a
5

Assuming that the housing supply is fixed in the short-run, any addition of a shale gas well
is assumed to be completely capitalized into price and not in the quantity of housing supplied.
Given that the advent of shale gas drilling is relatively recent, we would expect to still be
in the “short-run”. As more time passes, researchers will be able to study whether shale gas
development has had a discernable impact on new development.
6
Krupnick et al, “What the Experts Say About Shale Gas: There’s More Consensus Than
You Think,” RFF Discussion Paper, Forthcoming.

5

short window (e.g., 6 months) after well permitting and using school district fixed
effects to control for unobserved heterogeneity. Like Boxall et al. [2005], Klaiber
and Gopalakrishnan [2012] also find that wells have a small negative impact on
property values. We find evidence of much larger effects on property values a difference we ascribe to the rich set of controls for unobservables (both timeinvariant and time-varying) used in our DDD identification strategy described
above.
Because the hedonic price function is the envelope of individual bid functions,
it will depend upon the distributions of characteristics of both home buyers and
the housing stock. This means that if few of the neighborhoods in our sample are
affected by increased traffic and noise, then there will be a lower premium placed
on quiet neighborhood location. However, if shale development is widespread
and results in most neighborhoods being affected by heavy truck traffic, then the
houses located in the relatively few quiet neighborhoods would receive a high
premium. In the case of a widespread change in the distribution of a particular
attribute in the housing stock, it is possible that the entire hedonic price function might change, so that even the price of properties far from shale wells will
be affected. Furthermore, the hedonic price function is dependent on the distribution of tastes. If the mix of homebuyer attributes changes dramatically over
time, that could also lead to a shift in the hedonic price function. Bartik [1988]
shows that, if there is a discrete, non-marginal, change that affects a large area,
the hedonic price function may shift, which can hinder one’s ability to interpret
hedonic estimates as measures of willingness to pay. Rather, the estimates may
simply describe capitalization effects [Kuminoff and Pope, 2012]. This would be
a conservative interpretation of our results. Whereas a willingness to pay interpretation is useful for the cost-benefit analysis of alternative regulations and
standards that might be imposed on drillers, a focus on the capitalization effect
is relevant for policy if we are interested in whether shale gas wells increase the
risk of mortgage default. It is also important for local fiscal policy, as drilling
may have important implications for property tax revenues.

6

3

Background on Risks Associated with Shale
Gas Development

Shale gas extraction has become viable because of advances in hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling. Hydraulic fracturing is a process in which large
quantities of fracturing fluids (water, combined with chemical additives including friction reducers, surfactants, gelling agents, scale inhibitors, anti-bacterial
agents, and clay stabilizers and proppants) are injected at high pressure so as
to fracture and prop open the shale rock, allowing for the flow of natural gas
contained therein. The multiple risks associated with fracking (including the
contamination of groundwater) may have an impact on property values and are,
hence, relevant for mortgage lenders.7 Knowing the perceived costs associated
with these risks can also be of use to regulators considering different standards
for drilling operations.
First, development can cause contamination of local water supply resulting
from improper storage, treatment, and disposal of wastewater. Hydraulic fracturing also generates “flowback fluid” and produced water, the hydraulic fracturing
fluids and formation water that return to the surface, often containing salts,
metals, radionuclides, oil, grease, and VOC’s. These fluids might be recycled for
repeated use at considerable cost, treated at public or private waste water treatment facilities, or injected in deep underground injection wells. Mismanagement
of flowback fluid can result in contamination of nearby ground and surface water
supplies. Second, air pollution is a concern - escaped gases can include NOx
and VOC’s (which combine to produce ozone), other hazardous air pollutants
(HAP’s), methane and other greenhouse gases. Third, spills and other accidents
can occur - unexpected pockets of high pressure gas can lead to blowouts that
are accompanied by large releases of gas or polluted water, and improper wellcasings can allow contaminants to leak into nearby groundwater sources. Fourth,
there may also be a risk of contamination from drill cuttings and mud. These
substances are used to lubricate drill bits and to carry cuttings to the surface
and often contain diesel, mineral oils or other synthetic alternatives, heavy metals (e.g., barium) and acids. These materials can leach into nearby groundwater
7

For a risk matrix for shale gas development see:
http://www.rff.org/centers/energy_economics_and_policy/Pages/Shale-Matricies.aspx.

7

sources. Other negative externalities include noise, increased traffic, deterioration
of roads due to heavy truck traffic, minor earthquakes, and clearing of land to
drill wells, which can also affect property values by reducing the aesthetic appeal
of the region in general.

4

Method

Implementation of the hedonic method is complicated by the presence of property
and neighborhood attributes that are unobserved by the researcher but correlated
with the attribute of interest. The specifications we use in order to demonstrate
and address this problem include a simple cross-section, a property fixed effects regression, and a triple-difference (DDD) estimator that uses detailed geographical
information about well proximity and the placement of the piped water network
to define several overlapping treatment and control groups. We briefly review the
econometric theory behind each of these approaches below.

4.1

Cross-Sectional Estimates

The most naïve specification ignores any panel variation in the data and simply
estimates the effect of exposure to a shale gas well by comparing the prices of
properties in the vicinity of a well to those properties not exposed to a well.
Considering the set of all houses in the study area, we run the following regression
specification:
Pi = β0 + β1 W ELLDISTi + Xi0 δ + Y EARi0 γ + εi

(1)

where

Pi
W ELLDISTi
Xi
Y EARi

natural log of transaction price of property i
distance to nearest shale gas well at the time of transaction
vector of attributes of property i
vector of dummy variables indicating year property i is sold

In this specification, the effect of exposure to a well is measured by β1 .
The problem here is that W ELLDISTi is likely to be correlated with εi (i.e.,
8

properties and neighborhoods that are near wells are likely to be different from
those that are not near wells in unobservable ways that may also affect property
values). For example, houses located in close proximity to wells may be of lower
or better quality than those located elsewhere in the county. One way to check for
this possibility is by comparing observable attributes of properties and neighborhoods, both located near and far from shale gas wells. Significant differences in
observable attributes suggests a potential for differences in unobservables, which
could lead to bias in the estimation of Equation (1) (see Table 5 in the Appendix).
Therefore, it is important to control for these unobserved location attributes that
lead to the location decisions by gas exploration and production companies.
Utilizing pooled ordinary least squares (OLS) can also be problematic since
the error terms associated with homes sold multiple times will likely be correlated,
given that unobserved attributes of the home may not change much over time.
This creates correlation between the error terms, which violates the assumption
of i.i.d. error terms necessary for consistent estimation of the parameters. Using
property fixed effects allows us to control for these correlated unobservables by
specifically accounting for the correlation within homes sold more than once.

4.2

Property Fixed Effects

Properties that are near shale wells might differ systematically in unobservable
ways from those that are not near wells. If properties farther from wells are associated with more desirable unobserved characteristics, then this would create an
elevated baseline to which the properties near wells would be compared, inflating
the estimated negative effect of proximity to a well. Utilizing property-level fixed
effects allows us to difference away the unobservable attributes associated with a
particular property, or with the property’s location.
In our second specification, we exploit the variation in panel data to control
for time-invariant property attributes with property-level fixed effects. Suppose
Pit measures the natural log of the price of property i, which transacts in year t.
Xi is a vector of attributes of the property8 , and W ELLDISTit is the distance of
property i to the nearest well at the time of the transaction. µi is a time-invariant
attribute associated with the property that may or may not be observable by the
8

The property attributes do not change over time in our dataset, because the attributes of
the property in the final transaction are the only attributes that are recorded in the data.

9

researcher, and νit is a time-varying unobservable attribute associated with the
property. Importantly, µi may be correlated with W ELLDISTit in the following
equation:
Pi,t = β0 + β1 W ELLDISTit + Xi0 δ + µi + νit

(2)

We employ a fixed effects technique in order to remove µi from Equation 2:
0
g
P̃it = β1 W ELLDIST
it + X̃ i δ + ν̃it

(3)

g
where P̃it , W ELLDIST
it , X̃i , and ν̃it are mean differenced variables. Estimating
this specification controls for any permanent unobservable differences between
properties that have the shale well treatment and those that do not.

4.3

Difference-in-Difference-in-Differences (DDD)

While property-level fixed effects account for time-invariant unobserved property
and location attributes, they are not able to control for time-varying sources of
unobservable heterogeneity. This is a concern, as shale gas production could be
associated with a boom to the local economy and with valuable payments for
mineral rights at the property level, both of which can be hard to quantify, yet
may be correlated with well proximity. As Table 1 demonstrates, average distance
to the nearest well decreases over time as more wells are drilled. In fact, the
average distance to a well decreased by almost 50 percent over the time period.
If the economic boom associated with increased in-migration and employment
due to drilling activity increases property values over time, then this increased
capitalization will appear to be caused by closer proximity to shale gas wells. If
we do not take this underlying trend into account, then we will underestimate
the negative impact of the well. Failure to account for payments for mineral
rights can have a similar effect. This warrants going beyond a simple fixed effects
specification and conducting a quasi-experimental procedure that removes the
underlying time trends and better estimates the impact of proximity to shale gas
wells on property values. We employ a linear DDD technique, which is described
in more detail below. There, we define a pair of overlapping treatment and control
groups of properties by exploiting a property’s proximity to wells and whether or
not it is part of the public water service area (PWSA).
10

Table 1: Shale Gas Activity Over Time in Washington County, PA
Year No. Wells No. Permitted Dist. To Nearest Well (m) Dist. to Nearest Permit (m)
2005
5
9
11,952.9
11,952.9
2006
25
32
11,879.4
11,883.6
2007
80
116
9,370.8
7,806.5
2008
188
221
7,336.6
7,329.3
2009
188
268
6,326.3
6,323.6
Notes: Counts are of wellpads (there may be multiple wellbores on each wellpad).

4.3.1

Treatment Group Well Proximity

In order to identify the properties “treated” by exposure to groundwater contamination risk, we first exploit the fact that the effects of a well are localized, in that
many of the disamenities associated with development (such as noise and truck
traffic along with groundwater contamination) will not affect properties farther
from a well. At some distance far enough away from the well site, drilling may
not influence property values at all. This appears to be the case based on work
by Boxall et al. [2005] on sour gas wells in Alberta, Canada. In order to identify
the correct treatment distance from a well, we conduct an econometric test to see
at which point the well no longer impacts property values. The test we employ
follows the strategy of Linden and Rockoff [2008]. This method compares properties sold after a well has been drilled (within certain distances) to properties sold
prior to a well being drilled (within the same distance), and identifies at which
distance wells stop impacting property values. We then define our first treatment
group as properties having a well within this distance.

11

1
Log Price Residuals ($)
−1
0
−2
0

1000

2000
3000
Distance from Well (in meters)
Before Drilled

4000

5000

After Drilled

Bandwidth= 782 meters, N1 = 198, N2 = 704

Figure 1: Sales Price Gradient of From Local Polynomial Regressions on Distance
from Current/Future Well

In order to conduct the Linden and Rockoff [2008] test, we create a subsample
of properties that have, at some point in time (either before the property is sold or
after), only one well pad located within 5000 meters. We begin by estimating two
price gradients based on distance to a well: one for property sales that occurred
prior to a well being drilled and one for property sales after drilling began. The
distance at which the difference in these two price gradients becomes insignificant
is the distance at which we can define the first treatment group. Figure 1 shows
these price gradients estimated by local polynomial regressions. For properties
that are located more than 2000 meters from a well, the gradients are similar both
before and after the well is drilled. However properties located closer than 2000
meters to a well are sold for more on average after the well is drilled than before
the well is drilled, which would correspond to properties receiving, or expecting to
receive, lease payments.9 The solid line in the graph demonstrates that properties
sold prior to a well being drilled within 2000 meters receive lower sale prices the
closer they are to a well, implying that wells are being located in areas with
9

A horizontal well might extend over a mile (1609 meters) and therefore it is possible for a
property within 2000 meters of a well to be receiving payments.

12

negative unobservable attributes.10 Thus, we use a distance of 2000 meters from
a well to measure the treatment, where any property located farther than 2000
meters is assumed to not be affected by well drilling. Importantly, we expect
the effects of a boom to the local economy to be similar across that 2000 meter
threshold. This defines our first treatment-control group: treated homes are those
located within 2000 meters distance of a shale gas well, and the control homes
are those located outside this 2000 meters band. This allows us to control for the
unobserved time varying factors that are correlated with shale gas development
by looking at homes sold inside and outside of a 2000 meter boundary of shale
gas wells, as both these groups will likely be affected in similar ways by a regional
economic boom. Finally, given evidence that wells are located in less desirable
areas, we control for these unobserved area attributes with property fixed effects.
4.3.2

Private Water Wells vs. Piped Water

Much of the concern surrounding shale gas development arises from the risk of
groundwater contamination. Properties that utilize water wells may be affected if
the surface casing of a gas well cracks and methane or other contaminants migrate
into the groundwater [SEAB, 2011, Osborn et al., 2011] or if fractures connecting
the shale formation reach the aquifer [Warner et al., 2012, Myers, 2012]. Properties that receive drinking water from water service utilities, on the other hand,
do not face this risk.11 We hypothesize that this risk may be capitalized into the
value of the property; in particular, households using water wells may be more
adversely affected by proximity to shale gas wells relative to households relying
on piped water, and therefore would face a lower transaction value when “treated”
by proximity to a well. In order to capture this difference across properties, we
define an additional treatment group by designating properties depending upon
whether they rely on groundwater or piped water. Specifically, we use GIS data
on the location of the PWSA and map the properties into their respective groups.
10

Creating this figure after excluding properties that have permitted, but not drilled, wells
nearby excludes only 11 observations and results in a figure similar to Figure 1. This provides
further evidence that the upward sloping portion of the “before drilled” line reflects negative
unobservables correlated with proximity rather than expectations of future drilling.
11
While hydraulic fracturing may cause contamination of the publicly available water supply,
the city is tasked with providing clean water to its constituents, so the risk of receiving contaminated water through piped water lines is much lower than an unregulated well managed
by a homeowner.

13

This allows us to interact distance with a groundwater indicator in our estimation in order to find the different impact of proximity to wells for groundwater
versus piped water homes. Any differences between groundwater and piped water dependent properties that were present before the well is put in place are
accounted for at a very detailed level by property fixed effects. While properties within 2000 meters of a shale gas well are equally likely to receive benefits
from lease payments regardless of water source, those properties dependent upon
groundwater are more likely to capitalize the negative consequences of increased
contamination risk. This defines our second treatment-control group: by looking
at the difference across groundwater dependence (and within 2000 meters of a
shale gas well), we are essentially controlling for the unobserved lease payments
that are common to both these groups, while allowing the first treatment effect
(proximity to shale gas wells) to vary by drinking water source.
As a preliminary examination of whether and how groundwater and PWSA
homes differ in their impact from shale gas well proximity, we conduct a generalized propensity score (GPS) model, as detailed in Hirano and Imbens [2004]. GPS
allows the treatment of proximity to vary continuously, while regular matching
models assume a binary treatment. For this test, we thus define the treatment as
the distance to the nearest well, and estimate the impact on property values as
this distance is varied. We include as controls property characteristics and census
tract attributes.12 Figure 2 demonstrates the impact of proximity to shale gas
wells for the entire sample (including cities), and it appears that the treatment
effect of proximity varies substantially with water service. For properties in a
PWSA, being close to a shale gas well actually increases property values. This
implies that the local economic development and lease payments associated with
shale development can boost the housing market substantially, but only if the
property is protected in some way from the environmental impacts. However, for
properties without piped water, being closer to a shale gas well decreases property values. Thus, we find strong evidence of a contrasting impact across different
water service areas. Figure 2 also shows that the impact of proximity to shale
wells tapers off after approximately 6km, providing evidence that the impact of
12
Ideally, we would run the estimation on each year separately in order to eliminate the
time-varying issues that can bias the outcome from the fixed effects model. Unfortunately, our
sample size is not large enough to run it with each year separately, so we have to estimate the
dose response aggregated from 2006-2009. However, to control for the unobserved attributes
correlated with years, we include year dummies.

14

shale development are localized.

11.2

Groundwater Area (Full Sample)

11
10.6

10.8

E[log price]

11.4
11.2

10.4

10.8

11

E[log price]

11.6

11.8

Water Service Area (Full Sample)

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

Distance (m)
Dose Response

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

Distance (m)

95% Confidence

Dose Response

(a)

95% Confidence

(b)

Figure 2: Impact on Property Values from Proximity to the Nearest Shale Gas
Well

5

Data

Our main dataset is used under an agreement between the Duke University Department of Economics and Dataquick Information Services, a national real estate
data company. These property data include information on all properties sold in
Washington County, Pennsylvania from 2004 to 2009. The buyers’ and sellers’
names are provided, along with the transaction price, exact street address, square
footage, year built, lot size, number of rooms, number of bathrooms, number of
units in building, and many other characteristics. We begin with 41,266 observations in Washington County, PA, and remove observations that do not list a
transaction price, have a zero transaction price,13 do not have a latitude/longitude
coordinate, were sold prior to a “major improvement”,14 are described as only a
land sale (a transaction without a house), or claim to be a zero square footage
house. The final cleaned dataset has 19,055 observations. Summary statistics
13

Most observations are removed after deleting transactions with a price of zero (12,327
observations).
14
We delete sales prior to major improvements because Dataquick data only report property
characteristics at the time of the last recorded sale. If the property was altered between the
last sale and earlier sales, we would have no record of how it had changed. Nonetheless this
only removes 4 observations.

15

10000

comparing the full sample and final sample show that they are similar in all respects except the transaction price (Table 2) - that difference being attributable
to dropping observations with a zero price.
Table 2: Summary Statistics
Final Sample
Mean
Std. Dev.
Property Characteristics:
Transaction Price (Dollars)
127,233
Ground Water
0.09
Age
54.6
Total Living Area (1000 sqft)
1.8
No. Bathrooms
1.69
No. Bedrooms
2.73
Sold in Year Built
0.118
Lot Size (100,000 sqft)
0.244
Distance to Nearest MSA (km)
35.8
Census Tract Characteristics:
Mean Income
65,655
% Under 19 Years Old
23.9
% Black
3.78
% Hispanic
0.426
% Age 25 w/High School
39.2
% Age 25 w Bachelors
16.7
% Same House 1 Year
88.6
% Unemployed
6.19
% Poverty
7.63
% Public Assistance
2.21
% Over 65 Years Old
17.7
% Female Household Head
10
Shale Well Proximity:
Distance to Closest Well (m)
10,109
Distance to Closest Permit (not Drilled) (m) 10,239
Number of Wellpads Drilled within 2km
.0306
Observations
19,055
Notes: Transactions in Washington County, 2004-2009, of houses in
number of observations varies depending

Full Sample
Mean
Std. Dev.

135,002
0.286
39.7
0.877
1.01
1.12
0.322
0.766
7.04

103,462
0.1
52.6
1.79
1.66
2.65
0.0954
0.262
35.8

181,573
0.3
40
0.88
1.02
1.15
0.294
1.3
7.1

23,778
4.19
5.87
0.72
10.5
7.51
6.75
2.84
6.93
2.13
4.92
5.6

66,132
23.8
3.61
0.428
39.2
16.9
88.8
6.11
7.38
2.11
17.8
9.85

23,474
4.14
5.74
0.713
10.4
7.51
6.64
2.82
6.86
2.1
4.89
5.54

4,307
4,675
.489
26,236
sub-sample used, and all transactions. The

In order to control for neighborhood amenities, we match each property’s
location with census tract information, including demographics and other characteristics. The census tract data come from the American Community Survey,
which provides a tract-level moving average of observations recorded between the
years 2005 and 2009.
We also match geocoded property transactions data to our second main data
source - the location of wells in Washington County. We obtained data describing
the permitted wells located on the Marcellus shale from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. To determine whether the permit has been
drilled, we rely on two different datasets. A well is classified as drilled if there
was a “spud” date (i.e., date that drilling commenced) listed in the Pennsylvania
16

Figure 3: Well Pad with Multiple Wells

Department of Environmental Protection Spud Data or if there was a completion date listed in the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources Well
Information System (The Pennsylvania Internet Record Imaging System/Wells
Information System [PA*IRIS/WIS]). As there were many wells listed in one but
not both datasets, combining the two datasets provides us with a more complete
picture of drilling activity in this part of Pennsylvania. The final dataset includes
both vertical and horizontal wells, both of which produce similar disamenities,
including risks of groundwater contamination.15
Many of these wells are in very close proximity to one another, yet the data
do not identify whether these wells are on the same well pad. Well pads are areas
where multiple wells are placed close to each other, allowing the gas companies
to expand greatly the area of coverage while minimizing surface disturbance. As
current shale gas extraction in Pennsylvania typically involves horizontal drilling,
a well pad can include many wells in close proximity while maximizing access to
shale gas below the surface. Figure 3 demonstrates how six horizontal wells can
be placed on a small well pad, minimizing the footprint relative to vertical drilling
(which would require 24 wells evenly spaced apart, as indicated by the squares
in the figure).
Without identifying well pads, we might overstate the extent of drilling activity confronting a property. For example, a property near the well pad in Figure
2 would be identified as being treated by six wells, though presumably after the
first well has been drilled, the additional impact from each additional wellbore
would be less than the first. Thus, we create well pads using the distance between
15

Risk of improper well casing or cementing would be present in both vertical and horizontal
wells.

17

the wells, and treat each well pad as a single entity. In order to create well pads,
we choose all wellbores that are within one acre (a 63 meter distance) of another
wellbore and assign them to the same well pad.16 In our data, of the wellbores
that are within one acre of another wellbore, 50 percent are within 11 meters and
75 percent are within 20 meters. Any wellbore within one acre is considered to
be on the same well pad, so if more than two wellbores are included, our constructed well pads can cover an area larger than one acre. The average number
of wellbores per well pad is 3.7 (max of 12), where 25 percent of the well pads in
our data have only 1 well.
We begin by matching property transactions to all wells located within 20km
of the property, including permitted but not drilled wells, drilled wells, and prepermitted wells (i.e., wells that are permitted and drilled after the time of the
property transaction). Once these wells are matched, we create variables that
measure each house’s Euclidean distance to the closest well pad that is either
permitted or drilled at the time of the transaction, and variables describing the
well count within 2000 meters. These are our main variables of interest, as they
identify our “treatment”: how proximity to wells affects property values. We also
calculate the inverse of the distance to the nearest well and use this variable as
the treatment in the cross sectional and fixed effects specifications, allowing for
an easier interpretation of the results - an increase in inverse distance implies a
closer distance to a well, so a positive coefficient would imply a positive valuation
of proximity. Furthermore, utilizing inverse distance places more emphasis on
homes that are closer to wells; this is a reasonable functional form (relative to
a linearly decreasing function), given that the marginal disutility of disamenities
associated with drilling likely declines as one moves further from a well (i.e.,
visual aesthetic issues may not be present at 3-4 miles distance, though truck
traffic may still affect those farther away).
In order to capture the water contamination risks that home owners may face
from shale gas extraction, we utilize data on public water service areas in Washington County and identify properties that do not have access to public piped
drinking water. We obtained the GIS boundaries of the public water supplier’s
service area from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
16

During completion, a multi-well pad, access road, and infrastructure are estimated to encompass 7.4 acres in size, after completion and partial reclamation, a multi-well pad averages
4.5 acres in size [New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, 2011].

18

Properties located outside of a PWSA most likely utilize private water wells,
since the county does not provide much financial assistance to individuals who
wish to extend the piped water area to their location.17 This allows us to separate the analysis by water service area into PWSA and “groundwater” areas,
and we use this distinction to identify the water contamination risk that may
be capitalized into the transaction value. Figure 4 shows the map of Washington County, Pennsylvania, describing the locations of the permitted and drilled
(spudded) wells, property transactions, and the water service area. This map
describes all wells and transactions in the sample, so some of the wells shown
there were not present at the time of a nearby transaction. The large clustering
of transactions in the center part of the county corresponds to the two cities in
the county: Washington and Canonsburg. These cities fall along the major highway that cuts through the county (I-79, which connects with I-70 in Washington
City). We hypothesize that properties within these major cities may face significant changes due to the economic boom associated with shale gas development.
Thus, we exclude these cities in certain specifications in order to help isolate the
disamenity value associated with proximity to a well from the property value
benefits associated with the economic boom.

17

Personal communication with the Development Manager at the Washington County Planning Commission, April 24, 2012.

19

Figure 4: Property Sales in Washington County, 2004-2009. Includes Drilled
Wells, Permitted Wells, and Public Water Service Areas

20

6

Results

6.1

Cross-Sectional Results

We first report results for our cross-sectional specification, where we regress
logged transaction prices on regression controls for property and census tract
attributes, year dummies, and several treatment variables. These treatment variables include both inverse distance to the nearest drilled well and this variable
interacted with a dummy for groundwater (which equals one if the property is
located outside a PWSA). This allows us to separately identify the impact of
proximity to a well for households living in groundwater areas. We expect this
coefficient to be negative, as being closer to a well causes a greater risk to households living in groundwater areas. We also include inverse distance to the nearest
permitted well in order to identify whether there is a different impact from permitted wells relative to drilled wells. This variable is also interacted with a
groundwater dummy. We run the regression for the full sample as well as the
subsample excluding the cities.
We find a positive and significant impact of proximity to a drilled well, though
the interaction with groundwater is negative and insignificant. Inverse distance
to a permitted well interacted with groundwater is positive but insignificant. The
positive sign on the coefficient may be picking up the fact that proximity to a
permitted well implies a likely lease payment.18 In fact, these lease payments
increase with the amount of land leased, and lot sizes in groundwater areas are
much larger than in the PWSA areas. Thus, the groundwater-dependent properties may positively capitalize on the permitting of the well before the negative
amenities associated with drilling occur. However, given the insignificance of the
coefficient on the interaction of groundwater with proximity, it is difficult to draw
conclusions regarding the overall impact of proximity to wells for the groundwater
area homes.
Since inverse distance is not a linear function of proximity, we cannot interpret
18

Usually the mineral rights would be part of any property transfer, unless those rights were
severed from the title to the property by being retained by the seller during the transfer, or
sold to another party prior to the transfer. If mineral rights are sometimes severed, this would
simply reduce the size of the price premium we estimate on well proximity. This should not,
however, affect our estimates of the capitalization of groundwater contamination risk unless the
probability of mineral right severance is correlated with water source in the area around the
groundwater-PWSA boundary. We have no reason to suspect that this is the case.

21

the magnitude of these coefficients directly. Instead, we take the derivative of the
price with respect to distance (meters) in order to find the marginal effect of
proximity on price. Thus, the derivative of the price function is:
∂(lnp)/∂(distance) = −β/(distance2 )

(4)

where β is the coefficient and distance is in meters. For a PWSA property that
is 1000 meters away from a well pad, the percent change in price from a one
meter increase in distance is -0.03 percent (−100 ∗ 326.148 ∗ (1/10002 )), implying
positive impacts on property values from proximity to wells (Table 3, column
1). The comparable result for groundwater-dependent properties is inconclusive
given that the coefficient on the interaction term is insignificant. These results
likely reflect the fact that the cross-sectional specification does not account for
unobserved attributes of either the property or its location. These attributes may
be correlated with proximity to a well and with water source, which can cause a
bias in the cross-sectional coefficients. This leads us to employ a property fixed
effects approach in order to remove these unobservable location attributes.

6.2

Property Fixed Effect Results

The signs of the coefficients from the FE specification are similar but larger
and more significant than under the OLS specification.19 For the full sample
(including cities), we find a positive impact of drilled shale gas well proximity
on property values, though it is negative (and larger) for those households living
in groundwater areas. This implies that shale development causes an increase in
property values in general (perhaps due to lease payments, increased economic
activity, or higher rental prices), though properties that do not have access to
piped water have an overall negative impact due to shale gas development risks.
When we exclude the cities, this effect is even more pronounced: the size of the
coefficient on proximity to drilled wells decreases, suggesting that the effect of
increased economic development is concentrated in the cities. The results imply
that the marginal change in property values from moving one meter farther from
19

There are more observations in columns 2 and 4 relative to columns 1 and 3 because of
missing values for property characteristics-the fixed effects specification does not require these
variables to be complete for all homes, so we are able to make use of more observations in the
fixed effect regressions than in the OLS regressions.

22

Table 3: Cross Sectional and Property Fixed Effects Estimates of the Effect of
Shale Gas Wells on Log Sale Price
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
OLS
OLS
FE
FE
Inverse Distance to Well (meters−1 )
326.148*** 263.962** 1103.470**
764.502**
(121.106)
(125.322)
(447.170)
(363.109)
Inv. Dist. to Well*Groundwater
-290.933
-411.179
-1458.178*** -1351.901***
(207.612)
(250.482)
(420.039)
(370.750)
Inv. Dist. to Permitted (not Drilled) Well 21.767
-151.561
296.562
1470.929
(121.548)
(225.927)
(335.141)
(994.679)
Inv. Dist. to Permitted* Groundwater
193.943
605.057
-333.022
-1560.450
(228.639)
(406.166)
(516.627)
(1213.657)
Groundwater
-.108
-.098
(.069)
(.086)
Age
-.014***
-.012***
(.000)
(.001)
Total Living Area (1000 sqft)
.283***
.285***
(.019)
(.025)
No. Bathrooms
.070***
.057*
(.021)
(.030)
No. Bedrooms
-.014
-.026
(.018)
(.024)
Sold in Year Built
-.204***
-.365***
(.040)
(.067)
Lot Size (100,000 sqft)
.280***
.301***
(.057)
(.064)
Lot Size Squared (100,000 sqft)
-.025*
-.022**
(.013)
(.010)
Distance to Nearest MSA (km)
.011***
.003
(.002)
(.003)
Mean Income (1000 dlls)
.005***
.007***
(.001)
(.002)
% Unemployed
-.030***
-.034***
(.007)
(.010)
% Age 25 w/Bachelors
.027***
.026***
(.004)
(.006)
% Female Household Head
.006
.009
(.004)
(.007)
% Over 65 Years Old
.005*
.014**
(.003)
(.006)
% Black
-.007**
-.038***
(.003)
(.008)
% Hispanic
-.097***
-.076***
(.019)
(.030)
2006
-.072*
-.107*
.345
.325
(.039)
(.063)
(.207)
(.348)
2007
-.096**
-.076
.704***
.672**
(.040)
(.063)
(.197)
(.325)
2008
-.248***
-.259***
.854***
.859***
(.042)
(.065)
(.207)
(.321)
2009
-.493***
-.525***
1.394***
1.498***
(.059)
(.084)
(.265)
(.347)
n
10,833
5,847
10,960
5,945
Mean of Dep. Var.
11.09107
10.94342
11.07652
10.92134
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the census tract (102 census tracts). Columns (3) and (4) include property fixed effects. Columns (2) and (4) do not include the two largest cities in Washington County
(Washington and Canonsburg). *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

23

a well is -0.0764 percent for PWSA properties and 0.059 percent (0.076%-0.135%)
for groundwater-dependent properties (Table 3, column 4).20 This presents some
evidence that those living outside the PWSA, while attaining increased property
values from lease payments, are not able to offset the negative impacts associated
with groundwater risks.
According to Table 3, the relative effect of proximity to shale gas wells on
groundwater and PWSA homes is very different in the OLS and fixed effects
specifications. In the fixed effects specification, homes overall are more positively
affected by proximity, although the effect on groundwater homes is more negative. We test the difference between the coefficients on proximity and proximity
interacted with groundwater across the two specifications, and find that the interaction term changes significantly, although the proximity term alone does not.
This demonstrates that there is an unobservable correlated with proximity and
groundwater that is being picked up by the fixed effect approach. Specifically, the
change in coefficients suggests that shale gas wells are being located near homes
in groundwater areas that are unobservably better. There is indeed evidence
that these groundwater area homes are observably better and have larger lots
(See Table 5 for differences across homes located close to shale gas wells). Properties with larger lots - which tend to be located in groundwater areas - would
be preferred by gas exploration and production companies, as leasing the same
quantity of land would require fewer transactions and potentially lower costs per
well. Though we control for lot size in the OLS specification, lot size may be correlated with positive unobservable attributes in groundwater areas, which would
explain the shift in the interaction coefficient. However, as evidenced by Figure
1, there appear to be negative unobservables correlated with proximity in PWSA
homes, which could drive the increase in the proximity coefficient when moving
from OLS to fixed effects.21
Unfortunately, relying on fixed effects can be problematic given time varying
20

The t-statistic on the difference in these parameters is -1.73, implying a statistically significant net gain in property values from moving farther from the well.
21
In order to create this figure we only included homes with one wellpad within 5000 meters,
which excluded many of the groundwater dependent properties: the results from this figure
are driven mostly by PWSA homes for which, given the upward sloping solid line, it would
appear there are negative unobservables correlated with proximity. Creating a separate figure
for groundwater and PWSA properties would have too few observations in each distance bin to
be reliable. This does not affect our DDD estimation strategy, however, which relies on homes
being located near one or more wells within 2000 meters.

24

unobservables - e.g, the local economic boom and lease payments to individual
homeowners. This warrants our use of a triple-difference estimator to remove
these confounding effects.

6.3

Difference-in-Difference-in-Differences

Though we do not have information on gas lease payments to homeowners,22 we
assume that all properties (conditional upon proximity to a drilled well and other
observables such as lot size) have an equal likelihood of receiving lease payments
regardless of water service area.23 Moreover, while both may see their prices go
up because of mineral rights and increased economic activity, properties that rely
on groundwater may see their values increase by less (or even decrease) given
concerns of groundwater contamination from nearby shale gas development. Our
overlapping treatment and control groups based on well proximity and water
source provide us with a two-part quasi-experiment with which we can tease out
the negative impact of groundwater contamination from the positive impact of
the mineral lease payments and economic activity.
We estimate the following regression equation:
Log(price)it = N2000,it + Groundwateri ∗ N2000,it + θt + µi + νit

(5)

where N2000,it is a count of the number of well pads within 2000 meters at the
time t of sale. It equals zero if t is before drilling takes place, or if property i is
more than 2000 meters from the nearest well pad. In addition, Groundwater is
an indicator for whether property i relies on groundwater; θt is a year fixed effect
22

Mineral leases are filed at the county courthouse however not in an electronic format. Some
leases have been scanned and are available in pdf format at www.landex.com, however, this
service is geared towards viewing a handful of leases; downloading all leases in a county would
be expensive and matching the leases to properties via an address or tax parcel number would
likely be an imprecise endeavor.
23
It could be the case that, given groundwater safety concerns, individuals in groundwater
areas are less likely to sign a mineral lease, in which case we would overestimate the negative
impact of a well in a groundwater area if fewer groundwater dependent homes are receiving
lease payments. Our results would thus be interpreted as an upper bound on the negative
impact of proximity for groundwater dependent homes. However, gas exploration and production companies will only drill after obtaining the mineral rights to a sufficiently large area to
warrant drilling, implying that holdouts are the minority in areas where wells have been drilled.
Furthermore, property owners unwilling to sign based on groundwater contamination concerns
are likely rare; if others nearby have granted their mineral rights, groundwater contamination
is not prevented by not signing.

25

to capture trends over time; µi is a property fixed effect that absorbs the timeinvariant differences between properties that eventually have one or more wells
within 2000 meters and those that do not,24 as well as time-invariant differences
between groundwater and PWSA properties. The interaction Groundwateri ∗
N2000,it measures the treatment effect on groundwater homes relative to PWSA
homes, accounting for any time-varying unobservables that similarly affect close
and distant properties.
Finally, in order to reduce the burden on our differencing strategy to control
for time-varying unobserved neighborhood attributes, our main specification only
looks at properties located within 1000 meters of either side of the border of the
PWSA.25 This represents the smallest (and most homogenous) geographic area we
can use that still contains properties relying on groundwater along with properties
in the PWSA.
In order to validate our assumption of common time trends across the two
groups (PWSA and groundwater) and within the same neighborhood (1000 meters from the border), we regress transaction values on the property characteristics
and census tract attributes that are used in our cross-sectional specification, and
then calculate the residuals, separately for groundwater-dependent and PWSA
homes. We plot the residuals over time prior to any wells being drilled (the first
well in Washington County was drilled in June 2005), once for a restricted sample of homes located within 1000 meters of either side of the PWSA border, and
once for the entire sample of homes in Washington County. Figure 5 plots the
time trend across the full sample of the two groups, while Figure 6 restricts the
sample to homes located within 1000 meters of either side of the PWSA border.
Both figures track quite well across the two samples prior to any property being
treated by a well, although the restricted sample (which is our final DDD sample)
tracks more closely. This demonstrates that focusing on homes that are closer
together helps eliminate differing pre-trends across the control and treatment
group, thereby validating our DDD approach with the restricted sample.
24

While being located inside the PWSA or groundwater area may not be invariant over time,
we only have data on the most recent layout of the PWSA; thus our data on water service are
time invariant and we do not include a groundwater dummy in this specification.
25
We also include a specification with the entire sample in Washington County to test how
the assumption of common trends changes with a larger group.

26

Figure 5: Mean Residuals of Log Transaction Price using the Full Sample

Figure 6: Mean Residuals of Log Transaction Price using the properties located
1000 m from the PWSA Border

27

We provide additional evidence to validate our assumption that PWSA homes
within 1000 meters of the PWSA border are a good control for the groundwaterdependent homes near the other side of the border, by inspecting aerial maps of
the homes in this region. We find that, for nearly all of our sample, PWSA and
groundwater areas are not divided in such a way as might cause neighborhood
discontinuity (e.g., such as by a highway, railroad track, etc).26 This provides
further justification for use of homes on the PWSA side of the border as controls
for the groundwater-dependent homes in our DDD method.
We estimate our DDD specification using a number of different subsamples. In
our first two regressions, we use a subsample that omits properties that were sold
after they had permitted (but not yet drilled) wells within 2000 meters (columns
1 and 2 of Table 4). This subsample removes properties that may be receiving
lease or bonus payments from a gas exploration and development company due
to a permitted but not drilled well. The initial specification in column 1 looks at
all properties in both the PWSA and groundwater areas (instead of only those
located along the PWSA border), which allows us to test the importance of the
assumption of common time trends close to the border. In the second regression
(column 2) we restrict the sample to PWSA border homes. Since it is possible
that the PWSA has been extended beyond the border designated in our data, we
omit properties that are 300 meters on the groundwater side of a water service
area in order to reduce the risk of including misclassified properties. Our third
specification looks at all properties in Washington county, including the properties
with permitted (but undrilled) wells, but controls for these with an indicator for
having permitted wells nearby, as well as the interaction of this indicator with
Groundwater (column 3).27 . Finally, this third specification is also run using
only the PWSA border home properties (column 4). Thus, only columns 2 and
4 allow for the assumption of common time trends.
26

One exception is displayed in the Appendix (Figure 9), where highway I-70 coincides with
the PWSA boundary. Our results are robust to dropping homes located in this area.
27
Including properties treated by permitted wells increases the sample size by 128 observations for the full sample, and by 46 for the band around the PWSA border.

28

Table 4: DDD Estimates of the Effect of Shale Gas Wells on Log Sale Price by
Drinking Water Source

Wellpads Drilled within 2km
Wellpads Drilled within 2km*Groundwater

(1)
Full

(2)
Band

(3)
Full

(4)
Band

.288***
(.068)
-.901**
(.370)

.321***
(.082)
-.433***
(.117)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

.091*
(.053)
.011
(.106)
.177
(.119)
.002
(.123)
Yes
Yes

.107**
(.040)
-.236*
(.124)
-.036
(.088)
-.749
(.593)
Yes
Yes

Wellpads Permitted (not drilled) within 2km
Wellpads Permitted (not drilled) within 2km*Groundwater
Year Effects
Property Effects

n
17,779
3,229
17,907 3,275
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the census tract (102 census tracts). All specifications include
year-of-sale and property fixed effects. Columns (1) and (2) are specifications that omit properties with wells
permitted (but not drilled) within 2000 meters. Columns (3) and (4) include properties with wells permitted
within 2000 meters. Columns (2) and (4) only examine properties within a 1000 meter band around the water
service area. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.

Similar to the cross-sectional and FE results, we find that property values go
up after a well pad has been drilled within 2000 meters, while properties that rely
on groundwater are negatively affected by exposure. We find that permitted (but
not drilled) wells do not have a significant effect on property values in our final
specification, though controlling for these wells reduces the impacts (both positive
and negative) of the treatment on property values relative to column 2 (Table
4, column 4). Though insignificant, the parameter estimate on the interaction
term of permitted wells with the groundwater indicator is large and negative,
providing some evidence that permitting may be negatively capitalized into the
property value by groundwater homes. This could be due to the fact that the
new home buyer is aware of the forthcoming drilling activity due to incoming
lease payments or that construction has already begun to occur nearby.
The estimates in the final specification (column 4) demonstrate that properties in the PWSA positively capitalize proximity to a well pad by 10.7 percent,
and this result is statistically significant. This is most likely due to lease payments, which allow properties in the PWSA to increase their values while avoiding
the risks (or perceived risks) of contaminated groundwater. For properties that
depend on groundwater, however, the estimate of the effect of drilling a well pad

29

within 2000 meters implies a decrease in property values of 23.6 percent. The net
impact of these two effects is made up of a statistically significant reduction in
value of 23.6 percent attributable to groundwater contamination risk, partially
offset by the 10.7 percent increase (likely) attributable to lease payments. Their
difference (-12.9 percent) while not itself significant,28 suggests that, in contrast
to PWSA homes, prices of groundwater dependent properties certainly do not rise
as a result of nearby drilling, and may fall because of groundwater contamination
risk.
The final estimation also demonstrates the importance of controlling for the
fact that gas exploration and development companies have strategic location decisions. In the third specification, permitted wells significantly decrease values
for groundwater dependent homes, though this significance disappears when we
only look at homes near the PWSA border. Since gas wells near both sides of the
border are located in relatively similar areas, they are less likely to be located in
strategically different ways, and hence our final specification demonstrates that
not controlling for these location decisions can cause groundwater dependent
homes to appear more harmed by proximity to wells than they truly are.

7

Conclusion

Our study seeks to understand and quantify the positive and negative impacts of
shale gas development on nearby property values. Our goal is to distinguish who
benefits and who loses from this unconventional form of natural gas extraction.
Specifically, we focus on the potential for groundwater contamination, one of the
most high-profile risks associated with drilling. We demonstrate that those risks
lead to a large and significant reduction in property values. These reductions
offset any gains to the owners of groundwater-dependent properties from lease
payments or improved local economic conditions, and may even lead to a net
drop in prices. Unfortunately, due to limitations on lease payment data, we are
not able to disentangle the positive effects of nearby drilling on property values
from the effects of negative externalities that are not associated with groundwater risks (e.g., increased traffic; noise, air, and light pollution) - doing so is the
subject of ongoing research. With our triple-difference strategy, we are, however,
28

The t-statistic on the difference in these parameters is -1.03.

30

able to provide evidence that concern for groundwater contamination risk significantly decreases the value of nearby homes. Thus, being able to mitigate the
potential for water contamination from shale gas development (such as through
the extension of the piped water service area) allows properties to benefit from
the lease payments and increased economic activity that accompanies drilling
without having to bear the cost of the groundwater risks. This finding also provides added impetus for regulators to increase regulations to protect groundwater
around hydraulic fracturing sites and for industry to increase transparency and
voluntary action to reduce water contamination concerns.
To the extent that the net effect of drilling on groundwater-dependent properties might even be negative, we could see an increase in the likelihood of foreclosure in areas experiencing rapid growth of hydraulic fracturing. The U.S.
government acknowledged the possible negative consequences of allowing leasing
on mortgaged land in March 2012 when it began discussing a regulation requiring
an environmental review of any property with an oil and gas lease before issuing a
mortgage.29 However, this proposed regulation was rejected within a week.30 The
overall lack of research regarding the impacts on property values from proximity
to shale gas wells hinders the ability of the government to regulate optimally,
both at the national and local levels. This paper helps to fill that void.

29

“Mortgages for Drilling Properties May Face Hurdle,” New York Times, 18 March 2012.
“U.S. Rejects Environmental Reviews on Mortgages Linked to Drilling,” New York Times,
23 March 2012.
30

31

References
T.J. Bartik. Measuring the benefits of amenity improvements in hedonic price models.
Land Economics, 64(2):172–183, 1988.
P.C. Boxall, W.H. Chan, and M.L. McMillan. The impact of oil and natural gas facilities
on rural residential property values: a spatial hedonic analysis. Resource and Energy
Economics, 27(3):248–269, 2005.
L.W. Davis. The effect of power plants on local housing values and rents. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 93(4):1391–1402, 2011.
EPA. EPA Releases Draft Findings of Pavillion, Wyoming Ground Water Investigation
for Public Comment and Independent Scientific Review, Environmental Protection
Agency News Release . 2011. URL http://yosemite.epa.gov/opa/admpress.nsf/
0/EF35BD26A80D6CE3852579600065C94E.
D. Guignet. What do property values really tell us? a hedonic study of underground
storage tanks. NCEE Working Paper Series, 2012.
M.D. Heintzelman and C.M. Tuttle. Values in the Wind: A Hedonic Analysis of Wind
Power Facilities. Land Economics, 88(3):571–588, 2012.
K. Hirano and G.W. Imbens. The propensity score with continuous treatments. Applied
Bayesian Modeling and Causal Inference from Incomplete-Data Perspectives, pages
73–84, 2004.
H. Allen Klaiber and Sathya Gopalakrishnan. The Impact of Shale Exploration on
Housing Values in Pennsylvania, Working Paper. 2012.
Nicolai V. Kuminoff and Jaren Pope. Do “Capitalization Effects” for Public Goods
Reveal the Public’s Willingness to Pay? Working Paper. 2012.
L. Linden and J.E. Rockoff. Estimates of the impact of crime risk on property values
from megan’s laws. The American Economic Review, 98(3):1103–1127, 2008.
J. Marchand. Local labor market impacts of energy boom-bust-boom in western canada.
Journal of Urban Economics, 2011.
T. Myers. Potential contaminant pathways from hydraulically fractured shale to
aquifers. Ground Water, 2012.
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. Revised Draft Supplemental Generic Environmental Impact Statement On The Oil, Gas and Solution Mining
Regulatory Program, Well Permit Issuance for Horizontal Drilling and High-Volume
Hydraulic Fracturing to Develop the Marcellus Shale and Other Low-Permeability
Gas Reservoirs. 2011. URL http://www.dec.ny.gov/docs/materials_minerals_
pdf/rdsgeisexecsum0911.pdf.

32

Stephen G. Osborn, Avner Vengosh, Nathaniel R. Warner, and Robert B. Jackson.
Methane contamination of drinking water accompanying gas-well drilling and hydraulic fracturing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(20):8172–
8176, 2011.
RB Palmquist, FM Roka, and T. Vukina. Hog operations, environmental effects, and
residential property values. Land Economics, 73(1):114–124, 1997.
S. Rosen. Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation in pure competition. The Journal of Political Economy, 82(1):34–55, 1974.
SEAB. Shale Gas Production Subcommittee Second Ninety Day Report, Secretary of
Energy Advisory Board,U.S. Department of Energy. November 2011.
B.R. Swistock, W.E. Sharpe, and P.D. Robillard. A survey of lead, nitrate and radon
contamination of private individual water systems in Pennsylvania. Journal of Environmental Health, 55(5):6–12, 1993.
N.R. Warner, R.B. Jackson, T.H. Darrah, S.G. Osborn, A. Down, K. Zhao, A. White,
and A. Vengosh. Geochemical evidence for possible natural migration of Marcellus
formation brine to shallow aquifers in Pennsylvania. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 109(30):11961–11966, 2012.
J.G. Weber. The effects of a natural gas boom on employment and income in Colorado,
Texas, and Wyoming. Energy Economics, 2011.

33

A

Appendix

Table 5: Means (and Standard Deviations) of Property Characteristics by Distance to Nearest Current or Future Well
<2 km
2-4 km
4-6 km
120,108
112,262
104,810
(107,633) (103,219) (116,334)
Age
54.58
54.65
57.62
(39.19)
(40.3)
(40.01)
Total Living Area (1000 sqft)
1.896
1.747
1.642
(1.004)
(.8265)
(.679)
No. Bathrooms
1.612
1.48
1.482
(.9343)
(.9562)
(.9373)
No. Bedrooms
2.699
2.52
2.452
(1.067)
(1.21)
(1.164)
Sold in Year Built
.06311
.1222
.1013
(.2437)
(.3278)
(.3019)
Lot Size (100,000 sqft)
.4076
.2238
.2209
(.5176)
(.3906)
(.4955)
Distance to Nearest MSA (km) 34.81
34.99
35.74
(5.76)
(6.184)
(7.013)
Mean Income
68,851
59,431
59,431
(11,678)
(12,038)
(12,749)
% Under 19 Years Old
24.67
23.66
23.01
(4.066)
(4.523)
(3.095)
% Black
1.846
4.277
3.393
(3.082)
(4.529)
(3.62)
% Hispanic
.6519
.681
.2979
(.9262)
(1.026)
(.4401)
% Age 25 w/High School
43.52
43
41.26
(4.766)
(5.573)
(7.712)
% Age 25 w Bachelors
13.98
14.03
14.98
(3.421)
(3.838)
(5.9)
% Same House 1 Year
89.99
88.81
87.99
(3.055)
(3.96)
(4.838)
% Unemployed
6.243
7.028
5.979
(1.648)
(2.269)
(2.46)
% Poverty
4.764
6.286
7.019
(3.366)
(4.513)
(4.633)
% Public Assistance
1.991
1.962
2.126
(1.025)
(1.574)
(1.763)
% Over 65 Years Old
17.3
18.13
18.08
(3.711)
(4.46)
(4.674)
% Female Household Head
9.577
11.62
10.59
(3.349)
(4.727)
(4.205)
Ground Water
.4396
.1639
.09304
(.4975)
(.3704)
(.2906)
Observations
207
775
1623
Notes: Summary statistics based on the distance to the closest well drilled at time of
the future.
Transaction Price (Dollars)

34

6-8 km
104,300
(97,693)
58.66
(40.17)
1.682
(.7133)
1.521
(.931)
2.577
(1.151)
.1162
(.3206)
.1864
(.3763)
37.77
(5.631)
58,681
(16,620)
23.67
(4.566)
5.518
(7.88)
.4773
(.7651)
41.82
(7.977)
14.83
(6.393)
87.02
(7.504)
6.859
(3.09)
8.53
(7.882)
2.526
(2.576)
17.67
(5.233)
12.19
(5.438)
.06808
(.2519)
2130
sale or at some time in

Figure 7: Property Sales and permitted and drilled wells in Washington County,
2004-2009. Indicates 1000 meter band inside and outside of Public Water Service
Areas.

35

Figure 8: Example of no artificial boundaries: Close-up of Washington City.

36

Figure 9: One exception where a highway coincides with the PWSA boundary;
Our results are robust to dropping this area.

37

