                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   BUBBLES, FINANCIAL CRISES, AND SYSTEMIC RISK

                                      Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                         Martin Oehmke

                                        Working Paper 18398
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18398


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




This chapter was written for the Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Volume 2. We are grateful
to Patrick Cheridito, Thomas Eisenbach, Stephen Morris, Delwin Olivan, René Stulz, Dimitri Vayanos,
and Eugene White for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this chapter. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18398.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Markus K. Brunnermeier and Martin Oehmke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Bubbles, Financial Crises, and Systemic Risk
Markus K. Brunnermeier and Martin Oehmke
NBER Working Paper No. 18398
September 2012
JEL No. G00,G01,G20

                                              ABSTRACT

This chapter surveys the literature on bubbles, financial crises, and systemic risk. The first part of the
chapter provides a brief historical account of bubbles and financial crisis. The second part of the chapter
gives a structured overview of the literature on financial bubbles. The third part of the chapter discusses
the literatures on financial crises and systemic risk, with particular emphasis on amplification and
propagation mechanisms during financial crises, and the measurement of systemic risk. Finally, we
point toward some questions for future research.


Markus K. Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Finance and Public Policy
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
markus@princeton.edu

Martin Oehmke
Finance and Economics Division
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 420
New York, NY 10027
moehmke@columbia.edu
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                                         3

2 A Brief Historical Overview of Bubbles and Crises                                                                    7

3 Bubbles                                                                                                             12
  3.1 Rational Bubbles without Frictions . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   14
  3.2 OLG Frictions and Market Incompleteness         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
  3.3 Informational Frictions . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19
  3.4 Delegated Investment and Credit Bubbles         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   22
  3.5 Heterogeneous-Beliefs Bubbles . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   24
  3.6 Empirical Evidence on Bubbles . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   27
  3.7 Experimental Evidence on Bubbles . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   28

4 Crises                                                                                                              30
  4.1 Counterparty/Bank Runs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  . . . . . . . . .                   .   .   32
      4.1.1 Bank Runs as a Sunspot Phenomenon . . .                       . . . . . . . . .                   .   .   34
      4.1.2 Information-induced Bank Runs . . . . . . .                   . . . . . . . . .                   .   .   35
  4.2 Collateral/Margin Runs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                . . . . . . . . .                   .   .   40
      4.2.1 Loss Spiral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             . . . . . . . . .                   .   .   41
      4.2.2 Margin/Haircut or Leverage Spiral . . . . .                   . . . . . . . . .                   .   .   44
      4.2.3 Contagion and Flight to Safety . . . . . . .                  . . . . . . . . .                   .   .   48
  4.3 Lenders’ or Borrowers’ Friction? . . . . . . . . . . .              . . . . . . . . .                   .   .   49
  4.4 Network Externalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             . . . . . . . . .                   .   .   52
  4.5 Feedback Effects between Financial Sector Risk and                  Sovereign Risk                      .   .   57

5 Measuring Systemic Risk                                                                                             60
  5.1 Systemic Risk Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   60
  5.2 Data Collection and Macro Modeling . . . . . . .                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   63
  5.3 Challenges in Estimating Systemic Risk Measures                 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   65
  5.4 Some Specific Measures of Systemic Risk . . . . .               .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   67

6 Conclusion                                                                                                          71




                                          2
1     Introduction
Bubbles, crashes, and financial crises have been recurring phenomena in financial mar-
kets from their early days up to the modern age. This chapter surveys and links the
literature on bubbles, financial crises, and systemic risk. The overarching structure of
this chapter arises from distinguishing two phases that play a role in almost all financial
crises: (i) a run-up phase, in which bubbles and imbalances form, and (ii) a crisis phase,
during which risk that has built up in the background materializes and the crisis erupts.
To illuminate the run-up phase, our survey draws on the large literature on bubbles and
asset price booms. To understand the crisis phase, we draw on models of amplification
mechanisms that occur after a bubble bursts. Finally, we stress that the run-up and
crisis phase cannot be seen in isolation—they are two sides of the same coin. This has
important implications for the emerging literature on measuring systemic risk.
    Section 2 provides a brief historical account of bubbles and financial crises. While
the discussion is kept brief, we point the reader to further sources on the historical
episodes we discuss.
    During the run-up phase, discussed in Section 3, asset price bubbles and imbal-
ances form. Most of the time, these imbalances build up slowly in the background
and volatility is low. Initially, the imbalances that ultimately lead to a financial crisis
are often hard to detect. For example, at first a boom in asset prices can often be
rationalized by appealing to some form of innovation. This innovation could be tech-
nological change (e.g., railroads, telegraphs, the internet), financial liberalization (e.g.,
the removal of Regulation Q), or financial innovation (e.g., securitization). However,
as the bubble gains momentum, it ultimately becomes clear that the fundamental im-
provements that may have warranted an initial increase in asset prices cannot keep up
with ever-increasing valuations. A bubble has formed.
    The run-up phase often causes incentive distortions for agents in the economy. These
incentive distortions can either be the consequence of rational behavior, or may be
caused by behavioral belief distortions. Rational distortions occur when agents in the
economy rationally respond to the incentives they face during the run-up phase. These
include, for example, moral hazard problems that arise from expected bailouts or poli-
cies like the “Greenspan put.” They also include over-leveraging or over-investment
that result from potential fire-sale externalities. Such externalities can arise when in-
dividual households or firms take potential drops in asset prices as given when making
their investment decision, not internalizing that it is their joint investment decision that


                                             3
determines the size of the crash.
    Belief distortions occur because often there are insufficient data to establish that a
bubble is forming. For example, if there has never been a nationwide decline in nominal
house prices, agents may extrapolate that house prices will also not decline in the
future (extrapolative expectations). Market participants are especially prone to such
extrapolative expectations if there is a lack of data. Alternatively, belief distortions
may be based on the “this-time-is-different” rationale. While the asset price boom
observed may be out of line with historical data, agents may choose to ignore this by
arguing that something fundamental is different this time around, such that cautionary
signals from history do not apply.
    The ideal breeding ground for the run-up phase is an environment of low volatility.
Usually, during such times, financing is easy to come by. Speculators can lever up,
lowering the return differential between risky and less risky securities. The resulting
leverage and maturity mismatch may be excessive because each individual speculator
does not internalize the externalities he causes on the financial system. For example,
when levering up with short-term debt, each speculator only takes into account that
he might not be able to roll over his debt and might be forced to sell off assets at
fire-sale prices. However, the same investor does not take into account that his selling
will depress prices, potentially forcing others to sell as well, exacerbating the fire sale.
Put differently, financial stability is a public good. Because everyone profits from it,
individual traders may have insufficient incentives to contribute to it.
    In Section 4 we turn to the crisis phase, which starts when, after the gradual buildup
of a bubble and the associated imbalances, a trigger event leads to the bursting of the
bubble. This sudden transition has sometimes been referred to as a “Minsky moment.”
The Minsky moment can occur long after most market participants are aware, or at least
suspicious, that a bubble has built up in the background. Overall, the main problem is
not the price correction per se, but the fact that the necessary correction often occurs
only very late, at which point risk and large imbalances have built up. The trigger event
that catalyzes the crisis does not have to be an event of major economic significance
when seen by itself. For example, the subprime mortgage market that triggered the
recent financial crisis made up only about 4% of the overall mortgage market. However,
because of amplification effects, even small trigger events can lead to major financial
crises and recessions.
    During the crisis phase, amplification mechanisms play a major role. These ampli-
fication mechanisms both increase the magnitude of the correction in the part of the

                                             4
economy that was affected by a bubble and spread the effects to other parts of the econ-
omy. Amplification mechanisms that arise during financial crises can either be direct
(caused by direct contractual links) or indirect (caused by spillovers or externalities
that are due to common exposures or the endogenous response of various market par-
ticipants). A good example of direct spillover effects are bank runs of different forms,
such as classic depositor runs or their modern reincarnation as counterparty runs. As
a crisis erupts, bank depositors and other short-term creditors to financial institutions
may decide to take out their funding, thus amplifying the crisis. Another example of
direct spillovers are so-called domino effects. For example, the failure of one bank may
affect another bank that is a creditor to the failed institution. Thus, domino effects
are closely related to interconnectedness within a network of institutions. Then there
are indirect spillovers that, rather than through direct contractual relations, work in-
directly through the price mechanism. For example, the fire-sale liquidation of assets
by one bank may drive down the marked-to-market value of another bank’s portfolio,
potentially causing this second bank to also sell assets. These indirect spillover effects
are closely related to fire-sale externalities and liquidity spirals.
    When it comes to amplification, an important distinction is whether the imbalances
that formed during the run-up (or bubble) phase were fueled by credit. The reason is
that the bursting of credit bubbles leads to more de-leveraging and stronger amplifi-
cation mechanisms. For example, while the bursting of the technology bubble in 2000
caused significant wealth destruction, its impacts on the real economy were relatively
small when compared to the bursting of the recent housing bubble. The distinguishing
feature of the housing bubble was the preceding credit boom. Similarly, the run-up in
stock prices during the Roaring Twenties was to a large extent based on credit in the
form of margin trading, i.e., it was financed via short-term loans. This credit-fed boom
ultimately led to the Great Depression. Similarly, the Scandinavian crisis in the early
1990s and the Japanese “lost decade” were also preceded by lending booms that had
led to excessive asset prices.
    While financial crises often erupt suddenly, recovery from crises often takes a long
time. This happens because the negative shock caused by the bursting of the bubble
leads to persistent adverse effects and deep and drawn-out recessions. For example,
output typically recovers only slowly after a financial crisis. Even after policy responses,
such as a recapitalization of the banking system, recovery is typically sluggish. This is
the case because balance sheets of other agents might still be impaired. For example, the
recent crisis in the U.S. severely impaired household balance sheets. Rebuilding these

                                             5
balance sheets takes time and thus prolongs the crisis. The bursting of the Japanese real
estate and stock market bubbles in the 1990s, on the other hand, impaired corporate
and bank balance sheets, which was one of the contributing factors to the lost decade(s)
in Japan.
    In Section 5, we close our discussion of financial crises by discussing measures of
systemic risk. Because of the large social costs of financial crises, such measures, if
available in a timely manner, could serve as early-warning signals for policy makers. The
development of such measures, a research agenda that is still in its infancy, requires two
steps. First, it is necessary to develop a conceptual framework for measuring systemic
risk in a coherent fashion. The second step involves putting in place data collection
systems that allow the timely computation of such systemic risk measures. We conclude
this section by discussing a number of specific systemic risk measures that have been
proposed in the literature.
    Finally, in Section 6 we highlight a number of open questions to be addressed in
future research. This, of course, is not meant as an exhaustive list of future research
questions in this field. Rather, it should be read as a somewhat personal list of topics
that we believe could use further study.
    In writing this chapter, we had to draw the line in terms of what to include. One
important area that we do not cover is the sovereign and international dimension of
financial crises. Even financial crises that are local in origin often develop an interna-
tional dimension. For example, financial crises may be associated with large exchange
rate movements that occur when countries devalue their currency or come under specu-
lative attack. Such currency crises may go hand in hand with banking crises and those
two channels may reinforce each other, a phenomenon that has become known as twin
crises (Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999)). Currency devaluation deepens banking crises
(and real private-sector indebtedness) if debt is denominated in foreign currency, some-
thing often referred to as the “original sin” of emerging economies. Banking crises may
lead to sovereign debt crises (Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)) and countries may default
on their external (and potentially also domestic) debt. While these sovereign and inter-
national dimensions are important aspects of financial crises, they go beyond the scope
of this chapter. Instead, we refer the reader to Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and, for an
in-depth discussion of recent sovereign crises, Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2006).




                                            6
2     A Brief Historical Overview of Bubbles and Crises
Historically, bubbles, crashes, and financial crises have occurred with striking regularity.
There is evidence for bubbles and crises during all time periods for which we have
financial data. Moreover, bubbles and crises have occurred in financial markets at
all stages of development: developed financial systems as well as emerging economies
and developing financial markets. This section provides a brief summary of the most
important crisis episodes. Additional detail on these episodes can be found, for example,
in Kindleberger (1978), Shiller (2000), Allen and Gale (2007), and Reinhart and Rogoff
(2009).
    While each particular boom and each particular crisis is different in its details and
specificities, there are recurring themes and common patterns. For example, in the
typical anatomy of a financial crisis, a period of booming asset prices (potentially
an asset price bubble), initially triggered by fundamental or financial innovation, is
followed by a crash. This crash usually sets off a number of amplification mechanisms
and, ultimately, this often leads to significant reductions in economic activity. The
resulting declines in economic activity are often sharp and persistent.
    The earliest examples of debt crises and debt forgiveness are from Mesopotamia.
Merchants extended credit to farmers, but when harvests turned out worse than ex-
pected, farmers regularly ended up overindebted, leading to social unrest and threat-
ening the social order (see, for example, Graeber (2011)). This led to the practice of
“cleaning the slate”: From time to time debts were wiped out and farmers given a
fresh start. In similar fashion, in ancient Greece, the Solonic reforms of 594 BC can-
celed debts and outlawed enslavement for debt in order to improve the situation of
debt-ridden farmers.
    Maybe the best-documented early examples of asset price bubbles are the Dutch
tulip mania (1634-37), the Mississippi Bubble (1719-20), and the South Sea Bubble
(1720). Each of these episodes involved spectacular rises in the prices of certain assets
(the price of tulips, shares in the Mississippi Company, and shares in the South Sea
Company, respectively), followed by precipitous declines in the prices of these assets (for
more detailed accounts of these episodes, see Neal (1990, 2012) and Garber (2000)).
These crises also serve as an early example of potential contagion. As Kindleberger
(1978) points out, many British investors had bought shares in John Law’s Mississippi
Company in Paris, while many investors from the Continent had purchased South
Sea Company shares in London. Schnabel and Shin (2004) also document contagion


                                             7
during the northern European financial crisis of 1763, which involved highly levered
and interlocked financial ties between Amsterdam, Hamburg, and Prussia and resulted
in significant asset fire sales by affected market participants. The crisis of 1763 also
highlights the role of financial innovation, in this case in the form of bills of exchange
that facilitated leverage.
    During the 19th century, the U.S. suffered a multitude of banking crises. Before
the creation of a national banking system in 1863-65, major banking crises occurred in
the U.S. in 1837 and in 1857. After the creation of a national U.S. banking system,
banking panics occurred again (in varied forms) in 1873, 1884, 1893, 1907, and 1914.
While it is hard to find good data, anecdotally many of these crises were preceded by
land bubbles (before the Civil War) or bubbles in railroad bonds (after the Civil War).
Most of these panics went hand in hand with large drops in the stock market as banks
cut down margin lending (see Allen and Gale (2007)) and were associated with drops
in real activity as proxied, for example, by the production of pig iron (Gorton (1988))
or the Miron and Romer (1990) measure of industrial production. The panic of 1907
ultimately led to the creation of the Federal Reserve System in 1914.
    During the 1920s, the U.S. saw a large stock market boom, particularly from 1927
to 1929. The Roaring Twenties were followed by the great stock market crash of 1929
and the Great Depression, including the banking panic of 1933. The Great Depression
followed a typical boom-bust cycle that included a large run-up in real estate prices
that peaked in 1926, followed by a crash in stock market and real estate valuations,
a banking panic, and a prolonged recession. While the real estate price boom of the
1920s often receives less emphasis in analyses of the Great Depression, White (2009)
argues that the real estate bubble of the 1920s was, in fact, similar in magnitude to the
boom and bust cycle in real estate prices associated with the financial crisis of 2007-09.
    Alongside the real estate bubble of the 1920s, the Great Depression was fueled by a
bubble in the stock market. During the run-up in the stock market, many stocks were
bought on margin, which meant that the stock market bubble was credit-financed. In
1928 the U.S. Federal Reserve first used moral persuasion to discourage banks from
lending to speculators. It then started tightening monetary policy in February 1928
(see Friedman and Schwartz (1963)). The Federal Reserve eventually raised the inter-
est rate in July 1929. Arguably, the actions by the Federal Reserve contributed to the
stock market crash that materialized in 1929, ultimately resulting in the Great Depres-
sion. The Great Depression ultimately caused a full-blown international banking crisis,
starting with the failure of the largest bank in Austria, Credit-Anstalt, in 1931.

                                            8
    Since the Great Depression, banking panics have become rare in the U.S., mostly
because of the creation of the Federal Reserve System in 1914 and introduction of
deposit insurance as part of the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933. But this did not eliminate
financial crises. For example, the savings and loan crisis of 1979 led to the failure
of no fewer than 747 savings and loan institutions. As the Federal Reserve started
raising interest rates to rein in inflation, short-term funding costs of savings and loan
institutions exceeded the returns of the assets they were holding. For most savings and
loan institutions, the only way to respond was to increase the riskiness of their assets,
in the hope that higher returns would offset higher funding costs. Eventually, however,
most savings and loans were deeply underwater and their assets had to be taken over
by the Resolution Trust Corporation that was formed in 1989. Some cite the savings
and loan crisis as one of the reasons for the U.S. recession of 1990-91.
    The 1970s and 1980s also witnessed large boom-bust cycles in international credit.
Many South American countries borrowed considerably in international markets through-
out the 1960s and 1970s to finance domestic investments in infrastructure and industry.
During that period, the indebtedness of these countries soared: Kindleberger (1978)
points out that the foreign debts of Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and other developing
countries increased from $125 billion in 1972 to over $800 billion in 1982. However,
the sharp increase in U.S. interest rates led to a devaluation of South American cur-
rencies and drastically increased the real debt burden from dollar-denominated debt in
those countries. At the same time, a recession in the U.S. dried up the flow of credit
to those countries. In 1982, Mexico declared it would no longer be able to service its
debt. Ultimately, the South American debt crises led to the Brady Plan in 1989 (see,
for example, Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2006)).
    Another major lending boom followed by a painful bust occurred in Scandinavia in
the early 1990s. As a result, Finland, Norway, and Sweden suffered a major banking
crisis during this period (see, for example, Englund (1999) and Jonung, Kiander, and
Vartia (2009)). In all three countries, the crisis followed a boom in lending and asset
prices, particularly for real estate, that had developed in the late 1980s following credit
market liberalization earlier in the decade. The burst of the bubble led to large drops
in output in all three countries. All three countries had to abandon pegs of their
currencies, leading to devaluation and increases in the real indebtedness of the banking
sectors in all three countries, which had borrowed in foreign currency. As a response
to the crisis, the Swedish government took over part of the banking system. Finland’s
government extended large amounts of loans and guarantees to prop up the country’s

                                            9
banking system.
    Japan also suffered a major financial crisis in the early 1990s. The Japanese crisis
was preceded by a boom in both real estate and the Japanese stock market. The losses
from this crisis weighed on Japanese banks and the Japanese economy for years, leading
to the “lost decade” of the 1990s and continuing slow growth in Japan during the 2000s.
    The Japanese example illustrates the problems bubbles pose for central banks. Wor-
ried about the bubble in real estate and stock prices, the Bank of Japan started raising
the official discount rate in May 1989, eventually increasing it from 2.5% to 6.0%. In
addition, the Bank of Japan limited the growth rate of lending to the real estate in-
dustry such that it could not exceed the growth rate of total lending (“total volume
control”) and forced all banks to report lending to the construction industry and non-
bank financial industry. Both of these interventions forced the real estate sector to
de-lever, driving down prices. Many real estate firms went bankrupt, leading to fire-
sales in real estate. Since real estate was the primary collateral for many industries,
overall lending declined, pushing down collateral value even further. Ultimately, the
decrease in real estate prices led to a debt overhang problem for the entire Japanese
banking sector, crippling the Japanese economy for decades (see, for example, Hoshi
and Kashyap (2004)).
    The mid-1990s and early 2000s also featured a return of currency and sovereign
debt crises. Mexico, a success story of the early 1990s, was unable to roll over its
foreign-currency-denominated debt after large fiscal deficits and a sharp decline in the
value of the peso, triggering a bailout by the United States and the IMF. In 1997 and
1998, the focus fell on East Asian countries and Russia. After large equity and real
estate booms in East Asia, a run on Thailand’s currency (the baht) led to a reversal of
international capital flows to the entire region, triggering a financial crisis that quickly
spread to other East Asian countries, such as Indonesia and Korea (Radelet, Sachs,
Cooper, and Bosworth (1998)). In August 1998, Russia declared a moratorium on its
ruble-denominated debt and devalued its currency. Among other things, a decrease in
the oil price had led to a worsening of Russia’s fiscal situation, leading to rising debt-
to-GDP ratios, fiscal deficits, and rising interest rates. Ultimately, Russia opted not to
defend its exchange rate peg and devalued its currency, declaring at the same time a
moratorium on its ruble-denominated debt. The Russian banking system was rendered
effectively insolvent, both from direct losses on government debt and losses from the
devaluation of the ruble. Outside of Russia, the crisis led to upheaval in global financial
markets and the demise of the hedge fund Long Term Capital Management (LTCM).

                                            10
This prompted the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to orchestrate a private-sector
bailout for LTCM. At the same time, the Federal Reserve cut the interest rate.
    In 2001 it became clear that Argentina was unable to sustain the level of public-
sector debt it had accumulated over the 1990s, while the Argentinean peso was pegged
to the U.S. dollar via a currency board. Despite IMF support, Argentina suffered a run
on the banking system in November 2001 and had to suspend convertibility of deposits.
In January 2002, Argentina suspended the peso’s peg to the dollar. Within a few days,
the peso lost much of its value. The crisis led to a severe decrease in GDP and a spike in
inflation. Ultimately, Argentina defaulted on its debts. The Argentinian default led to
at least four large debt restructurings. Argentina also highlighted the growing difficulty
in resolving defaults when creditors are dispersed; more than three years passed between
default and an ultimate restructuring deal. Between 2001 and 2002, output collapsed
by 16.3% (for detailed summaries of the Russian crisis, Argentinian crisis, and other
recent sovereign debt crises, see Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2006)).
    Recently, the bursting of the U.S. housing bubble and the associated financial mar-
ket turmoil of 2007 and 2008 led to the most severe financial crisis since the Great
Depression (for a summary, see Brunnermeier (2009)). A combination of low interest
rates, financial innovation in the form of mortgage securitization, and a global savings
glut had led to a boom in U.S. real estate prices that started reversing in 2007. The
collapse of the real estate bubble led to the default, or near default, of a number of
U.S. financial institutions, most notably Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and AIG.
The U.S. government responded with a massive bailout operation in the fall of 2008.
Nonetheless, the collapse of the real estate bubble led to one of the longest and deepest
recessions in U.S. history.
    Most recently, the European Union has been dealing with a major sovereign debt
crisis. Following a lending boom during the early 2000s, a loss of competitiveness, fiscal
deficits, and repercussions from the great financial crisis of 2008 led to debt crises in
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. These crises also highlight the intimate
connection between banking crises and sovereign debt crises. In Ireland and Spain, a
crisis in the banking sector—following a bubble in real estate and house prices—led to
a sovereign debt crisis. In Italy, on the other hand, a sovereign debt crisis threatens the
banking system.




                                            11
3       Bubbles
The term bubbles refers to large, sustained mispricings of financial or real assets. While
exact definitions of what exactly constitutes a bubble vary, it is clear that not every
temporary mispricing can be called a bubble. Rather, bubbles are often associated with
mispricings that have certain features. For example, asset valuation in bubble periods
is often explosive. Or, the term bubble may refer to periods in which the price of an
asset exceeds fundamentals because investors believe that they can sell the asset at an
even higher price to some other investor in the future. In fact, John Maynard Keynes,
in his General Theory, distinguishes investors, who buy an asset for its dividend stream
(fundamental value), from speculators, who buy an asset for its resale value.
    Ultimately, bubbles are of interest to economists because prices affect the real al-
location in the economy. For example, the presence of bubbles may distort agents’
investment incentives, leading to overinvestment in the asset that is overpriced. Real
estate bubbles may thus lead to inefficient construction of new homes. Moreover, bub-
bles can have real effects because the bursting of a bubble may leave the balance sheets
of firms, financial institutions, and households in the economy impaired, slowing down
real activity. Because of these repercussions on the real economy, it is important for
economists to understand the circumstances under which bubbles can arise and why
prices can deviate systematically from their fundamental value.
    Hyman Minsky provided an early, informal characterization of bubbles and the as-
sociated busts. In his characterization, Minsky distinguishes between five phases (see,
for example, the description of Minsky’s model in Kindleberger (1978)). An initial
displacement—for example, a new technology or financial innovation—leads to expec-
tations of increased profits and economic growth. This leads to a boom phase that is
usually characterized by low volatility, credit expansion, and increases in investment.1
Asset prices rise, first at a slower pace but then with growing momentum. During the
boom phase, the increases in prices may be such that prices start exceeding the actual
fundamental improvements from the innovation. This is followed by a phase of eupho-
ria during which investors trade the overvalued asset in a frenzy. Prices increase in an
explosive fashion. At this point investors may be aware, or at least suspicious, that
there may be a bubble, but they are confident that they can sell the asset to a greater
fool in the future. Usually, this phase will be associated with high trading volume. The
    1
    For empirical studies that document increases in credit during the run-up to financial crises, see
Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) and Schularick and Taylor (2012).


                                                 12
resulting trading frenzy may also lead to price volatility as observed, for example, dur-
ing the internet bubble of the late 1990s. At some point, sophisticated investors start
reducing their positions and take their profits. During this phase of profit taking there
may, for a while, be enough demand from less sophisticated investors who may be new
to that particular market. However, at some point prices start to fall rapidly, leading
to a panic phase, when investors dump the asset. Prices spiral down, often accelerated
by margin calls and weakening balance sheets. If the run-up was financed with credit,
amplification and spillover effects kick in, which can lead to severe overshooting also in
the downturn.
     Much of the theoretical literature on financial bubbles can be seen as an attempt to
formalize this narrative. As we will see, often these models are good at explaining parts
but not all of the Minsky framework. For example, some models generate the explosive
price paths described by Minsky, but have less to say about trading volume. Other
bubble models generate the associated trading volume, but may not feature explosive
price paths. While the literature on bubbles has made giant strides in the last decades,
it is thus probably fair to say that a comprehensive model of Minsky’s narrative is still
somewhat elusive.
     In this section, we first survey the theoretical literature on bubbles.2 We start by
describing models of rational bubbles. In this class of models, the price path of an asset
that is affected by a bubble is explosive, and bubbles can usually be sustained only
if their presence allows for an improvement over the allocation in the economy absent
the bubble. This means that even in these rational models, some sorts of frictions
(for example, stemming from an overlapping generations structure or market incom-
pleteness) are important. Subsequently, we show that bubbles also arise naturally in
models that incorporate other types of frictions. We first discuss how informational
frictions allow bubbles to persist and how, in the presence of informational frictions,
non-fundamental news can lead to large price corrections or crashes. We then discuss
how frictions that arise from delegated investment can help sustain bubbles. In some of
these models, the bubble is fueled by credit, which is an important feature since it can
lead to painful amplification when the bubble bursts, a feature that we discuss in more
detail in the section on crashes. Finally, we discuss models of bubbles that are based
on heterogeneous beliefs across agents. In contrast to many other models of bubbles,
heterogeneous-beliefs models generate the prediction that bubbles are associated with
  2
      Parts of this section draw on Brunnermeier (2008).



                                                  13
high trading volume, something that is often observed in practice. After surveying the
theoretical literature on bubbles, we briefly discuss empirical and experimental evidence
on bubbles. Here we mainly focus on the empirical literature that attempts to test for
rational bubbles, and on some classic experimental results.


3.1    Rational Bubbles without Frictions
In models of rational bubbles, investors are willing to hold a bubble asset because the
price of the asset is expected to rise in the future. A bubble can be sustained today
because the bubble is expected to grow in the future, at least as long as the bubble
does not burst. While different variations of these models allow for bubbles that burst
with some probability or bubbles that grow stochastically, one robust implication of
all rational bubbles is that, as long as the bubble continues, the price of the asset
has to grow explosively. The explosive nature of the price path is consistent with the
observed run-up phases to many financial crises. It has also been the focus of much of
the empirical literature that attempts to test for the existence of bubbles.
    More formally, rearranging the definition of the (net) return, rt+1,s := (pt+1,s + dt+1,s ) /pt −
1, where pt,s is the price and dt,s is the dividend payment at time t and state s, and
taking rational expectations yields
                                                                  
                                                       pt+1 + dt+1
                                        p t = Et                     .                     (1)
                                                         1 + rt+1
Hence, the current price is just the discounted expected future price and dividend
payment in the next period. For simplicity, assume that the expected return that
the marginal rational trader requires in order to hold the asset is constant over time,
Et [rt+1 ] = r, for all t. Solving the above difference equation forward and using the law
of iterated expectations, one obtains
                               " T −t                #                    
                                X          1                     1
                    p t = Et                     dt+τ + Et               pT .              (2)
                                τ =1
                                        (1 + r)τ             (1 + r)T −t

This means that the equilibrium price is given by the expected discounted value of the
future dividend stream paid from t + 1 to T plus the expected discounted value of the
price at time T . For securities with finite maturity, the price after maturity, say T , is
zero, pT = 0. Hence, the price of the asset, pt , is unique and simply coincides with the
expected future discounted dividend stream until maturity. For securities with infinite


                                                        14
maturity, T → ∞, the price pt only coincides with the future expected discounted future
dividend stream,
            h      call iti fundamental value, vt , if the so-called transversality condition,
                1
limT →∞ Et (1+r)  T pt+T     = 0, holds. Without imposing the transversality condition,
pt = vt is only one of many possible prices that solve the above expectational difference
equation (1). Any price pt = vt + bt , decomposed in the fundamental value, vt , and a
bubble component, bt , such that
                                                            
                                                    1
                                  b t = Et               bt+1 ,                           (3)
                                                 (1 + r)

is also a solution.
    Equation (3) highlights that the bubble component bt has to grow in expectation
at a rate of r. This insight was used by Blanchard and Watson (1982) in their model
of rational bubbles, in which the bubble persists in each period only with probability
π and bursts with probability (1 − π). Since in expectation the bubble has to grow at
rate r, conditional on the bubble surviving it now has to grow at rate (1 + r) /π. As
long as the bubble survives, it thus has to grow explosively. More generally, the bubble
component may be stochastic. A specific example of a stochastic bubble is an intrinsic
bubble, where the bubble component is assumed to be deterministically related to a
stochastic dividend process (Froot and Obstfeld (1991)).
    The fact that any rational bubble has to grow at an expected rate of r eliminates
many potential rational bubbles through a backward-induction argument. For example,
a positive bubble cannot emerge if there is an upper limit on the size of the bubble. If, for
instance, the presence of substitutes limits the potential bubble in a certain commodity,
no bubble can emerge. An ever-growing commodity bubble would make the commodity
so expensive that it would be substituted with some other good. Similarly, a bubble on
a non-zero supply asset cannot arise if the required return r exceeds the growth rate
of the economy, since the bubble would outgrow the aggregate wealth in the economy.
Hence, rational bubbles can only exist in a world in which the required return is lower
than or equal to the growth rate of the economy. As we discuss below, this can be
the case in an overlapping generations (OLG) setting if there is an overaccumulation
of private capital that makes the economy dynamically inefficient.
    The rational bubble model also shows that a negative bubble, bt < 0, cannot arise on
a limited liability asset. The reason is that a growing negative bubble would imply that,
conditional on the bubble surviving, the asset price would have to become negative at
some point in the future, which is not possible for a limited liability asset. Moreover,

                                                 15
if bubbles can never be negative, this also implies that if a bubble vanishes at any
point in time, it has to remain zero forever from that point onwards. This leads to the
important insight that bubbles cannot start within a rational bubble model; they must
already be present when the asset starts trading.
    Despite its appeal, the rational bubble model outlined above suffers from the short-
coming that such bubbles can often be ruled out using a general equilibrium zero-sum
argument. Specifically, if it is commonly known that the initial allocation in an econ-
omy is interim Pareto efficient, then rational bubbles cannot arise (Kreps (1977), Tirole
(1982)). To see this, note that if there were a bubble, this would make a seller of the
“bubble asset” better off, which—because of the interim Pareto efficiency of the initial
allocation—has to make the buyer of the asset worse off. Hence, no individual would
be willing to buy the overpriced asset.
    This zero-sum argument also holds in a setting in which investors have differen-
tial/asymmetric information (as long as agents have common priors). In asymmetric
information settings with common priors, a condition for a bubble to exist is that the
bubble is not commonly known (see Brunnermeier (2001)). For example, everybody
may know that the price of an asset exceeds the value of any possible dividend stream,
but this may not be common knowledge, i.e., not everybody knows that all the other
investors also know this fact. This lack of higher-order mutual knowledge makes it
possible for finite bubbles to exist under the following necessary conditions, given by
Allen, Morris, and Postlewaite (1993): (i) It cannot be common knowledge that the
initial allocation is interim Pareto efficient, as mentioned above. That is, there have to
be gains from trade or at least some investors have to think that there might be gains
from trade. (ii) Investors have to remain asymmetrically informed even after inferring
information from prices and net trades. This implies that prices cannot be fully re-
vealing. (iii) Investors must be constrained from (short) selling their desired number
of shares in at least one future contingency for finite bubbles to persist. In a similar
setting, Morris, Postlewaite, and Shin (1995) show that, in finite horizon settings, the
size of a bubble can be bounded by the “depth” of knowledge of the bubble’s existence.
Intuitively, the depth of knowledge measures how far away the agents in the economy
are from common knowledge. Conlon (2004) provides a tractable finite-horizon setting
to show that bubbles can persist even if everybody knows that everybody knows that
the asset is overpriced, but not ad infinitum (i.e., the bubble mutually known at the nth
order, but not commonly known). More broadly, this line of research highlights that, in
addition to asymmetric information, frictions, such as short-sale constraints or trading

                                           16
restrictions, are needed for bubbles to persist.


3.2     OLG Frictions and Market Incompleteness
A well-known example of a bubble that can survive because of a friction inherent in the
structure of the underlying economic model is fiat money in an overlapping generations
(OLG) model (Samuelson (1958)). While the intrinsic value of fiat money is zero, it can
have a positive price in equilibrium. This bubble asset (money) is useful because it can
serve as a store of value and thus allows wealth transfers across generations. Absent
the bubble asset, this type of wealth transfer is not possible in the OLG framework.
    Diamond (1965) develops an OLG model in which capital serves as a store of value.
In competitive equilibrium, the interest rate equals the marginal productivity of capital.
According to the golden rule, under the optimal allocation, the marginal productivity
of capital equals the population growth rate. Diamond (1965) shows that this is not
necessarily the case in his OLG framework. For example, capital accumulation can
exceed the golden rule, such that the marginal productivity of capital is lower than
the population growth rate. The economy is thus dynamically inefficient.3 In this case
government debt can be used to crowd out excess investment and restore efficiency.
    Tirole (1985) shows that, instead of government debt, a bubble on capital can
achieve the same objective. Bubbles can exist in this framework because the initial
allocation is not Pareto efficient, such that the bubble can lead to a Pareto improvement
in the allocation. Note, however, that this happens because the bubble crowds out
investment. The presence of a bubble is thus associated with lower investment, while
the bursting of a bubble is associated with an investment boom. In practice, we often
see the opposite.
    A more recent strand of literature deals with these counterfactual implications by
adding borrowing constraints. For example, in the model of Martin and Ventura (2012),
entrepreneurs can borrow only a fraction of their future firm value. Once financing
constraints are present, bubbles not only have a crowding out effect, but can also
have a “crowding-in”effect, and thus allow a productive subset of entrepreneurs to
increase investments. Because of this crowding-in effect, bubbles can exist and increase
efficiency even if the economy absent the bubble is dynamically (constrained) efficient.
As in Tirole (1985), bubbles still crowd out total investment since they use up part
  3
    However, Abel, Mankiw, Summers, and Zeckhauser (1989) argue that it is not clear that this is
the case in the U.S.


                                               17
of savings, but a bubble also relaxes the borrowing constraint for entrepreneurs with
good investment opportunities. This improves the flow and allocation of funds to the
productive entrepreneurs and crowds in their productive investment.
    While in OLG models individuals save for future periods with low (deterministic)
endowments, in Bewley-type economies individuals save for precautionary reasons in
order to self-insure against uninsurable idiosyncratic risk. Not surprisingly, the implica-
tions of these models are similar to those of an OLG setting. In the endowment economy
of Bewley (1977, 1980, 1983), agents self-insure against idiosyncratic risk because they
may hit a borrowing constraint in the future. Assets with high market liquidity that pay
off without large discounts in all states of the world trade at a “bubble premium.” As
in OLG models, a bubble in the form of fiat money (or government debt) can improve
welfare. In the spirit of Diamond (1965), Aiyagari (1994) introduces capital accumula-
tion with production into a Bewley economy. In this case, precautionary saving, rather
than the OLG structure in Diamond (1965), leads to excessive capital accumulation.
    The “noise trader risk” model by DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990)
also relies on an OLG structure. However, this model focuses on relative prices of two
assets with identical (deterministic) cash flow streams. Rational risk averse arbitrageurs
with finite horizons are reluctant to take on positions that fully equate both prices since
the mispricing may widen further due to irrational noise traders. As a consequence,
arbitrageurs only partially trade against the mispricing. In this model, it is thus the
combination of short horizons, risk aversion, and noise trader risk that allows the bub-
ble to persist.4 In Dow and Gorton (1994), mispricings may also persist because of
short horizons. However, in their model it is not irrational noise traders who prevent
arbitrage. Rather risk-neutral arbitrageurs with private information about the future
value of an asset have short horizons and only trade against longer-term arbitrage op-
portunities if it is sufficiently likely that other arbitrageurs receive the same information
in the future, such that they can “take over the trade” in future periods, thus forming
an “arbitrage chain.”
    Rational bubbles in the spirit of Blanchard and Watson (1982) or Tirole (1985) rely
crucially on an infinite horizon setting. Absent an infinite horizon, bubbles would be
ruled out by backward-induction arguments. However, DeMarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer
(2008) show that bubbles can also develop in finite horizon OLG models. In the model,
   4
     Loewenstein and Willard (2006) point out that another important assumption in DeLong, Shleifer,
Summers, and Waldmann (1990) is that the risk-free storage technology is available in infinite amounts.
If it is not, the mispricing can be ruled out via backward induction.


                                                  18
generations of investors form different cohorts, and markets are incomplete because
unborn investors cannot trade with current generations. This leads to a pecuniary ex-
ternality that creates endogenous relative wealth concerns among agents. The intuition
is that, within a generation, the utility of one agent depends on the wealth of other
agents. Specifically, when other investors in a cohort are wealthy in middle age, they
drive up asset prices and thus make it more costly to save for retirement. This can
induce herding behavior: Agents may want to imitate the portfolio choices of other
agents in their cohort in order to avoid being poor when others are wealthy. Because of
the OLG structure, these relative wealth concerns cannot be eliminated through prior
trade. While future young investors benefit from the reduction in their borrowing costs
that results when their current middle-aged cohort is wealthy, they are not present
when the middle-aged were young.
    Relative wealth concerns make trading against the crowd risky and can generate
incentives for agents to herd into the risky asset, thus driving up its price. Intuitively,
investors are willing to buy an overpriced asset in order not to be priced out of the
market in the next period. DeMarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer (2008) show that, when
investors are sufficiently risk averse, the risky asset can have a negative risk premium
in equilibrium even though its cash flow is positively correlated with aggregate risk.


3.3    Informational Frictions
Rational traders may fail to lean against and eliminate an emerging bubble because
doing so can be risky. This risk can take different forms. First, there is fundamental
risk: The fundamental value may jump unexpectedly, justifying the high price. In this
case, investors that trade against the bubble turn out to be “wrong” and lose money.
Second, even if investors that lean against the bubble are “right,” they may lose money
if the price of the asset temporarily rises further, temporarily widening the mispricing,
as in the paper by DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990) discussed above.
Another class of frictions that allows bubbles to persist are informational frictions. In
Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003), long-lived risk-neutral traders even find it optimal
to temporarily ride the bubble in order to profit from price increases in the bubble
asset. By doing so, they delay the bursting of the bubble. This allows the bubble to
grow even larger, leading to a more sizable price correction at a later point in time.
Unlike in DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990), it is not the uncertainty
about the behavior of irrational noise traders, but uncertainty about the other rational


                                            19
traders that makes it optimal to ride the bubble. The key element of the model is that
in addition to the competitive preemptive force to exit before others exit and thereby
burst the bubble, there is also an element of coordination (or synchronization) among
the rational traders. A single trader alone cannot bring down the bubble; a group of
them has to be disinvested at the same time in order to burst the bubble.
    More specifically, in Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003), the price increase is initially
supported by an increase in fundamental value. This is illustrated in Figure 1, where
the fundamental value of the asset rises until t = 110. Kindleberger (1978) refers to this
initial phase prior to a bubble as the displacement period, during which the fundamental
value of a new technology is learned slowly. The bubble phase starts in period t = 110,
when the price of the asset continues to grow even though there is no further increase
in fundamental value. Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003) assume that, from that point
onwards, individual traders become sequentially aware that the price is too high. In
the example depicted in Figure 1, the first trader thus learns that there is a bubble at
t = 110, while the last trader only learns that there is a bubble at t = 140. The key
assumption is that each trader does not know when, relative to other traders, he learns
about the bubble. Thus, from an individual investor’s perspective, the starting point
and size of the bubble are unknown. As a result, a trader who learns of the bubble
at t = 110 has a lower estimate of the fundamental (or, equivalently, he estimates an
earlier starting point of the bubble) than traders who learn of the bubble at a later
point in time.
    Because of this sequential awareness, it is never common knowledge that a bubble
has emerged. It is this lack of common knowledge that removes the bite from the stan-
dard backward-induction argument that rules out bubbles. Since there is no commonly
known point in time from which one could start backward induction, even finite horizon
bubbles can persist.
    A synchronization problem arises because Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003) assume
that no single trader alone can burst the bubble. This leads to a situation where each
trader tries to preempt the crash while attempting to ride the bubble as long as possible.
If he attacks the bubble too early, he forgoes profits from the subsequent run-up; if he
attacks too late and remains invested in the bubble asset, he suffers from the eventual
crash. In equilibrium, each trader finds it optimal to ride the bubble for a certain
number of periods, which in turn prolongs the life span of the bubble and justifies riding
the bubble even longer. In Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003), it is critical that the selling
pressure of a single trader is not fully reflected in the price process. Doblas-Madrid

                                           20
              35


              30


              25


              20

                                       Bubble starts
              15


              10       Paradigm
                         shift
               5
                                                  t0   t0 +Η
                   0              50        100            150         200




Figure 1: Explosive bubble path and sequential awareness in the model of Abreu and
Brunnermeier (2003).

(2012) endogenizes the price process in a discretized setting with multidimensional
uncertainty and shows that, as the amount of noise in the economy increases, larger
bubbles become possible, since a greater number of agents are able to sell before the
crash.
    Empirically, there is evidence in favor of the hypothesis that sophisticated investors
find it optimal to ride bubbles. For example, between 1998 and 2000, hedge funds
were heavily invested in technology stocks (Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004)). Contrary
to the efficient-market hypothesis, hedge funds were thus not a price-correcting force
during the technology boom, even though they are arguably closer to the ideal of
“rational arbitrageurs” than any other class of investors. Similarly, Temin and Voth
(2004) document that Hoare’s Bank was profitably riding the South Sea bubble in 1719-
1720, even though it had given numerous indications that it believed the stock to be
overvalued. Many other investors, including Isaac Newton, also tried to ride the South
Sea bubble, but with less success. Frustrated with his trading experience, Newton
concluded: “I can calculate the motions of the heavenly bodies, but not the madness
of people.”
    Another important message of the theoretical work on synchronization risk is that
relatively insignificant news events can trigger large price movements, because even
unimportant news events can allow for traders to synchronize their selling strategies.
Indeed, empirically, most large stock price movements cannot be attributed to signif-

                                            21
icant fundamental news, according to Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1989) and Fair
(2002). We will return to this feature later when discussing the various triggers of a
crisis.


3.4    Delegated Investment and Credit Bubbles
Most investors do not just invest their own funds. Rather, they finance their trades
by raising equity or debt, or they may simply be in charge of investing other people’s
money. Delegated investment can lead to further incentive distortions, especially when
the ultimate providers of funds are unsure about the skills of the fund manager. As a
result, portfolio managers may act myopically, or they might buy “bubble assets” to
pretend that they are skilled. If the investors are funded by debt, their incentives may
also be distorted by limited liability.
    Shleifer and Vishny (1997) stress that delegated portfolio management leads to
short-termism and fund managers refraining from exploiting long-run arbitrage op-
portunities. Fund managers are concerned about short-run price movements, because
temporary losses lead to fund outflows. A temporary widening of the mispricing and
the subsequent outflow of funds forces fund managers to unwind their positions ex-
actly when the mispricing is the largest. Anticipating this possible scenario, mutual
fund managers trade less aggressively against the mispricing. Similarly, hedge funds
face a high flow-performance sensitivity, despite some arrangements designed to prevent
outflows (e.g., lock-up provisions).
    Allen and Gorton (1993) show that fund managers may have an incentive to buy
an overvalued asset because not trading would reveal to their client investors that
they have low skill and no talent to spot undervalued assets. Consequently, bad fund
managers “churn bubbles” at the expense of their uninformed client investors. Because
of limited liability, fund managers participate in the potential upside of a trade but not
in the downside, such that a classic risk-shifting problem arises. Importantly, delegated
investing becomes a positive-sum game for bad fund managers, thus overcoming the
zero-sum argument that usually rules out the existence of bubbles. In equilibrium,
good managers subsidize bad managers and investors on average earn their cost of
investment. With a finite set of portfolio managers, the question remains why the last
portfolio manager has an incentive to purchase the asset, a problem that could cause the
whole construction to unravel. The model resolves this problem by using a stochastic
sequential awareness structure in which the last trader believes that she might with


                                           22
some probability be the penultimate trader.
    Sato (2009) incorporates delegated investment with relative performance evaluation
of fund managers into the framework of Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003) and shows
that the incentives to ride a bubble rather than correct the mispricing are even more
pronounced than in the original Abreu-Brunnermeier setting.
    Allen and Gale (2000a) provide a model for a credit bubble that is based on a risk-
shifting argument. In this model, investors borrow money from banks in order to invest
in a risk-free and a risky asset. By assumption, this borrowing takes the form of debt
financing. The lending banks cannot control how investors allocate the funds between
the risky and the risk-free asset. Once investors have borrowed money from banks, they
thus maximize the value of their levered portfolio, taking into account that they have
limited liability when the value of their investment falls such that they cannot repay
their loan to banks. In that case, investors simply default and walk away.
    Allen and Gale (2000a) show that the equilibrium price of the risky asset exceeds
the equilibrium price in an economy in which the same amount of funds is invested
directly, such that no risk-shifting problem exists. In this sense, the model predicts
that investment financed by credit can lead to bubbles. In an extension of the model,
Allen and Gale also show that the uncertainty about future credit conditions can have
a similar effect on the price of the risky asset. An important assumption of their model
is that banks cannot invest directly. For example, if banks could invest directly in the
risk-free asset, they would strictly prefer this over lending to the investors.
    More generally, once a bubble is under way, risk shifting may lead to further dis-
tortions. For example, when fund managers realize that they are under water because
they invested in an overpriced asset they may have incentives to “double down” or
“gamble for resurrection.” By the classic intuition from Jensen and Meckling (1976),
these incentives are particularly strong when the overpriced asset is volatile. Gambling
for resurrection, while rational from an individual fund manager’s perspective, may
prolong the bubble and exacerbate its detrimental effects.
    There are other models of inefficient credit booms; yet in those models it becomes
harder to determine whether one can refer to these credit booms as bubbles. Lorenzoni
(2008) develops an economy in which investors face credit constraints. In equilibrium,
there is too little borrowing relative to the first-best allocation, but too much borrowing
relative to the constrained efficient second-best allocation. The reason for this effect
is a pecuniary externality. When investors choose how much they borrow, they take
prices as given and thus do not internalize the effect of their borrowing decisions on the

                                            23
tightness of financial constraints during crises. We discuss these models in more detail
in the section on crises.


3.5     Heterogeneous-Beliefs Bubbles
Another class of models relies on heterogeneous beliefs among investors to generate
bubbles. In these models, investors’ beliefs differ because they have different prior
belief distributions, possibly due to psychological biases. For example, if investors are
overconfident about the precision of signals they receive, this leads to different prior
distributions (with lower variance) about the signals’ noise term. Investors with non-
common priors can agree to disagree even after they share all their information. Also,
in contrast to an asymmetric information setting, investors do not try to infer other
traders’ information from prices.
    Combining such heterogeneous beliefs with short-sale constraints can result in over-
pricing.5 The reason is that optimists push up the asset price, while pessimists cannot
counterbalance it because they face short-sale constraints (Miller (1977)). Ofek and
Richardson (2003) link this argument to the internet bubble of the late 1990s.
    In a dynamic model, the asset price can even exceed the valuation of the most opti-
mistic investor in the economy. This is possible, since the currently optimistic investors
(the current owners of the asset) have the option to resell the asset in the future at a
high price whenever they become less optimistic. At that point other traders will be
more optimistic and thus willing to buy the asset (Harrison and Kreps (1978)). Also in
these models, it is essential that less optimistic investors, who would like to short the
asset, are prevented from doing so through a short-sale constraint. This means that
heterogeneous-beliefs models are more applicable to markets where short selling is diffi-
cult, such as real estate, art, or certain stocks for which short selling is either restricted
or difficult owing to institutional constraints. Morris (1996) considers a special case of
Harrison and Kreps (1978) where traders initially have heterogeneous beliefs, but their
beliefs converge over time. As a consequence, an initial bubble component dies out over
time (for example, as investors learn after an IPO).
    Figure 2 provides a simple example to illustrate how heterogeneous beliefs coupled
with the ability to retrade can lead to prices that exceed even the valuation of the
most optimistic agent in the economy. In the example there are two traders, A and
   5
    For more detail on this literature, good starting points are the survey articles by Hong and Stein
(2007) and Xiong (2012).



                                                 24
B with heterogeneous beliefs π A and π B , respectively. Both traders value the asset at
E0A [v] = E0B [v] = 50 if they have to hold it until t = 2. However, if they have the
option to resell the asset in t = 1, this changes. Trader B now anticipates that he can
sell the asset to investor A, in the up-state u, where investor A is an optimist. Vice
versa, A expects to sell the asset to B in the down-state d, where B is an optimist.
Taking into account this option to resell, both investors are willing to pay p0 = 57.5 at
time t = 0, even though they both expect the asset to pay off only 50. The price of the
asset thus exceeds even the most optimistic agent’s valuation of the asset.




             Figure 2: A simple example economy with heterogeneous beliefs.

    An attractive feature of heterogeneous-beliefs bubbles is that they predict that bub-
bles are accompanied by large trading volume and high price volatility, as, for example,
in the model of Scheinkman and Xiong (2003).6 If investors are risk averse, another pre-
diction of heterogeneous-beliefs models is that the size of the bubble, trading volume,
and volatility are decreasing in the supply (tradeable asset float) of the bubble asset
(Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006)). These predictions are consistent with the evi-
dence from the internet stock bubble in the late 1990s, which was associated with high
trading volume and high price volatility. Also consistent with heterogeneous-beliefs
models is the observation that the internet bubble started to deflate from March 2000
  6
      For models of trading volume based on heterogeneous beliefs, see also Harris and Raviv (1993).


                                                  25
onwards, as the tradeable float of internet stocks increased (see Ofek and Richardson
(2003)). Chen, Hong, and Stein (2001) also document that high trading volume relative
to trend forecasts negative skewness (future crashes), consistent with the heterogeneous-
beliefs model put forward in Hong and Stein (2003).
    A number of papers also explore the role of credit in heterogeneous-beliefs mod-
els. Geanakoplos (2010) develops a model in which agents with heterogeneous beliefs
have limited wealth, such that agents with optimistic views about an asset borrow funds
from more pessimistic agents, against collateral. The extent to which pessimistic agents
are willing to finance the investment by optimistic agents then becomes an important
determinant of leverage and, in turn, asset prices. Moreover, in downturns, when op-
timists lose wealth, more of the asset has to be held by pessimists, thus exacerbating
price declines. In contrast to models in the spirit of Harrison and Kreps (1978), in
this setup beliefs do not change over time, such that no resell premium arises. Hence,
the price of the asset always remains below the valuation of the most optimistic agent.
Simsek (2011) shows that the extent to which pessimists are willing to finance asset
purchases by optimists depends on the specific form of the belief disagreement. Intu-
itively speaking, when disagreement is mostly about the upside, pessimists are more
willing to provide credit than when disagreement is about the downside. Hence, it
is not just the amount of disagreement, but also the nature of disagreement among
agents that matters for asset prices. Fostel and Geanakoplos (2012) provide a model in
which financial innovation in the form of tranching raises asset prices by increasing the
ability of the optimist to take positions in the asset. At the same time, in their model
an unexpected introduction of credit default swaps can lead to drastic reductions in
asset prices, since it allows pessimists to more effectively bet against the bubble asset.
This echoes the argument in Gorton (2010) that the introduction of the ABX index on
subprime securitization transactions contributed to the dramatic bust in the subprime
mortgage market.
    The zero-sum argument that typically rules out bubbles does not apply to a setting
with heterogenous beliefs since each trader thinks that he benefits from future trading.
However, these beliefs are not mutually consistent. From any individual trader’s per-
spective, his trading causes a negative externality on his counterparty. Based on this,
Brunnermeier, Simsek, and Xiong (2012) develop a welfare criterion for settings with
heterogeneous beliefs. Under this criterion, trading by market participants with het-
erogeneous beliefs leads to an inferior allocation if this trading lowers overall expected
social welfare under any of the traders’ subjective probability measures.

                                           26
3.6    Empirical Evidence on Bubbles
Identifying bubbles in the data is a challenging task. The reason is that in order to
identify a bubble, one needs to know an asset’s fundamental value, which is usually
difficult to measure. Based on this, a number of scholars have argued that certain
episodes that are often referred to as bubbles may in fact have fundamental explana-
tions. For example, Garber (2000) argues that the Dutch tulip mania, the Mississippi
bubble, and the South Sea bubble can in fact be explained based on fundamentals.
Pastor and Veronesi (2006) argue that the internet bubble of the late 1990s may be
explained without appealing to a bubble logic. More generally, in Pastor and Veronesi
(2009), apparent bubbles in stock prices can occur after technological revolutions, if
the average productivity of the new technology is uncertain and subject to learning.
The apparent “bubble” deflates as the new technology is widely adopted and its risk
becomes systematic.
    However, there are a number of clean examples of mispricings or bubbles that can-
not be explained by fundamental reasons. For example, Lamont and Thaler (2003) use
the Palm/3Com carve-out to document a relative mispricing between the share prices
of Palm and 3Com that cannot be attributed to fundamental differences. One inter-
pretation is that Palm shares were subject to an irrational internet premium. Xiong
and Yu (2011) provide another clean example from the Chinese warrants market. In
this example, the fundamental is the stock price that underlies the warrant and is thus
measurable. Xiong and Yu (2011) document that out of-the-money warrants that were
essentially worthless were traded heavily at extremely inflated prices.
    The main approach of empirical studies that seek to test for the presence of bubbles
has been the rational bubble model in the spirit of Blanchard and Watson (1982).
Most of these tests rely on the explosive feature of the (conditional) bubble path in the
rational bubble model.
    In an early study, Flood and Garber (1980) use the result that bubbles cannot
start within a rational asset pricing model. This means that, at any point in time,
the price of an asset affected by a bubble must have a non-zero part that grows at
an expected rate of r. However, this approach is problematic because of an exploding
regressor problem. As the bubble grows over time, the regressor explodes such that
the coefficient estimate relies primarily on the most recent data points. This leads to a
small sample problem, because the ratio of the information content of the most recent
data-point to the information content of all previous observations never goes to zero.


                                           27
Hence, the central limit theorem does not apply.
    In Diba and Grossman (1988), the approach taken is to examine whether the dif-
ference between the stock price and the price dividend ratio is stationary, which should
be the case under the hypothesis that there is no bubble. If the dividend process fol-
lows a linear unit-root process (e.g., a random walk), then the price process also has
a unit root. However, the difference between the price and the discounted expected
dividend stream, pt − dt /r, is stationary under the no-bubble hypothesis (in econo-
metric language, pt and dt /r are co-integrated). Using a number of unit root tests,
autocorrelation patterns, and co-integration tests, Diba and Grossman conclude that
the no-bubble hypothesis cannot be rejected.
    However, this study has also been challenged on econometric grounds. In partic-
ular, Evans (1991) shows that the standard linear econometric methods used in the
study by Diba and Grossman may fail to detect the explosive non-linear patterns of
bubbles that collapse periodically. West (1987) proposes a different approach that re-
lies on estimating the parameters needed to calculate the expected discounted value
of dividends in two different ways. His insight is that only one of the two esti-
mates is affected by the bubble. First, the accounting identity (1) can be rewritten
          1                    1
as pt = 1+r  (pt+1 + dt+1 ) − 1+r (pt+1 + dt+1 − Et [pt+1 + dt+1 ]). This means that when
running an instrumental variables regression of pt on (pt+1 + dt+1 )—using, for example,
dt as an instrument—one obtains an estimate for r that is independent of the existence
of a rational bubble. Second, if (for example) the dividend process follows a stationary
AR(1) process, dt+1 = φdt + ηt+1 , with independent noise ηt+1 , one can estimate φ. The
                                                                             φ
expected discounted value of future dividends is then given by vt = 1+r−φ       dt . Under
the null hypothesis that there is no bubble, i.e., pt = vt , the coefficient estimate of
                                                                      φ
the regression of pt on dt thus provides a second estimate of 1+r−φ       . West then uses
a Hausman-specification test to determine whether both estimates coincide. He finds
that the U.S. stock market data usually reject the null hypothesis of no bubble.


3.7       Experimental Evidence on Bubbles
In addition to empirical tests, researchers have used controlled laboratory experiments
to study bubbles.7 The advantage of laboratory experiments is that they allow the
researcher to isolate and test specific mechanisms and theoretical arguments. One
main line of research in this area is concerned with backward induction, which is one
  7
      For a survey of the early work on experimental asset markets, see Sunder (1995).


                                                  28
of the classic theoretical arguments to rule out bubbles.
     Many studies in this literature rely on the classic centipede game of Rosenthal
(1981). In this game, two players alternately decide whether to continue or stop a
game that runs for a finite number of periods. By construction, at any point in time
the player making the move is better off stopping the game than continuing if the other
player stops immediately afterwards, but he is worse off stopping than continuing if
the other player continues afterwards. Using backward induction, this game has only a
single subgame perfect equilibrium: The first player to move should immediately stop
the game. In experimental settings, however, players usually initially continue to play
the game, which is a violation of the backward-induction principle (see, for example,
McKelvey and Palfrey (1992)). These experimental findings thus question the validity
of the theoretical backward-induction argument that is often used to rule out bubbles.
     Another line of research (Smith, Suchanek, and Williams (1988)) directly stud-
ies settings in which participants in the experiment can trade a risky asset. All
participants know that the asset pays a uniformly distributed random dividend of
d ∈ {d0 = 0, d1 , d2 , d3 } in each of the 15 periods. Hence, the fundamental value for a
risk-neutral trader is initially 15 i 14 di and then declines by i 14 di in each period. The
                                    P                           P

study finds that there is vigorous trading, and prices initially rise despite the fact that
it is known to all participants that the fundamental value of the asset steadily declines.
The time series of asset prices in these experiments often exhibits a classic boom-bust
pattern. An initial boom phase is followed by a period during which the price exceeds
the fundamental value, before the price collapses towards the end. One interpretation
of these results is that bubbles emerge because each trader hopes to pass the asset on
to some less rational trader (greater fool) in the final trading rounds. However, similar
patterns also emerge when investors have no resale option and are forced to hold the
asset until the end (Lei, Noussair, and Plott (2001)). Kirchler, Huber, and Stöckl (2011)
argue that the bubbles documented by Smith, Suchanek, and Williams (1988) are due
to the combination of declining fundamental value (which leads to mispricing) and an
increasing cash-to-asset-value ratio (which leads to overvaluation).8 Brunnermeier and
Morgan (2010) experimentally test the predictions of Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003)
and document that subjects are reluctant to attack a bubble if they become sequentially
   8
     The experimental setting of Smith, Suchanek, and Williams (1988) has generated a large follow-up
literature that documents the robustness of their findings (see, for example, King, Smith, Williams,
and Van Boening (1993), Van Boening, Williams, and LaMaster (1993), Porter and Smith (1995),
Dufwenberg, Lindqvist, and Moore (2005), Haruvy and Noussair (2006), and Haruvy, Lahav, and
Noussair (2007)).


                                                 29
aware of the bubble and don’t know which position in the queue they are. In a related
setting, Moinas and Pouget (2012) provide an elegant experimental design to show that
the propensity to speculate increases with the (potentially infinite) trading horizon and
that a heterogeneous quantal response equilibrium provides a good description of the
experimental outcome.


4     Crises
A sustained run-up phase of low risk premia is typically followed by a crisis. Intuitively
speaking, imbalances that build up during the boom phase suddenly materialize, often
with a vengeance. Paradoxically, it is thus a low-volatility environment that is the
breeding ground for the high volatility that follows when the crisis erupts.
    For most crises it is difficult to pinpoint the exact trigger that acts as the catalyst.
Even when we can point towards a potential trigger, in many cases the triggering event
to which a crisis is attributed seems small relative to the crisis that follows. For example,
some people attribute the bursting of the internet bubble to the announcement that
the human genome project could not be patented. Others attribute it to the enormous
rate at which some internet companies were burning cash, while others dismiss all of
these potential triggers. For the more recent housing bubble, the triggering event seems
clearer. Blame is usually laid on the subprime mortgage market that began to turn sour
in late 2006. However, the subprime market constituted only about 4% of the overall
mortgage market. This leads to the question, how can such “small” news cause so
much damage? And how can a crisis that originates in the subprime mortgage market
propagate across so many sectors of the economy?
    The reason is amplification. In the presence of amplification, even a modest trigger-
ing event can cause large spillovers across the financial system. Amplification can occur
because of direct spillovers, such as so-called domino effects, or indirect spillovers that
work through prices, constraints, and the endogenous responses of market participants.
Conceptually, spillovers are associated with externalities that an individual action a−i
causes on the utility or payoff of some other individual ui (ai , a−i ). The marginal ex-
ternality (the effect of a change in individual −i’s action on individual i’s utility) can
                   ∂ui (ai ,a−i )
be expressed as        ∂a−i
                                  . Since individual −i does not internalize the impact of her
action on individual i’s payoff, the resulting outcome is often not Pareto efficient.
    In contrast to the classic textbook externality, in which an action directly affects


                                             30
the well-being of another agent, externalities in finance often work through prices. For
example, a financial institution may not internalize that the price changes that result
from liquidating certain assets will also affect other institutions’ balance sheets. In a
complete markets Arrow-Debreu economy, these pecuniary externalities do not lead to
inefficiencies. In fact, it is precisely the price-taking behavior of agents that ensures
that the equilibrium allocation is efficient. The reason is that under complete markets
the marginal rates of substitution are equalized in equilibrium, such that a small wealth
transfer effected through prices does not affect welfare.
    This changes, however, when we leave the complete-markets setup of Arrow-Debreu.
In an incomplete-markets setting, marginal rates of substitution are usually not equal-
ized across all agents or time periods, such that wealth transfers through prices can
affect efficiency. Since price-taking agents do not internalize this, the resulting equi-
librium is usually not even constrained efficient (i.e., a planner subject to the same
constraints could improve on the competitive equilibrium allocation). A similar argu-
ment holds in economies with occasionally binding constraints that depend on prices.9
    Hence, if financial institutions are subject to constraints that depend on asset prices,
price-taking financial institutions will fail to internalize the effect of their actions on the
tightness of the constraint such that the resulting equilibrium is usually not constrained
efficient. As a result, pecuniary externalities have efficiency consequences and the com-
petitive equilibrium generally does not lead to an allocation that is constrained efficient.
In the context of financial markets, these pecuniary externalities are sometimes referred
to as fire-sale externalities.
    Another important phenomenon during financial crises is amplification that arises
due to the self-reinforcing nature of market participants’ actions. For example, if one
financial institution sells and depresses the price, others become more likely to follow
suit and destabilize the price even further. Conceptually speaking, during financial
crises individual actions often become strategic complements, which formally is the
                                 ∂ 2 ui (ai ,a−i )
case whenever payoffs satisfy ∂ai ∂a−i > 0. When this is the case, demand curves are
often upward sloping, such that declining prices lead to a reduction in demand. When
this strategic complementarity is strong enough, multiple equilibria can arise.
    Moreover, adverse feedback loops and liquidity spirals may arise and amplify the
   9
    For a more formal treatment, see Hart (1975), Stiglitz (1982), Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis
(1986), and Gromb and Vayanos (2002). See Davila (2011) for a distinction between pecuniary exter-
nalities due to incomplete markets and pecuniary externalities that work through financial constraints
that depend on prices.



                                                 31
crisis. This is the case when the liquidity mismatch of many market participants is high.
Liquidity mismatch is high when, on the asset side of the balance sheet, real investment
is irreversible (due to technological illiquidity) or the assets can only be sold to others
with a large discount in times of crisis (due to market illiquidity) and, at the same time,
on the liability side of the balance sheet, the maturity structure is very short term (low
funding liquidity). Market liquidity is especially high for flight-to-safety assets, such as
gold or U.S. Treasuries. However, the flight-to-safety status can potentially be lost if
market participants suddenly stop coordinating on one of the flight-to-safety assets.10
     Overall, a key element in understanding financial crises and systemic risk is thus not
only direct domino effects, but also spillovers and the endogenous responses of other
market participants. These spillovers and endogengous responses lead to increased
endogenous risk, which not only amplifies the initial shock but also makes a temporary
adverse shock persist. Recovery from the crisis may thus take a long time.
     Understanding where spillovers and amplification occur is also crucial for policy
decisions during financial crises. For example, it is important to identify where in the
intermediation chain the externalities and amplification effects are at work. This is
the primary reason why policy research has put a lot of emphasis on differentiating
between the borrower balance-sheet channel (frictions arise on the borrower’s side) and
the lender balance-sheet channel (frictions arise on the lending side), both of which we
discuss below.


4.1     Counterparty/Bank Runs
One important amplification mechanism during financial crises is the potential for cred-
itor or depositor runs. The possibility for runs arises because of the liquidity mismatch
inherent in the financial system. Runs may occur as depositor runs on banks, such as
the classic 19th-century bank run, but they can also materialize as creditor runs on
unsecured short-term credit of financial institutions. For secured, i.e., collateralized
funding markets, borrowers may experience so-called margin runs.
    The important underlying friction that allows such runs is the presence of liquidity
mismatch. While liquidity mismatch serves a valuable function in terms of channeling
savings into long-term investment activity, it makes the financial system fragile. The
canonical model of such maturity and liquidity transformation is developed in Diamond
  10
    Liquidity mismatch does not equal maturity mismatch. For example, holding 30-year U.S. Trea-
suries funded with short-term paper has very little liquidity mismatch but large maturity mismatch.



                                                32
and Dybvig (1983), building on Bryant (1980). The main insight from these papers
is that the institutional structure of maturity transformation makes the intermediary
fragile because it creates the possibility of bank runs.
    In the Diamond-Dybvig model, banks offer demand deposits that match agents’
potential liquidity needs and use a large part of these deposits to finance illiquid long-
term investments (maturity transformation). However, these demand deposits open up
the possibility of bank runs. More specifically, there are two investment technologies:
an illiquid technology and a storage technology. The illiquid technology is a long-run
investment project that requires one unit of investment. It can be liquidated early in
t = 1 at a salvage value of L ≤ 1. If carried through until t = 2, the long-run technology
pays off a fixed gross return of R > 1. In addition to the productive long-run investment
project, agents also have access to a costless storage technology. Agents can invest a
fraction of their endowment in the illiquid investment project and store the rest. The
savings opportunities can thus be summarized as:

                   Investment Projects          t=0    t=1      t=2
                   Risky investment project
                      - continuation            −1      0  R>1
                      - early liquidation       −1     L≤1  0
                   Storage technology
                      - from t = 0 to t = 1     −1       +1
                      - from t = 1 to t = 2              −1      +1

    There is a continuum of ex-ante identical agents who receive an endowment of one
unit at t = 0. Each agent faces a preference shock prior to t = 1. Depending on this
shock, the agent consumes either in t = 1 (“impatient consumers”) or in t = 2 (“patient
consumers”). Impatient consumers derive utility U 1 (c1 ) only from consumption in t = 1,
whereas patient consumers derive utility U 2 (c2 ) only from consumption in t = 2. Since
the agents do not know ex-ante whether they will be impatient or patient, they would
like to insure themselves against their uncertain liquidity needs.
    Without financial intermediaries each agent would invest an amount x in the long-
run investment project and store the remainder (1 − x). Impatient consumers who
liquidate their project then consume c1 = xL + (1 − x) ∈ [L, 1], while patient consumers
consume c2 = xR + (1 − x) ∈ [1, R]. The ex-ante utility of each agent is given by
λU (c1 ) + (1 − λ)U (c2 ), where λ denotes the probability of becoming an impatient
consumer.

                                           33
    A bank can improve on this allocation by offering a deposit contract (c∗1 , c∗2 ), which
satisfies
                                ∂U ∗          ∂U ∗
                                    (c1 ) = R    (c ),
                                ∂c1           ∂c2 2
such that the agents’ ex-ante utility is maximized. This is possible when the banking
sector is competitive and when there is no aggregate risk. The bank invests x∗ in the
long-run investment project and stores the remainder (1 − x∗ ). The stored reserves are
enough to satisfy the impatient consumers’ demand in t = 1, that is, λc∗1 = (1 − x∗ ),
while the remainder is paid out to patient consumers in t = 2. Thus, (1 − λ)c∗2 = Rx∗ .
As long as only impatient consumers withdraw their demand deposit c1 from the bank
in t = 1, the bank is prepared for this money outflow and does not need to liquidate
the long-run asset. In this case, no patient consumer has an incentive to withdraw
his money early.11 Hellwig (1994) shows that a similar allocation is possible also in a
setting with aggregate interest rate risk in the form of an uncertain short-term return
r2 from date 1 to date 2. The main difference is that, in the presence of interest rate
risk, it can be optimal to reinvest some of the liquid resources at date 1 when r2 turns
out to be high.

4.1.1    Bank Runs as a Sunspot Phenomenon

However, if patient consumers start withdrawing money early, then the bank does not
have enough reserves and is forced to liquidate some of its long-run investments. If
the bank promised a payment c∗1 > 1, which is optimal if the deposit holders’ relative
risk aversion coefficient exceeds 1, the bank has to liquidate more than one unit of the
long-run project for each additional patient consumer who withdraws in t = 1. In fact,
if the salvage value L is strictly smaller than 1, the bank has to liquidate an even larger
amount.
    Early liquidation of long-term investments reduces the bank’s ability to make pay-
ments in t = 2 and thus increases the incentive for patient consumers to withdraw their
money early. Specifically, Diamond and Dybvig (1983) assume that the bank must
honor a sequential service constraint. Depositors reach the teller one after the other
and the bank honors its contracts until it runs out of money. The sequential service
  11
     An important assumption in the Diamond-Dybvig model is that agents have restricted trading
opportunities, in the sense that they cannot trade in a secondary market at the intermediate date.
If such trading were possible, financial intermediation can no longer support the optimal allocation
because agents would arbitrage the optimal insurance scheme offered by the bank (see Jacklin (1987),
Diamond (1997), Farhi, Golosov, and Tsyvinski (2009)).


                                                34
constraint gives depositors the incentive to withdraw their money as early as possible
if they think that patient consumers will also withdraw their demand deposits early
and render the bank insolvent. Because of this payoff externality, individual agents’
early withdrawal decisions are strategic complements. As a result, there also exists a
bank run equilibrium in which all agents immediately withdraw their deposits in t = 1
and the bank is forced to liquidate its assets. In the Diamond-Dybvig model, both the
Pareto inferior bank run equilibrium and the full insurance equilibrium are possible,
and which equilibrium is selected is not pinned down by the model. Equilibrium selec-
tion may, for example, depend on sunspots, i.e., commonly observed exogenous random
variables that serve as a coordination device.
    There are a number of ways to eliminate the inferior run equilibrium. Suspension
of convertibility eliminates the bank run equilibrium as long as the fraction of impa-
tient consumers λ is deterministic. If the bank commits itself to serve only the first
λ customers who attempt to withdraw their demand deposits, no assets ever need be
liquidated, and the bank always has enough money to pay c∗2 . Consequently, patient
consumers never have an incentive to withdraw early. If the fraction of impatient con-
sumers λ is random, on the other hand, suspension of convertibility does not prevent
bank runs, since the bank does not know when to stop paying out money in t = 1.
Deposit insurance can eliminate the bank run equilibrium even for a random λ. If the
deposit guarantee of c∗1 is nominal, an inflation tax that depends on early withdrawals
can reduce the real value of the demand deposit. This eliminates the patient consumers’
incentive to withdraw their money early. Finally, banking panics may be prevented if
the central bank is willing to act as a lender of last resort. Intuitively, if agents know
that the bank can borrow from a lender of last resort and never has to liquidate the
long-term investment, there is no reason for patient consumers to run. Bagehot (1873)
famously proposed that the lender of last resort should lend to illiquid but solvent
institutions, at a penalty rate and against good collateral. Rochet and Vives (2004)
formalize this idea using a global games setup (more on this below). Of course, one
difficulty with this type of lender-of-last-resort intervention is that in practice it may
be difficult to tell apart an illiquid institution from a truly insolvent institution.

4.1.2   Information-induced Bank Runs

In the Diamond-Dybvig model, bank runs arise only as sunspot phenomena. One im-
plication is that bank runs may arise at any time, and not necessarily during financial


                                           35
crises. However, empirically bank runs seem to be related to fundamental informa-
tion. For example, Gorton (1988) demonstrates that bank runs usually occur after bad
fundamental news about the health of a bank or the financial system.
    A number of models analyze the connection between fundamental news and bank
runs (e.g., Postlewaite and Vives (1987), Jacklin and Bhattacharya (1988), Chari and
Jagannathan (1988), Morris and Shin (2001), Goldstein and Pauzner (2005)). The
common theme in these papers is that interim information about the model’s parameters
transforms a model of multiple equilibria into a model of amplification, in which in the
unique equilibrium a bank run occurs with a certain probability. In these models, bank
runs usually occur when a fundamental variable crosses a threshold, which means that
small changes in the information environment can lead to large changes in behavior and
thus precipitous amplification.
    For example, in Jacklin and Bhattacharya (1988) the payoff of the long-run in-
vestment project R is random and some agents receive information about R prior
to their withdrawal decision. In contrast to Diamond and Dybvig (1983), there is a
unique equilibrium. In this equilibrium, bank runs occur only in some states of the
world. Postlewaite and Vives (1987) develop an alternative framework with a unique
information-induced bank run equilibrium for certain parameter values.
    The payoff structure in Jacklin and Bhattacharya (1988) differs from Diamond and
Dybvig (1983) in two ways. First, the salvage value of the illiquid investment project,
L, is zero in t = 1. Second, the final payoff of the illiquid project R is random. The
probability of a high return RH is (1 − θ) and the probability of a low return RL is
θ. In the latter case, the bank can pay at most a fraction RL /RH of the maximum
payment in t = 2. Agents learn their time preference β in t = 1. A fixed fraction α of
the more patient “late consumers” also receive a signal about the payoff of the illiquid
project. This signal allows the informed late consumers to update their prior θ to θ̂.
Impatient consumers have a preference to consume early and thus withdraw a large
fraction of their deposits from the bank in t = 1. However, informed patient consumers
also withdraw their money early if the posterior probability of the low project payoff
RL , θ̂, is above a threshold level θ̄, which triggers a bank run.
    Chari and Jagannathan (1988) analyze information-induced bank runs where unin-
formed late consumers infer information from the aggregate withdrawal rate. In their
setup, all agents are risk neutral with a utility function U i (c1 , c2 ) = c1 + β i c2 . Type
1 agents are early consumers and their β 1 is close to zero. Type 2 agents with high
β 2 are late consumers. The fraction λ ∈ {0, λ1 , λ2 } of impatient early consumers is

                                             36
random. As in Jacklin and Bhattacharya (1988), a fraction α of late consumers receive
a signal about the random return of the illiquid investment project R ∈ {RL , RH }.
However, this fraction is also random with α ∈ {0, ᾱ}. In contrast to Diamond and
Dybvig (1983), the authors do not assume the sequential service constraint. In their
model all deposit holders arrive simultaneously and there is a pro rata allocation of the
funds. If short-term funds are not sufficient, the bank can prematurely liquidate the
long-run project. As long as total aggregate withdrawals do not exceed some threshold
K̄ the salvage value of the long-run investment project is L = 1. Otherwise, premature
liquidation is costly, i.e., L < 1.
    In this model, a large withdrawal of deposits (i) can be due to a large fraction of
impatient consumers, that is, a high realization of λ, or (ii) may occur because informed
patient consumers receive a bad signal about R. Since uninformed patient consumers
cannot distinguish between both forms of shocks, they base their decisions solely on
aggregate withdrawals. Hence, uninformed patient consumers might misinterpret large
withdrawals due to a high λ as being caused by a bad signal received by informed late
consumers. This induces them to withdraw their funds and forces banks to liquidate
their investment projects. This type of wrong inference by the uninformed deposit
holders can lead to bank runs even when R = RH . The liquidation costs erode the
bank’s assets and thus possible payouts in t = 2. Note that in Chari and Jagannathan
(1988), strategic complementarities arise for two reasons: The early withdrawal sends a
signal to the uninformed deposit holders that the return of the long-run asset is probably
low (information externality) and also forces the bank to conduct costly liquidation
(payoff externality).12
    More recently, Morris and Shin (2001) and Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) have used
global games techniques to analyze bank run models with unique equilibria. In these
models, every agent receives a noisy signal about the return of the long-run project.
In the unique equilibrium, bank runs are triggered whenever the realization of the
fundamental is below some threshold.
    Allen and Gale (1998, 2004) extend the original Diamond-Dybvig model by intro-
ducing uncertainty about the size of the aggregate preference shock λ in addition to
uncertainty about the return of the long-term investment R. Uncertainty about R in-
troduces the possibility of fundamental bank runs: Depositors may choose to withdraw
when R = RL . The bank can prevent this run by limiting the amount the depositor
  12
    In Gorton (1985), a bank can stop a run if R = RH . By paying a verification cost, it is able to
credibly communicate the true return RH and suspend convertibility.


                                                37
is allowed to withdraw at date 1 to be less than his consumption at date 2. However,
Allen and Gale show that it may actually be preferable not to prevent the bank run
when R = RL . Allowing the bank run in the low state can raise ex-ante welfare if the
loss from early liquidation in response to the bank run in the low state is more than
offset by the gains in the high state. For example, this can be the case when the low
payoff RL is sufficiently unlikely. One way to interpret this result is that the bank run
in the bad state introduces a state contingency that is not possible with a standard
deposit contract. Another important implication of this analysis is that, from an ex-
ante welfare perspective, bank runs and, more generally, crises need not be inefficient
phenomena; they may occur as part of an efficient equilibrium.
    When the fraction of early consumers is random, λ ∈ {λH , λL }, but banks have
to choose the amount invested in the liquid asset ex-ante, this can lead to substantial
price volatility. If banks want to hold sufficient liquidity to serve withdrawal demands
even in the high liquidity demand state, they will end up holding excess liquidity in
the low liquidity demand state. This can be an equilibrium only if the price of the
long-term asset is sufficiently low in the high liquidity demand state and sufficiently
high in the low liquidity demand state. In other words, an equilibrium where banks
hold sufficient liquidity will exhibit significant price volatility. In addition, there may
be a mixed-strategy equilibrium with default in which ex-ante identical banks choose
different portfolios and offer different deposit contracts. In particular, there are safe
banks that choose low values of d and x and never default and there are risky banks
that choose high values of d and x and run the risk of default. Overall, we see that in
the presence of aggregate risk, equilibria usually exhibit asset price volatility, default
of intermediaries, or both.
    Another potential amplifying mechanism during crises is the presence of Knightian
uncertainty. Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008) present a model of this phenomenon.
The argument is that financial crises may be characterized by Knightian uncertainty
about the environment, rather than merely increases in the riskiness of asset payoffs.
For example, economic agents may call into question their model of the world once a
crisis hits.
    As in Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Caballero and Krishnamurthy assume that
agents are subject to discount factor shocks. However, unlike in the Diamond-Dybvig
model, there are three periods with potentially two waves of discount factor shocks.
Agents exhibit max-min behavior relative to the second, more unlikely shock. Individ-
ually, all agents prepare for the worst-case, even though collectively it is not possible

                                            38
that they are all hit by the worst case scenario. As a result, agents act as if they
collectively overestimate the probability of the second more unlikely shock and hold
too much liquidity. As in the bank run models discussed above, a central bank could
improve welfare (measured under true probabilities, not under the agents’ max-min
preferences)—for example, by acting as a lender of last resort. Conceptually, Knight-
ian uncertainty and the associated belief distortions in Caballero and Krishnamurthy
(2008) play a role similar to the sequential service constraint in Diamond and Dybvig
(1983).
    In all of the models discussed above, liquidity mismatch is a central element of
amplification and propagation of shocks during financial crises. Of course, as seen in
our discussion of the canonical Diamond-Dybvig model, maturity transformation is a
central and, at least to some extent, a desirable element of financial intermediation.
Moreover, in addition to the liquidity provision rationale provided by Diamond and
Dybvig (1983), Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and Diamond and Rajan (2001) point out
that, in the absence of deposit insurance, short-term financing can serve another positive
role: The fragility created by the deposit contract disciplines the intermediary and
enables him to raise more funds than an entrepreneur could on his own.
    However, given the potential costs of maturity mismatch during crises, an impor-
tant question is whether the amount of liquidity mismatch that is privately chosen
by financial institutions is optimal. Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2012) argue that this
may not be the case. In particular, an individual creditor to a financial institution
can have an incentive to shorten the maturity of his loan, allowing him to adjust his
financing terms or pull out before other creditors can. This, in turn, causes all other
creditors to shorten their maturity as well. This dynamic leads to a maturity rat race
that is present whenever interim information is mostly about the probability of default
rather than the recovery in default. If financial institutions cannot commit to a matu-
rity structure, equilibrium financing may be inefficiently short-term in the sense that
the financial institution may use more short-term debt than would be warranted by
optimally trading off intermediation and commitment benefits against that resulting
financial fragility. In addition, Acharya (2009), Acharya and Yorulmazer (2007, 2008) ,
and Farhi and Tirole (2012) point out that if financial institutions expect authorities to
intervene via untargeted bailouts during financial crises, this provides another reason
for financial institutions to finance themselves short-term, increase leverage, and load
on systemic risk.



                                           39
4.2    Collateral/Margin Runs
Traditional banks that fund themselves primarily through demand deposits are subject
to counterparty bank runs as modelled in Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Modern finan-
cial institutions finance themselves to a large extent through wholesale funding markets
and securitized lending, like the repo market. These markets are subject to collateral
runs via increased margin requirements by financiers, as in Brunnermeier and Pedersen
(2009). Collateralized lending can be more anonymous since it is secured by the collat-
eral asset rather than the credibility of the counterparty. Such collateral runs occurred
in the asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) market in 2007 (Acharya, Schnabl, and
Suarez (2012)) and in parts of the repo market in 2008 (Gorton and Metrick (2011),
Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2011), and Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2010)).
These runs can cause spillover and contagion effects because changes in prices lead to
losses that depress financial institutions’ net worth (equity). Consequently, they are
forced to fire-sell assets, which, in turn, further depresses prices and increases losses.
This leads to another round of selling, and so on.
    We can distinguish two liquidity spirals that emerge in this context and amplify the
effects of initial shocks. The first is the loss spiral, which is depicted in the outer circle
of Figure 3. The loss spiral is driven by the loss of net worth of traders and financial
institutions during crises. The second liquidity spiral is the margin/haircut spiral, which
is depicted in the inner circle in Figure 3. The margin spiral works primarily through
increased volatility during crises. As volatility increases, margins and haircuts increase,
which reduces the maximum leverage investors can take on. The resulting fire sales
can lead to higher volatility, which exacerbates the initial shock and leads to a further
tightening of margins. The two liquidity spirals affect a broad array of risky assets
and can spill over across various investors, leading to contagion and the flight-to-safety
phenomenon. Moreover, the two liquidity spirals are often at work at the same time
and reinforce each other.
    Net worth matters in these models because the issuance of equity is limited. For
example, experts can issue only a certain amount of equity, since they are subject to a
“skin in the game”constraint as in Holmström and Tirole (1997). In addition, investors
may also face a constraint on debt issuance (or, equivalently, leverage). For secured
lending, the leverage ratio is capped by the margins—often also expressed as haircuts
or loan-to-value ratios. For unsecured lending, the total quantity of lending might be
rationed since part of future cash flow is non-pledgeable as in Hart and Moore (1994).


                                             40
Figure 3: Liquidity spirals during financial crises. The figure illustrates the two com-
ponents of liquidity spirals: the (i) loss spiral (outer circle) and (ii) the margin spiral
(inner circle).

Alternatively, higher borrowing may be limited because raising the interest rate on loans
may worsen the pool of loan applicants, leading to a “lemons” problem as in Stiglitz
and Weiss (1981).
    We now discuss both liquidity spirals in turn before focusing on the contagion and
flight-to-safety aspects.

4.2.1   Loss Spiral

The loss spiral arises because a decline in asset values erodes the net worth of levered
financial institutions much faster than their gross worth (total assets). For example, if a
financial institution has a leverage ratio of 10, a loss of 5% on its assets leads to a jump
in the leverage ratio from 10 to 19. If this decline in asset value is permanent, a financial
institution might want to sell some of these assets to return to its target leverage ratio.
However, even when the decline in asset value is only temporary, financial institutions
might be forced to reduce their exposure, even though they would still be at their
target leverage after the temporary shock disappears. This is particularly the case
when the financial institution’s liquidity mismatch is high, i.e., when assets can only
be sold with a large price impact (low market liquidity) and liabilities are short-term
(low funding liquidity). Importantly, it is not just a financial institution’s individual
liquidity mismatch that determines the size of the loss spiral. Rather, it is determined


                                             41
by the liquidity mismatch and aggregate selling of all institutions.
    The loss spiral arises in equilibrium because natural buyers for the asset (buyers with
expertise) may be constrained at the time. This was pointed out in the seminal paper
by Shleifer and Vishny (1992): First-best users, for example industry peers, are likely to
be constrained at the same time that a firm is in distress (consider, for example, selling
airlines in the airline industry). As a result, assets are sold to second-best users at fire-
sale prices. In a similar vein, in Allen and Gale (1994), limited market participation
restricts the amount of capital available to absorb asset sales that result when agents
are hit by preference shocks in the spirit of Diamond and Dybvig (1983). In Gromb
and Vayanos (2002), arbitrageurs are subject to margin constraints and may hold back
because of binding margin constraints today. Acharya and Viswanathan (2011) provide
a model in which both the need to sell assets and the limited ability to buy at an interim
date arise from moral hazard concerns that lead to credit rationing.
    In addition to outright binding constraints, also traders that are not currently con-
strained may prefer to sit out and keep dry powder for future buying opportunities.
For example, in Shleifer and Vishny (1997), expert arbitrageurs are concerned about
equity capital outflows after an adverse price move. In Gromb and Vayanos (2002), ar-
bitrageurs that are subject to margin constraints may hold back even if the constraint is
not binding today (i.e., in anticipation of binding constraints in the future). In Kondor
(2009), arbitrageurs also face margin constraints. If an initial mispricing persists, it has
to widen in equilibrium since arbitrageurs’ losses accumulate. A similar mechanism is
also at work in Diamond and Rajan (2011), who show that this may induce banks with
limited liability to hold on to impaired illiquid assets, even though this exposes them
to default risk. In all of these models, a reduction in arbitrageurs’ net worth reduces
their ability to step in, which leads to a (static) loss spiral. In addition, arbitrageurs
may also become more risk averse as their net worth declines. For example, in Xiong
(2001) expert arbitrageurs that can trade in a potentially mispriced asset have log util-
ity, such that their absolute risk aversion decreases with net worth. The risk of the
asset’s cash flow process, on the other hand, stays constant as the level of cash flows
drops. Arbitrageurs stabilize asset prices during normal times, but may exacerbate
price movements when their net worth is impaired.
    Interestingly, losses to net worth can lead to long-lasting effects. This has been
explored particularly in the macroeconomics literature that focuses on amplification
and persistence of effects that arise from losses to net worth. For example, Bernanke
and Gertler (1989) and Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997) study persistence in a costly-state-

                                             42
verification framework à la Townsend (1979) and Gale and Hellwig (1985). In these
models, investments are optimally financed via debt contracts: A debt contract mini-
mizes the verification costs since they are incurred only in states where the entrepreneur
defaults. In Bernanke and Gertler (1989), an adverse shock lowers the net worth of the
leveraged entrepreneurs. The lower the entrepreneurs’ net worth, the higher the prob-
ability of default, such that expected verification costs increase. This lowers overall
economic activity, profits, and retained earnings. Most importantly, it can take several
periods for entrepreneurs to accumulate sufficient retained earnings such that their net
worth is high enough for economic output to reach its full potential. Losses to net
worth thus cause persistent effects.
    In addition to persistence, the macro literature has also pointed out that the dynamic
amplification effect dwarfs the simple static (within period) amplification effect. In
Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) this arises because of technologically illiquidity
of capital (via the introduction of non-linear costs in the adjustment of capital). As a
consequence, the price of physical capital is procyclical, which amplifies the net worth
effects. Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) identify a dynamic amplification mechanism in
a setting in which entrepreneurs face a debt constraint and cannot issue any equity.
More specifically, each productive entrepreneur’s borrowing is limited by the collateral
value of his physical capital in the next period. After an unanticipated productivity
shock, leveraged entrepreneurs’ net worth drops. Like in the models mentioned above,
economic activity is depressed in future periods as well and it takes a long time to
rebuild entrepreneurs’ net worth. This period’s temporary shock not only adversely
impacts future periods, but the cutback of investment in the future also feeds back to
the current period. Reduced future investment depresses future asset prices, but since
this reduction is fully anticipated, it already depresses the current asset price, which
again lowers current collateral values, current borrowing, and investment. The dynamic
amplification mechanism in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) quantitatively dominates the
purely static loss spiral.
    Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2010) derive a fully dynamic and stochastic model
in which shocks occur with strictly positive probability. In addition to the dynamic
amplification effects, an interesting endogenous volatility dynamic emerges. Expert
investors only face an equity constraint and they limit their leverage for precautionary
reasons: They want to preserve buying power should others have to fire-sell their assets
in the future. The paper shows that the economy spends a lot of time close to the
steady state, around which amplification is small. Occasionally, however, the economy

                                           43
ends up in a crisis state and it can take a long time for the economy to emerge from
this crisis. The model also shows that a reduction in fundamental volatility can lead to
higher overall volatility of the system—the volatility paradox. The reason is that when
fundamental volatility falls, endogenous risk rises since expert investors take on higher
leverage. Amplification effects also arise in the limited participation model of He and
Krishnamurthy (2012), in which households can invest in the risky asset only through
intermediaries. Given the agency problem between households and intermediaries, the
net worth of the latter is the key state variable.

4.2.2   Margin/Haircut or Leverage Spiral

We now discuss the margin spiral. So far we have not explained why a drop in asset
prices leads to higher margins, haircuts, and a more cautious attitude towards lend-
ing. If the drop in the asset price is temporary—for example, resulting from a lack
of liquidity—investors with the necessary expertise should be facing good buying op-
portunities. Hence, one might think that lenders would be willing to lend more freely
by lowering margins when prices drop for liquidity reasons. Even if the price shock is
permanent, it is not immediately clear why, in percentage terms, the margin on the
asset should increase after a price drop.
    However, there are at least two reasons why one may expect margins to increase
after a downward price move. First, as in unsecured lending, asymmetric information
problems can become more severe after a large price drop. For one, financiers may
become especially careful about accepting assets as collateral if they fear receiving a
particularly bad selection of assets. They might, for example, be worried that structured
investment vehicles have already sold off good, marketable assets, such that the assets
left are less valuable “lemons.” Relatedly, after a price drop, the collateral asset can
become more informationally sensitive, leading to asymmetric information. While it
may not be worthwhile to collect information about a debt security as long as default
is extremely unlikely, after bad news default is more likely, and suddenly people with
better information technology have an incentive to collect private information. This
in turn creates asymmetric information and a lemons problem. Alternatively, when
debt becomes more informationally sensitive, this increases the impact of pre-existing
asymmetric information (see Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) and Dang, Gorton, and
Holmström (2010)).
    Second, unexpected price shocks might be a harbinger of higher future volatility.


                                           44
Because margins are set to protect financiers against adverse price movements in the
collateral asset, margins (or, equivalently, haircuts) typically increase with volatility.
Geanakoplos (2003) considers an example with “scary bad news” where bad news leads
to higher fundamental volatility in the future. More generally, Geanakoplos (1997,
2003) studies endogenous collateral/margin constraints in a general equilibrium frame-
work in which no payments in future periods/states can be credibly promised unless
they are 100% collateralized with the value of durable assets.
    In Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), the (dollar) margin mt has to be large enough
to cover the position’s π-value-at-risk (where π is a non-negative number close to zero,
e.g., 1%):
                              π = Pr(−∆pjt+1 > mj+  t | Ft ).                         (4)

The margin/haircut is implicitly defined by equation (4) as the π-quantile of next pe-
riod’s value change ∆pjt+1 of collateral asset j. Each risk-neutral expert has to finance
mj+   j+
   t xt    of the total value of his (long) position pjt xj+
                                                           t  with his own equity capital.
                                            j− j−
The same is true for short positions mt xt . Thus margins/haircuts determine the
maximum leverage (and loan-to-value ratio).
     As the estimated volatility of the potential price changes in the collateral asset,
∆pjt+1 , increases, so does the margin. In practice, these volatility estimates are often
backward looking as institutions use past data to predict future volatility. Hence, a
sharp price change increases volatility estimates. In Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)
fundamental volatility is truly clustered. That is, a large shock today leads to an
increase in future volatility that only slowly returns to its normal level σ j .
     Most of the time, price movements in this model are governed by fundamental cash
flow news. Occasionally, however, temporary selling (or buying) pressure arises that
reverts only in the next period. Without credit constraints, risk-neutral experts would
bridge the asynchronicity between buying and selling pressure, provide market liquidity,
and thereby ensure that the price pjt of asset j follows its expected cash flow vtj . In other
words, any temporary selling or buying pressure is simply offset by risk-neutral experts.
When experts face credit constraints, in the sense that they have to raise financing from
a group of financiers, their activity is limited and the price pjt can deviate from vtj . The
financiers, who set the margins at which they lend to the experts, attribute large price
changes mostly to shifts in fundamentals, since they occur more frequently than the
temporary liquidity shock that arises due to asynchronicity between buying and selling
pressure.


                                             45
    After a price shock, margins/haircuts widen, forcing experts to take smaller posi-
tions. Margins are thus destabilizing. The more sensitive margins are to a change in
price level (which indirectly results from the persistence of fundamental volatility), the
lower the experts’ funding liquidity. In the extreme case, if margins were to jump to
100%, margin funding dries up completely and experts cannot lever their positions at
all. This is equivalent to not being able to roll over debt, because the firm becomes
unable to use its assets as a basis for raising funds. Hence, margin sensitivity and
short-term maturity of liabilities are two equivalent forms of funding illiquidity.
    Low funding liquidity on the liability side of the balance sheet, combined with low
market liquidity (price impact) on the asset side (high liquidity mismatch), leads to
the liquidity spirals shown in Figure 3. When market liquidity is low, then selling the
asset depresses the price, which in turn worsens funding liquidity, which leads to even
more forced selling. Importantly, these two liquidity concepts do not exist in a vacuum;
they are influenced by the financial soundness of other financial institutions. If other
experts were able to buy the assets and stabilize the price, expert i’s constraint would
be relaxed and he could buy more assets as well (note that this is a form of strategic
complementarity).13 In price theory terms, the experts’ demand function for the asset
is backward bending. As the price drops, margins increase and, rather than buying
more assets, experts become more constrained and can only buy fewer assets.14
    In addition, investors with buying capacity may be reluctant to purchase collateral
assets because they anticipate that they may not be able to finance this purchase in
the future and may have to sell the asset at a discount themselves. This dynamic arises
when potential buyers have to finance their purchases using short-term debt and are
thus exposed to rollover risk. Acharya, Gale, and Yorulmazer (2011) show that, in this
situation, relatively small changes in the fundamental value of the collateral asset can
lead to large changes in its debt capacity. This channel again highlights the important
implications of liquidity mismatch during financial crises.
    Shocks to agents’ funding conditions can also cause liquidity spirals of deteriorating
market liquidity, funding liquidity, and falling prices, with spillover effects across mar-
kets. Just like the risk of a traditional counterparty bank run by depositors leads to
multiple equilibria in Diamond and Dybvig (1983), so does the risk of a collateral run
  13
     In more extreme cases, other traders might even engage in “predatory trading,” deliberately forcing
others to liquidate their positions at fire-sale prices, as in Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2005).
  14
     In Gennotte and Leland (1990), demand curves are backward bending since a portfolio insurance
trading strategy prescribes agents to sell as the price falls.



                                                  46
of increased margin requirements by financiers in Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009).
When other financiers demand high margins, this high margin becomes self-fulfilling.
Collateral runs are the modern form of bank runs that occurred in the ABCP and repo
market in 2007 and 2008.
    Specifically, there exists one equilibrium in which experts can absorb the selling
pressure and thereby stabilize the price. Hence, financiers predict low future price
volatility and set low margins/haircuts. These low margins enable experts to absorb
the selling pressure in the first place. In contrast, in the illiquidity equilibrium, experts
do not absorb the selling pressure and the price drops. As a consequence, financiers
think that future volatility will be high and, consequently, they charge a high margin.
This in turn makes it impossible for experts to fully absorb the initial selling pressure.
    One important implication of the analysis is that as experts’ net worth falls, pos-
sibly due to low realization of v, the price eventually drops discontinuously from the
perfect liquidity price with pjt = vtj to the price level of the low liquidity equilibrium.
This discontinuity feature is referred to as fragility of liquidity. Besides this disconti-
nuity, price is also very sensitive to further declines in experts’ net worth due to two
liquidity spirals: The (static) loss spiral and the margin/haircut spiral both lead to
de-leveraging. Adrian and Shin (2010) provide empirical evidence for these spirals for
investment banks by showing that their leverage is procyclical. Gorton and Metrick
(2011) document that such increases in margins occurred in parts of the (bilateral) repo
market during the financial crisis of 2007-09. Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2011)
and Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2010), on the other hand, show that margins in
the tri-party repo market were relatively stable. However, commercial banks seem to
have a countercyclical leverage, according to He, Khang, and Krishnamurthy (2010),
potentially because they had access to the Fed’s lending facilities.

Marking to market. The choice of accounting rules involves a trade-off between
the loss spiral and the margin spiral. If all positions are marked to market, the loss
spiral is more pronounced as holders of assets have to recognize losses immediately. On
the other hand, allowing financial institutions to hide their losses through more flexible
mark-to-model accounting rules does not necessarily stabilize markets. The reason is
that, relative to marking to market, mark-to-model accounting rules may lead to more
asymmetric information between borrowers and lenders and may thus exacerbate the
margin spiral.
    The loss spiral is more pronounced for stocks with low market liquidity, because sell-

                                             47
ing them at a time of financial distress will bring about a greater price drop than selling
a more liquid asset would. For many structured finance products, market liquidity is so
low that no reliable price exists because no trade takes place. As a consequence, owners
have considerable discretion over the value at which a particular asset is marked. Sell-
ing some of these assets in a financial crisis would establish a low price and force the
holder to mark down remaining holdings. Hence, investors are reluctant to do this—and
instead prefer to sell assets with higher market liquidity first.

4.2.3   Contagion and Flight to Safety

Both losses to net worth and tightening margins can also lead to contagion. In a setting
with multiple assets, risky asset prices might comove (even though their cash flows
are independently distributed) since they are exposed to the same funding liquidity
constraint. Losses can also generate contagion between assets when those assets are
held by common investors. For example, in a multi-asset extension of Xiong (2001),
Kyle and Xiong (2001) show that adverse wealth effects from losses lead to price declines
across various asset classes.
    In times when experts’ net worth is depressed, the difference in market liquidity
between high margin and low margin assets increases—a phenomenon that is often
referred to as flight to quality. This in turn can lead to larger endogenous margins,
exacerbating the price difference even further. At those times, assets with different
(exogenous) margins might trade at vastly different prices even though their payoffs are
very similar, resulting in a violation of the law of one price. Garleanu and Pedersen
(2011) provide a theoretical model that underscores this point, while Mitchell and
Pulvino (2012) provide empirical evidence from the 2008 financial crisis.
    Vayanos (2004) studies a multi-asset general equilibrium model with stochastic
volatility. Fund managers face transaction costs and are concerned about possible fund
outflows. Vayanos shows that, during volatile times, liquidity premia increase, investors
become more risk averse, assets become more negatively correlated with volatility, as-
sets’ pairwise correlations can increase, and illiquid assets’ market betas increase.
    Closely related is the flight to safety effect. Less informed financiers, who set mar-
gins, cut back their funding to leveraged expert investors and park their funds in nearly
risk-free assets. The prices of risky assets with low market liquidity fall, while prices
of flight-to-safety assets increase (as long as their supply is not perfectly elastic). A
good example of this phenomenon is the U.S. Treasury market during the summer of


                                            48
2011, when political wrangling about lifting the U.S. debt ceiling led to a downgrading
of U.S. Treasuries and an increase in CDS spreads on U.S. debt. At the same time, the
yield on U.S. Treasuries actually decreased, as investors fled to the “safe haven” asset,
U.S. Treasuries. Similarly, when Germany extended debt guarantees to the European
Financial Stability Fund, its debt became more risky and CDS spreads increased. Yet,
at the same time, large flight-to-safety capital flows from Spain and Italy into Ger-
man government bonds significantly lowered the yield on German bonds. Interestingly,
which asset obtains “flight-to-safety status” involves coordination. If most market par-
ticipants think that people will flee to a particular asset in times of crisis, this asset
enjoys higher market liquidity and hence is automatically safe as long as the cash flow
risk is somewhat contained.


4.3    Lenders’ or Borrowers’ Friction?
In studying amplification mechanisms, we have up to now focused mostly on the balance
sheets of the borrowers of funds and have assumed that lenders have deep pockets. For
example, in Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) it
is the weakness of borrower balance sheets that causes amplification and persistence.
However, another potential channel for amplification is on the lending side—in partic-
ular, the balance sheets of banks and other financial institution. When lenders have
limited capital, they may restrict their lending as their own financial situation worsens,
thus amplifying shocks. We can distinguish two main mechanisms through which this
happens: (i) moral hazard in monitoring and (ii) precautionary hoarding.
    Distinguishing whether frictions arise on the borrower’s or the lender’s side is im-
portant, because the location of the friction may have implications for which regulatory
interventions are appropriate. When the friction is on the borrower’s side, the appropri-
ate policy reaction may be to recapitalize or subsidize borrowers. On the other hand,
if the balance sheets of financial institutions are restricting lending, then it may be
optimal to recapitalize those institutions, as opposed to strengthening borrowers. To
distinguish between these alternative channels, it is thus useful to have models that
incorporate both: frictions on the borrower and on the lender side (a “double-decker”
model). One influential framework that combines these two channels is the Holmström
and Tirole (1997) model, in which financial institutions matter because they perform
valuable monitoring services but need to be incentivized to do so.
    The idea that financial intermediaries add value by monitoring borrowers goes back


                                           49
to Diamond (1984). The main mechanism behind this insight is one of returns to scale
in monitoring. If firms raise financing directly from m investors, monitoring by each
investor results in duplication of monitoring effort. Alternatively, the m investors can
hand their funds to a financial intermediary, who then lends to the firm. The advantage
of this setup is that only the financial intermediary has to monitor. Investors enter
debt contracts with the financial intermediary and impose a non-pecuniary punishment
whenever the financial intermediary cannot repay. This non-pecuniary penalty ensures
that the financial intermediary will in fact monitor the borrower. Because investment
projects are independent, if the financial intermediary lends to a sufficient number of
firms, the law of large numbers makes sure it can always repay investors, such that non-
pecuniary costs are never incurred. More generally, financial intermediation dominates
direct lending as long as the intermediary finances a large enough number of borrowers.15
    While the Diamond (1984) model establishes an important monitoring role for finan-
cial intermediaries, the model is less specific about how intermediaries are incentivized
to monitor. This is captured in reduced form in a non-pecuniary cost that creditors im-
pose on the financial intermediary in the case of default. Holmström and Tirole (1997)
provide a framework that models monitoring incentives by financial intermediaries in
a more full-fledged manner. Their main insight is that intermediaries must have a suf-
ficiently large stake in the ultimate borrower to have incentives to monitor. This, in
turn, means that the balance sheet of an intermediary limits the number of firms that
intermediary can finance. Moral hazard arises when the net worth of the intermediary’s
stake falls because the intermediary may then stop monitoring, forcing the market to
fall back to direct lending without monitoring.
    Like Diamond (1984), the Holmström and Tirole (1997) model features three classes
of agents: firms, banks, and uninformed investors. The model features moral hazard at
two levels. First, firms must exert effort such that their projects are positive NPV. If
they do not exert effort, they receive a private benefit, but the project becomes negative
NPV. Second, banks can monitor firms (reducing their private benefit from shirking),
but will monitor only if it is in their own interest to do so. The time line of the model
is as follows. At date 0, firms seek to finance an investment that exceeds their assets,
I > A. Firms can write contracts with both uninformed investors and banks. At date
1, banks can monitor the firm. Monitoring is efficient, but banks have to be given
  15
    As discussed by Hellwig (2000), the analysis changes when risk aversion is added. In particular,
if borrowers are risk averse, financial intermediaries provide financing and insurance services, and it
may be optimal to shift risk away from borrowers.


                                                  50
incentives to do so. In particular, a bank’s stake in the firm’s investment must be large
enough to make monitoring at cost k individually rational for the bank. At date 2, all
cash flows are realized.
    Firms that have sufficient assets, A ≥ A, can finance their project directly from
uninformed investors. Intuitively speaking, these firms have enough skin in the game
to exert effort such that no monitoring by banks is needed. Since monitoring is costly,
it is more efficient for those firms to raise all financing directly from the uninformed
investors. Firms with weaker balance sheets, A ≤ A < A, can raise funding only if
they are monitored by banks. In order to do so, they raise part of their funding from
banks (such that the bank just finds it individually rational to monitor) and raise the
remainder in the form of cheaper funding from uninformed investors. Importantly,
because banks have to hold a minimum stake in each firm they finance, the number of
firms that can receive monitored bank financing depends on the amount of capital in
the banking system, Km .
    In the Holmström and Tirole (1997) model, both lender and borrower balance sheets
matter. Stronger borrower balance sheets (a first-order stochastic dominance shift in the
distribution of borrower assets A) lead to an increase in output, illustrating the borrower
balance-sheet channel. A weakening of bank balance sheets leads to a contraction
in financing, illustrating how the lending channel can lead to a credit crunch. One
implication of this finding is that financial crises that significantly impair the balance
sheets of financial institutions can have significant negative repercussions on output
and real activity.
    Rampini and Viswanathan (2011) provide a dynamic model that incorporates the
balance sheets of both financial institutions and the corporate sector. In contrast to
Holmström and Tirole (1997), financial intermediaries are not monitoring specialists
but collateralization specialists: They are better able to collateralize claims than the
household sector. However, financial intermediaries are themselves constrained because
they have to raise their funding from the household sector, which is less good at lending
against collateral. This means that both the balance sheets of financial intermediaries
and the balance sheets of the corporate sector are state variables that affect the dynam-
ics of the economy. One important implication of their model is that, after a shock to
net worth, financial intermediaries accumulate capital more slowly than the corporate
sector. The reason is that for poorly capitalized firms, the marginal product of capital
is high relative to the spread that financial intermediaries can earn, such that the cor-
porate sector accumulates wealth faster. Because of this, a credit crunch (a reduction

                                            51
in the net worth of financial intermediaries) leads to a persistent reduction in output,
and the economy recovers only slowly.
    An alternative channel through which lender balance sheets can affect output is pre-
cautionary hoarding. Such precautionary hoarding arises if lenders are afraid that they
might suffer from interim shocks, such that they will need funds for their own projects or
trading strategies. The anticipation of those future shocks may then lead to a cutback in
lending today, comparable to precautionary savings in the classic consumption-savings
model. Precautionary hoarding is therefore more likely to arise when the likelihood of
interim shocks increases, and when outside funds are expected to be difficult to obtain
in the states where the shocks hit. Gale and Yorulmazer (2011) provide a model of such
precautionary liquidity hoarding. Their model also points to a speculative motive for
liquidity hoarding, because banks may choose to hold cash in order to exploit potential
fire-sale buying opportunities in the future. From a policy perspective, an implication of
their model is that banks hoard more liquidity than a social planner would, generating
a role for intervention by central banks to “unfreeze” lending markets.
    The troubles in the interbank lending market in 2007-08 are a textbook example
of precautionary hoarding by individual banks. As it became apparent that conduits,
structured investment vehicles, and other off-balance-sheet vehicles would likely draw
on credit lines extended by their sponsored bank, each bank’s uncertainty about its
own funding needs skyrocketed. At the same time, it became more uncertain whether
banks could tap into the interbank market after a potential interim shock, since it was
not known to what extent other banks faced similar problems. This led to sharp spikes
in the interbank market interest rate, LIBOR, relative to Treasuries.


4.4    Network Externalities
All our settings so far have assumed a distinct lending sector that provides credit to a
distinct borrowing sector. In reality, however, most financial institutions are lenders and
borrowers at the same time: The modern financial architecture consists of an interwoven
network of financial obligations. This network structure may play an important part
in propagating financial shocks during financial crises.
    The literature on financial networks is still in its infancy. A number of papers start
with a given financial network and highlight spillovers and amplification mechanisms
within this network. In some papers these spillovers occur via direct “domino effects,”
while other papers embed amplification via prices or bank runs into a network structure.


                                            52
Another emerging strand of this literature investigates network formation. A central
question here is whether an endogenous financial network will be efficient, or whether
it may become too complicated or excessively interconnected. Finally, network models
are central to the literature on payment systems and settlement risk.
    The most direct way for losses to propagate through a financial network is via direct
linkages between the balance sheets of financial institutions, or firms more generally.
The default of one financial institution on its obligations leads to losses on the balance
sheets of other financial institutions, which may lead to further defaults, and so on.
Eisenberg and Noe (2001) provide a model of such direct network dependence. Es-
sentially, starting with an initial default somewhere in the network, one has to check
whether other institutions in the system are able to make their payments given the
initial default. If this is not the case, at least one more institution defaults and one
then checks whether, given these additional losses, other institutions can make their
payments. This process continues until no further defaults are caused. Because in this
framework an initial default can lead to further defaults only via direct balance-sheet
linkages, it is sometimes referred to as the domino model of contagion.
    A number of studies have investigated the domino model of contagion using sim-
ulation studies (e.g., Upper and Worms (2004), Degryse and Nguyen (2007)). The
conclusion from these simulation studies, however, is that contagion through direct
domino linkages is usually not sufficiently strong to generate large crises. In this frame-
work, only very large initial shocks would lead to significant contagion. Perhaps this
should not be surprising. First of all, the direct domino model of contagion takes a very
static view of the financial system, in the sense that financial institutions are completely
passive and stand by as the initial shock feeds through the system. In practice, endoge-
nous responses by financial institutions to the initial shock may amplify its impact.
Second, the model of direct domino effects abstracts away from propagation through
price effects. Specifically, the initial default leads to losses only through direct losses
on obligations. However, if the initial default also leads to decreasing asset prices, this
provides an additional channel through which contagion can spread through the system
(for example, because financial constraints become tighter for all firms in the network).
Cifuentes, Ferrucci, and Shin (2005) add asset prices to a domino model of contagion.
In addition to direct bilateral exposures, contagion now also spreads through the ef-
fects of decreasing asset prices on banks’ balance sheets. The two channels of contagion
reinforce each other, which allows for more substantial contagion effects.
    Another mechanism that can amplify contagion within a network is the presence

                                            53
of bank runs. As is well known from Bhattacharya and Gale (1987), banks may form
networks to pool liquidity risk via the interbank market. However, such an arrangement
can also be a breeding ground for financial contagion, as pointed out by Allen and Gale
(2000b). Their model is a variant of Diamond and Dybvig (1983), in which banks are
connected in a network. The number of early consumers is random for each individual
bank, but the aggregate demand for liquidity at the intermediate date is constant.
Banks can thus insure each other via interbank deposits: A bank with a large number
of early consumers can obtain liquidity from a bank with a small number of early
consumers.
    As long as the overall liquidity demand is as expected, this type of insurance works
well, as in Bhattacharya and Gale (1987). However, Allen and Gale (2000b) show that
in the presence of a small unanticipated excess demand for liquidity, interconnections
via interbank deposits can lead to contagion. When the amount of liquidity in the
system is insufficient, banks have to liquidate some of the long-term investment. If the
amount that a bank has to liquidate is sufficiently large, a bank run is triggered and the
bank liquidated. But this means that other banks with deposits in the defaulting bank
suffer a loss, which may mean that they cannot serve their liquidity needs and may
suffer a bank run as well. The main insight in Allen and Gale (2000b) is that this type
of contagion depends on the network structure. For example, if all banks are connected
and hold interbank deposits with each other, an initial shock is spread evenly among all
other banks, which makes contagion less likely. When not all banks are connected, on
the other hand, the losses from an initial shock are concentrated in a smaller number
of other banks, which makes contagion more likely.
    In Allen and Gale (2000b), the liquidity shock that leads to contagion is unantic-
ipated (or occurs with very small probability), such that banks do not adjust their
liquidity buffers in response to the possible crisis. Moreover, because the crisis occurs
with arbitrarily small probability, it is socially optimal in their model not to insure
against the crisis. Zawadowski (2011) develops a related model in which banks that are
connected in a network know that they face future counterparty risk with positive prob-
ability and can choose to insure against this risk. Zawadowski shows that because of a
network externality, it is possible that banks do not insure against future counterparty
losses even though this would be socially desirable.
    Network risk has also received considerable attention in the literature on payment
systems. For example, Bech and Soramäki (2001) point out the possibility of gridlock
in the payment system. Consider a situation in which bank A owes 1 dollar to bank

                                           54
B, bank B owes 1 dollar to bank C, and bank C owes 1 dollar to bank A. In a gross
settlement system without netting, gridlock can ensue because each party can only pay
its obligation if it receives the dollar it is owed. If obligations were first netted out, this
situation would not arise.16 Such gridlock risk may arise in particular when individual
banks become more cautious about sending payments, which in turn may make other
banks take a more cautious stance as well. Afonso and Shin (2011) study this dynamic
in a model calibrated to one of the major U.S. payment systems, Fedwire. In their
framework, individually rational cautious behavior by banks is mutually reinforcing.
This can lead to illiquidity spirals in the payment system.
    Rotemberg (2011) extends this type of analysis to investigate how much liquidity
has to be in the system in order to avoid such gridlock. This depends on the financial
network. In particular, when the system is more interconnected, such that each firm
has more net creditors, more liquidity may be needed. The reason is that when firms
have a choice regarding which obligation to pay, they may send a dollar of liquidity to
nodes where it cannot be reused (i.e., continue to circle through the network).
    Rotemberg’s analysis also points to the public-good nature of netting, novation, and
trade compression within a network.17 In particular, if simplifying the financial network
via netting, novation, or trade compression benefits not only the parties that agree to
net their trades, but also the remainder of the network, then the public-good nature of
these netting transactions may lead to a financial network that is more interconnected
than would be optimal.
    Another approach to network formation is given in Allen, Babus, and Carletti
(2012), who show that the extent of information contagion in financial systems can
depend on the network structure. In this model, banks choose the number of connec-
tions they make to other banks in order to diversify their portfolio, but they do not
choose the overall network structure. For example, if there are six banks and each
bank links to two other banks, this can result in either two circles of three banks (a
clustered structure), or one large circle of six banks (an unclustered structure). When
banks are financed by short-term debt and there is interim information on bank default
  16
     Freixas and Parigi (1998) provide a model to compare gross and net payment systems. They
show that the central trade-off is that gross payment systems make intensive use of liquidity, while net
payment systems economize on liquidity but expose the system to contagion.
  17
     A novation occurs when one side of a contract assigns its obligation to another party. This allows
a party with two offsetting derivatives to step out of the picture, leaving only a contract between its
two original counterparties. In a compression trade, partially offsetting contracts are compressed and
replaced by a new contract. This is, for example, a common procedure in the CDS market.



                                                  55
probabilities, information contagion is more likely to arise under the clustered network
structure.
    Why may a simpler financial network be preferable to a more interconnected sys-
tem? One reason is network risk. Network risk is best illustrated by a simple example.
Consider a hedge fund that has an interest rate swap agreement with investment bank
A—that is, both parties have agreed to swap the difference between a floating interest
rate and a fixed interest rate. Now suppose that the hedge fund offsets its obligation
through another swap with a different investment bank. In the absence of counter-
party credit risk, the two swap agreements can be viewed as a single contract between
investment bank A and investment bank B; the hedge fund could simply step out of
the contract. However, this is not the case in the presence of counterparty risk. In
particular, it would be unwise for investment bank A to accept replacing the original
contract with a contract with investment bank B if it fears that investment bank B
might default on its commitment.




                Figure 4: A network of interest rate swap agreements.

    We can extend this example to see how an increase in perceived counterparty credit
risk might be self-fulfilling and create additional funding needs. Suppose that invest-
ment bank B had an offsetting swap agreement with a private equity fund, which in turn
offsets its exposure with investment bank A. In this hypothetical example, illustrated in
Figure 4, all parties are fully hedged and, hence, multilateral netting could eliminate all


                                            56
exposures. However, because all parties are aware only of their own contractual agree-
ments, they may not know the full situation and therefore become concerned about
counterparty credit risk even though there is none. If the investment banks refuse to
let the hedge fund and private equity fund net out their offsetting positions, both funds
have to either put up additional liquidity, or insure each other against counterparty
credit risk by buying credit default swaps. Anecdotally, this happened in the week af-
ter Lehman’s bankruptcy in September 2008. All major investment banks were worried
that their counterparties might default, such that they all bought credit default swap
protection against each other. As a result of deteriorated credit conditions and the
resulting buying pressure in the CDS market, the already high prices of credit default
swaps written on the major investment banks almost doubled.
    Network and counterparty credit risk problems are more easily overcome if a clear-
inghouse or another central authority or regulator knows who owes what to whom,
thus allowing multilateral netting to take place. One way to guarantee efficient netting
of obligations is by introducing a central clearing counterparty (CCP) for all trades.
Duffie and Zhu (2011) show that whether a CCP improves netting efficiency depends
on a trade-off between multilateral netting of one type of contract (for example, CDSs)
among all counterparties, which is possible when a CCP has been introduced, and bi-
lateral netting among many types of contracts (e.g., CDSs, currency swaps, interest
rate swaps). For a CCP to increase netting efficiency, the multilateral netting gains
created through the CCP must outweigh the losses in bilateral netting efficiency for
the remaining OTC contracts. Another important issue when considering a CCP is
the potential failure of the CCP itself. Specifically, while the presence of a CCP may
reduce counterparty risk among traders in the market, a potential failure of the CCP
itself would be a major systemic event. A CCP arrangement thus requires making sure
that the clearing house is well capitalized.


4.5    Feedback Effects between Financial Sector Risk and Sovereign
       Risk
So far we have focused primarily on propagation and amplification mechanisms within
the financial sector and from the financial sector to the real economy. In this section,
we briefly discuss another important feedback effect that arises when sovereign debt
becomes risky.
   Financial institutions are usually encouraged (or even required) to hold a cer-

                                           57
tain amount of safe and liquid assets. Typically, sovereign debt issued by developed
economies is considered to be such an asset. The rationale behind this reasoning is that
a sovereign can always print money to service its debt, which makes debt denominated
in domestic currency safe, at least in nominal terms. This (perceived) safety makes
sovereign debt an attractive instrument for risk and liquidity management purposes by
financial institutions. For example, many repo transactions rely on sovereign debt as
collateral and the margins on sovereign debt are typically lower than those for other
asset classes. Because of its perceived safety, sovereign debt of developed countries is
assigned zero risk under the Basel bank regulation framework.18
    However, even the debt of developed countries can become risky, as exemplified by
the recent sovereign debt crisis in Europe.19 If financial institutions rely on sovereign
debt for risk and liquidity management purposes, this introduces an interdependence of
sovereign and financial sector risk, which is illustrated in Figure 5. This interdependence
works through two main channels. First, an increase in the riskiness of government debt
impairs financial institutions that have large exposures to sovereign risk. This increases
the probability that the sovereign has to bail out the banking sector, which further
compromises the fiscal position of the sovereign. This increases yields on sovereign
debt and hence makes refinancing for the sovereign more challenging. Second, banks
that suffer losses on their holdings of sovereign debt may reduce their lending to the real
economy. The resulting decrease in credit slows down economic growth and thus reduces
the sovereign’s tax revenue, which again increases the riskiness of sovereign debt. In the
context of the European debt crisis, this feedback mechanism has been referred to as
the “diabolic loop” between sovereign risk and banking risk (Brunnermeier, Garicano,
Lane, Pagano, Reis, Santos, Thesmar, van Nieuwerburgh, and Vayanos (2011)).
    These feedback effects can be triggered either by an initial deterioration of the fiscal
position of the sovereign (for example, due to unsustainable spending) or by losses in the
banking sector (for example, when financial institutions are exposed to a crash in real
estate prices). Empirically, Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) document three stylized facts
that underscore these links between public debt and the financial sector. First, banking
crises often follow increases in external debt. Second, banking crises in turn often
precede or accompany sovereign debt crises. Third, public borrowing often increases
prior to external sovereign debt crises, for example because the government assumes
  18
    For example, under Basel II the risk weight on sovereign debt rated AA- and higher is is zero.
Basel III is similar to Basel II in this respect.
 19
    Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) provide an extensive survey of sovereign default over the centuries.


                                                58
Figure 5: Feedback effects between sovereign and financial sector risk (“diabolic loop”).

private debt as part of bailouts. Barth, Prabhavivadhana, and Yun (2012) document
that these interdependencies are stronger in countries where the ratio of bank assets to
GDP is relatively high.
    A number of recent papers study these feedback effects between sovereign risk and
financial sector risk.20 Bolton and Jeanne (2011) develop a model of two financially
integrated countries. The financial sectors in each country hold sovereign bonds, be-
cause safe bonds are required as collateral in the market for interbank loans. There is
a possibility that one of the two countries defaults, such that for diversification pur-
poses banks in each country hold debt issued by both sovereigns. While this generates
ex-ante diversification benefits, it also generates contagion ex post: A default by one
country is automatically transmitted to the other country via the integrated financial
sectors. Another finding of the paper is that financial integration without fiscal integra-
tion (meaning that each country issues bonds individually) results in an inefficiently low
  20
    An earlier literature has stressed the connection between banking crises and currency crises. This
link is documented in Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), who coined the term “twin crises.” See also
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).



                                                 59
supply of safe government bonds and an excessively high amount of risky government
debt. The safe country acts as a monopolist and restricts the supply of the safe-haven
asset. The risky country, on the other hand, issues too much risky debt because it does
not internalize the default costs it imposes on the other country.
    Gennaioli, Martin, and Rossi (2011) also provide a model of the interaction between
sovereign default, but in a one-country setting. Their key insight is that, when the
domestic banking sector holds a large amount of sovereign debt, it is more costly for the
country to default, as the default impairs the financial sector and leads to a reduction in
private credit. This generates a complementarity between public borrowing and private
credit markets. Countries with developed financial institutions that hold sovereign debt
have more incentive to repay their debt since default would disrupt economic growth.21
From an ex-ante perspective, large exposure of the domestic financial sector to sovereign
debt may thus have a benefit by incentivizing the sovereign to repay. The flip side of
this argument, of course, is that ex post sovereign default in countries with highly
developed financial sectors becomes particularly painful.


5      Measuring Systemic Risk
Systemic risk has two important elements: It builds up in the background during the
run-up phase of imbalances or bubbles and materializes only when the crisis erupts.
These two distinctive phases that shaped our survey so far also provide useful guidance
on how to measure systemic risk.


5.1     Systemic Risk Measures
Measuring systemic risk is, to some extent, related to measuring firm risk. This makes
risk measures at the firm level a natural starting point to think about systemic risk.
Over the last two decades, a large literature has explored such firm-level risk measures.
    The purpose of risk measures is to reduce a vast amount of data to a meaningful
single statistic that summarizes risk. For example, expected utility or the certainty
equivalent can be viewed as risk measures. Risk measures have become particularly
important since the implementation of Basel II bank regulations, which rely heavily on
  21
    This links their paper to one of the classic questions in the literature on sovereign debt: Why do
countries repay? We do not survey this literature here. Good starting points are Obstfeld and Rogoff
(1996) and Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2006).



                                                 60
the use of such risk measures.
   The most common measure of risk used by financial institutions—the value at risk
(VaR)—focuses on the risk of an individual institution in isolation. The q-VaR is the
maximum dollar loss within the q-confidence interval; see Kupiec (2002) and Jorion
(2006) for overviews. Formally, let X i be firm i’s profit distributed with a strictly
positive density; then the VaR iq is implicitly defined as the quantile q, such that

                                      Pr −X i ≥ VaR iq = q.
                                                      


       If X does not have a positive density, the q-VaR is usually defined as

                          VaRiq = inf{m ∈ R : Pr[X i + m < 0]} ≤ q.

The q-VaR can be interpreted as the minimal capital cushion that has to be added to
X to keep the probability of a default below q.
    While VaR is immensely popular, it has some well-known shortcomings. As pointed
out by Artzner, Delbaen, Eber, and Heath (1999), VaR is not a coherent risk measure,
in that it does not satisfy certain desirable criteria (or axioms). In particular, VaR is
not convex in X and can therefore fail to detect concentration of risks. The VaR also
does not distinguish between different outcomes within the q-tail.22
    Other risk measures explicitly take into account the loss distribution in the q-tail.
One such risk measure is the expected shortfall measure, which is defined as the expected
loss conditional on being in the q-tail:

                                      E[−X i | − X i ≥ VaRiq ].

   The expected shortfall measure has better formal properties than VaR. For contin-
uous distributions it agrees with average value at risk (AVaR) in the tail, which is a
coherent risk measure (see, for example, Föllmer and Schied (2011)). Of course, one
downside of the expected shortfall measure is that loss distributions within, say, the
1% tail are extremely hard to estimate, such that one usually has to make parametric
assumptions on the tail distribution. From a practical point of view, it is thus not clear
that the expected shortfall measure dominates the VaR.
  22
    A popular example to illustrate the shortcomings of VaR is to contrast a portfolio of 100 bonds with
independent default probabilities of 0.9%, to the analogous portfolio with perfectly correlated defaults.
The 1%-VaR of the diversified portfolio is larger than the 1%-VaR of the undiversified portfolio.



                                                   61
    While measuring systemic risk is related to measuring risk at the firm level, risk
measures for individual financial institutions are typically not good systemic risk mea-
sures. The reason is that the sum of individual risk measures usually does not capture
the systemic risk, i.e., the risk that the stability of the financial system is in danger as a
whole. In addition, institutions that are individually equally risky (e.g., they have the
same VaR) are not equally risky to the system. To see this, consider two institutions
that are individually equally risky, but the first institution causes large adverse spillover
effects when in financial distress, while the second institution does not.
    Ideally, one would like to have (i) a systemic risk measure for the whole economy
and (ii) a logically consistent way to allocate this systemic risk across various finan-
cial institutions according to certain axioms. For example, the overall systemic risk
could reflect the risk premium society should charge for insuring the financial sector
for bailout payments in crisis times. The allocation of this overall systemic risk to each
individual financial institution should reflect each institution’s total risk contribution
to overall systemic risk. From an abstract perspective, systemic risk measures are thus
related to firm-level risk measures that attempt to capture the total and marginal risk
contributions of, say, a number of trading desks.
    The literature distinguishes between several different risk allocation rules: The pro-
portional allocation proposed by Urban, Dittrich, Klüppelberg, and Stolting (2003)
assigns a fraction of total systemic risk to each institution, where each institution’s
fraction is given by institution i’s individual risk measures divided by the sum of all
institutions’ individual risk measures. The with-and-without allocation, proposed by
Merton and Perold (1993) and Matten (1996), calculates institution i’s contribution to
systemic risk as the difference in total systemic risk including institution i and exclud-
ing institution i. The marginal version of this rule is referred to as the Euler or gradient
allocation (see, for example, Patrik, Bernegger, and Rüegg (1999) and Tasche (1999)).
Tsanakas (2009) and Tarashev, Borio, and Tsatsaronis (2009) suggest calculating a
Shapley value as an allocation rule.23
    Ideally, the allocation should be such that (i) the sum of all risk contributions equals
the total systemic risk and (ii) each risk contribution incentivizes financial institutions to
(marginally) take on the appropriate amount of systemic risk. However, capturing both
total and marginal risk contributions in one measure is a challenging task, because the
  23
    The Shapley value is a concept from cooperative game theory. The intuition behind the Shapley
value is that it captures the average marginal contribution of a player to different coalitions that can
be formed.


                                                  62
relationship between the two may be non-linear (Brunnermeier and Cheridito (2011)).
In fact, the marginal contribution of one institution may depend on the risks taken by
other institutions.
    Economically, a systemic risk measure should identify “individually” systemically
important financial institutions (SIFIs) that are so interconnected and large that they
can cause negative risk spillover effects on others. In addition, it should also identify
institutions that are “systemic as part of a herd” (see Brunnermeier, Crocket, Goodhart,
Persaud, and Shin (2009)). This second point is important because a group of 100
institutions that act in a correlated fashion can be as dangerous to the system as one
large entity. This also means that splitting a SIFI into 100 smaller institutions does not
stabilize the system as long as these 100 smaller “clones” continue to act in a perfectly
correlated fashion. Hence, a good systemic risk measure should satisfy the “clone
property,” such that it also captures systemic risk emanating from smaller institutions
that act in a correlated fashion.


5.2    Data Collection and Macro Modeling
Without appropriate data, even the clearest concept of systemic risk is only of limited
use. This raises the question of which data one should collect to ensure financial stabil-
ity. In response to the financial crisis of 2007-09, the U.S. Congress created the Office of
Financial Research (OFR), which has been put in charge of collecting the data required
to measure systemic risk and ensure financial stability.
    In measuring systemic risk, the distinction between the run-up phase, during which
imbalances and systemic risk build up in the background, and the crisis phase, in which
systemic risk materializes and is propagated through the system, is again useful. In
particular, the data requirements for these two phases are different.
    Detecting imbalances that build up during the run-up phase requires low-frequency
price and quantity data. Daily data would probably provide only very limited addi-
tional insights. Since the exact triggers of financial crises vary from crisis to crisis
and are difficult to identify exactly, it is sensible to focus data collection on capturing
vulnerabilities of the financial system. Certain environments might lead to more vul-
nerability and larger tail risks because they are conducive to large amplification effects.
For example, the bursting of a credit bubble (like the stock market bubble in 1929 or
the housing bubble in 2007) is usually more harmful to the economy than the bursting
of a bubble that is not financed by credit (like the internet bubble of the late 1990s). To


                                            63
capture such vulnerabilities and tail risks in the financial system, data on both prices
and quantities should be collected. Price data may include, for example, price ratios
such as the price-dividend ratio for stocks or the price-rent ratio for real estate. Quan-
tity data may include, among other things, current account imbalances and money and
credit aggregates.
    When systemic risk materializes in a crisis, spillover and amplification effects de-
termine the overall damage to the economy. As pointed out in Section 4, these often
depend on the endogenous reaction of market participants, who are typically driven
by funding considerations: A trader with deep pockets will react very differently to
an extreme adverse shock compared to someone who funded his position on margins
or with short-term debt. The “risk topography” approach proposed in Brunnermeier,
Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2012) attempts to take into account these endogenous
responses. In this framework, the liquidity mismatch measure (Brunnermeier, Gorton,
and Krishnamurthy (2013)) is the key response indicator.
    Systemic risk cannot be detected by measuring only cash instruments. While prior
to the introduction of derivative markets, flows in assets were a good proxy for risk expo-
sures, through the introduction of derivatives, risk exposures have become divorced from
the flows. It is therefore paramount to collect information on risk exposures directly,
as opposed to measuring only flows in risky assets. More specifically, Brunnermeier,
Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2012) propose a two-step approach to collecting data and
measuring systemic risk. First, all financial institutions report their risk exposures to
a number of risk factors. For example, each institution reports its (partial equilibrium)
change of net worth and change in the liquidity mismatch index in response to a price
drop of, say, 5%, 10%, or 15% in mortgage-backed securities. After these responses have
been collected, the second step is conducted by financial regulators. Reported changes
in liquidity mismatch allow regulators to predict the market participants’ endogenous
responses to an initial shock. For example, it allows them to predict whether financial
institutions need to fire-sell some of their assets. Importantly, the regulators look at
individual responses in the context of a general equilibrium framework that takes into
account collective reactions by market participants. The regulators may then possibly
conclude that a 15% price drop is much more likely than a 5% or 10% price decline,
given that most market participants’ endogenous response to a shock is to sell assets.
Conceptually, this method allows regulators to identify mutually inconsistent plans by
market participants: If the risk management strategy of many market participants is
to sell assets in response to a price decline, then prices will drop by a large margin

                                            64
in response to a shock. The method also helps to reveal pockets of illiquidity and the
potential for “crowded trades.” If the regulator observes that certain asset classes are
likely to be sold in response to shocks, these asset classes are likely to be illiquid during
crises. While in the above example the risk factor we considered was exposure to price
fluctuations in a certain asset class (mortgage-backed securities, in this specific exam-
ple), risk factors should also include worsening of funding conditions, such as increases
in haircuts, and potential defaults by counterparties.
     Duffie (2012) proposes a network-based 10-by-10-by-10 approach that also relies on
financial institutions reporting their exposures to risk factors. In this proposal, each of
the, say, 10 largest financial institutions would report the gains and losses for 10 different
scenarios, relative to the 10 counterparties that are most affected in a given scenario.
These scenarios could include the default of a counterparty, changes in credit spreads,
changes in the yield curve, etc. The data collection effort asks financial institutions to
identify their counterparties themselves. The number 10 is simply a placeholder and can
be easily adjusted. While the 10-by-10-by-10 approach does not emphasize endogenous
responses by market participants, it is appealing because it captures direct spillover
effects among the largest financial institutions in an easily implementable fashion.
     To measure spillover effects and evaluate policy measures during times of crisis, more
granular data, or even high-frequency position data, may be useful. Importantly, these
data should be comprehensive in the sense that they should capture the whole portfolio
of financial institutions (and not only parts of it). For example, simply knowing a firm’s
CDS exposure is only of limited use if one does not have access to the firm’s positions
in the underlying bond.
     A detailed discussion of which exact data may be useful and which asset classes the
regulator should monitor goes beyond the scope of this chapter. For further reading, the
collection of articles in Brunnermeier and Krishnamurthy (2013) provides an in-depth
analysis of data collection efforts across different markets. Rather than going into
those specificities, in what follows we merely discuss some of the conceptual challenges
in estimating systemic risk measures.


5.3    Challenges in Estimating Systemic Risk Measures
Even a systemic risk measure that satisfies the desired properties is not very useful
if it cannot be estimated empirically. In particular, for a risk measure to be useful,
the inputs into the risk measure must be measurable in a timely fashion. However,


                                             65
such timely measurability is challenging for several reasons. First, tail events are by
definition rare, resulting in scarcity of data. In addition to this lack of data, many
variables cannot be observed reliably. For example, simple leverage measures may
not capture leverage that is embedded in certain assets held by financial institutions.
Moreover, because systemic risk usually builds up in the background during the low-
volatility environment of the run-up phase, regulations based on risk measures that
rely mostly on contemporaneous volatility are not useful. They may even exacerbate
the credit cycle. Hence, the volatility paradox rules out using contemporaneous risk
measures and calls for slow-moving measures that predict the vulnerability of the system
to future adverse shocks.
    To avoid using contemporaneous data or inputs that are hard to measure, Adrian
and Brunnermeier (2008) propose to first project the preferred systemic risk measures
onto more reliably measurable lagged characteristics, such as liquidity mismatch, size,
and leverage. Confidential supervisory data about financial structure that track features
such as counterparty exposures, contingent credit lines, and other contractual linkages
among institutions may also be useful. These regressions, in turn, give an indication
as to which observable variables can help predict future crashes and thus help measure
the current vulnerability of the financial system. Of course, this approach is subject
to a Lucas critique. If certain characteristics are used for financial regulation, then
individual institutions will try to manipulate their reported characteristics, and as a
consequence the effectiveness of such regulation is reduced.
    Another challenge is that any statistical analysis relies on historical data. A purely
statistical approach is thus limited by the types of shocks and vulnerabilities that we
have observed in the available historical data. It is also vulnerable to regime changes
in the data. For these reasons, any statistical analysis has to be complemented with
thorough theoretical reasoning. Such theoretical reasoning may help identify vulnera-
bilities that are not apparent from historical data. Moreover, regulators should make
use of position data to estimate risk exposures as well as direct and indirect spillover
effects. This is important because even a shock that has been observed historically will
feed through the system differently in the current environment. The regulator should
also complement historical data with stress tests, which can be used to measure the
financial system’s resilience to a particular stress scenario.
    Independently of whether the risk evaluation involves more of a statistical or a stress
test approach, one can employ a bottom-up approach or top-down approach. At one
extreme, one could collect all individual positions data for all instruments from all

                                            66
market participants and conduct a rich bottom-up systemic risk analysis. In contrast,
at the opposite end of the spectrum is a top-down approach, which attempts to infer
systemic risk by looking at time series of historical prices. The latter approach exploits
information aggregation by financial markets, but suffers from the shortcoming of as-
suming that market prices correctly reflect risks. Sole reliance on this second approach
can thus not be sufficient, because risk may be mispriced during the run-up phase—as,
for example, during the low-spread environment leading up to the crisis of 2007-09.
The challenge with the bottom-up approach, on the other hand, is its informational
requirements. The regulator needs to know not only each firm’s positions and corre-
lation structure, but also their interaction with the firm’s funding structure. Many of
these interdependencies are endogenous and depend on institutions’ responses to vari-
ous shocks. Overall, finding the right balance between these two polar approaches is a
challenge.
    Another issue that arises in estimating systemic risk measures is whether to rely
on total assets or equity values to measure risk exposure. In addition, one also has
to make a choice as to whether to base the analysis on book values, market values, or
both. Using equity prices has the drawback that equity contains an option component
whose value increases with risk. An insolvent firm might still have a positive equity
value, simply due to the fact that its cash flow is risky and equity holders enjoy limited
liability. This is the reason why many studies focus on the market value of total assets,
even if they have to be backed out indirectly. Often it is advisable to subtract the face
value of the institutions’ liabilities. It is important to focus on the face value of liabilities
as opposed to the market value, since the market value of a firm’s debt decreases as its
default probability increases, allowing it to book some artificial increase in profit and
market cap.


5.4     Some Specific Measures of Systemic Risk
Since the financial crisis of 2007-09, there has been an explosion of suggested systemic
risk measures. In a recent survey, Bisias, Flood, Lo, and Valavanis (2012) categorize
and contrast more than 30 systemic risk measures. In this chapter, we will discuss only
a few of these measures to highlight some main approaches.
    Adrian and Brunnermeier (2008) propose the CoVaR measure of systemic risk. The
aim of CoVaR is to measure spillover effects to capture externalities that an individual
institution imposes on the financial system, and to outline a method to construct a coun-


                                               67
tercyclical, forward-looking systemic risk measure by predicting future systemic risk
using current institutional characteristics. The estimation is tractable due to the use
of quantile regressions. The prefix “Co, ”which stands for conditional, tail correlation,
contagion, or comovement, stresses the systemic nature of this measure.
    As a measure of systemic risk, CoVaR captures direct and indirect spillover effects
and is based on the tail covariation between financial institutions and the financial
system. More specifically, the CoVaRj|iq denotes the VaR of the financial system (or of
institution j) conditional on some event C (X i ) of institution i. That is, CoVaRj|i
                                                                                    q is
implicitly defined by the q-quantile of the conditional probability distribution:24
                                                        
                              j       j|C(X i )      i
                                                       
                          Pr X ≤ CoVaRq         |C X       = q.

We denote institution i’s contribution to j by

                                            j|X i =VaR iq                 i =Median i
                    ∆CoVaRj|i
                          q = CoVaR q                       − CoVaR j|X
                                                                    q                   .

    The contemporaneous ∆CoVaR i thus quantifies the spillover effects by measuring
how much an institution adds to the overall risk of the financial system.
    Depending on the conditioning, one can distinguish between a contribution ∆CoVaR
and the exposure ∆CoVaR. The contribution ∆CoVaR answers the question of to what
extent conditioning on the distress of institution i, e.g., C (X i ) = VaRiq , increases
the value at risk of the whole financial system relative to the “normal” state of this
institution. The reverse conditioning yields the exposure ∆CoVaR. Conditioning on the
whole financial system being at its VaR level answers the question of which institution
suffers the most if there is a financial crisis. In other words, the contribution ∆CoVaR
tries to relate to externalities an institution creates to the system, while the exposure
∆CoVaR relates to how much a bank can fall victim should a crisis erupt. The CoVaR
approach is a statistical one, without explicit reference to structural economic models.
    The second innovation of Adrian and Brunnermeier (2008) is to relate ∆CoVaR t
to macro variables and—importantly—to lagged observable characteristics like size,
leverage, and maturity mismatch. The predicted values yield the “forward ∆CoVaR.”
This forward measure captures the stylized fact that systemic risk is building up in the
  24
    Note that Adrian and Brunnermeier (2008) do not follow the usual convention of flipping the sign
to make the VaR a positive number. Hence, in the definition below, VaR and CoVaR are negative
numbers.



                                                 68
background, especially in low-volatility environments. The “forward ∆CoVaR” measure
avoids the “procyclicality pitfall” by estimating the relationship between current firm
characteristics and future spillover effects, as proxied by ∆CoVaR.
    A number of recent papers have extended the CoVaR method and estimated it for
a number of financial systems. For example, Adams, Füss, and Gropp (2010) study
risk spillovers among financial institutions, using quantile regressions; Wong and Fong
(2010) estimate CoVaR for the CDS of Asia-Pacific banks; Gauthier, Lehar, and Souissi
(2012) estimate systemic risk exposures for the Canadian banking system. Chan-Lau
(2009) controls for some additional common risk factors and calls the resulting measure
Co-Risk. Boyson, Stahel, and Stulz (2010) study spillover effects across hedge fund
styles in downturns using quantile regressions and a logit model.
    In an important early contribution, Engle and Manganelli (2004) develop the CAViaR
measure, which uses quantile regressions in combination with a GARCH model to model
the time-varying tail behavior of asset returns. They provide a method to estimate dy-
namic quantiles. Manganelli, Kim, and White (2011) study a multivariate extension of
CAViaR, which lends itself to estimating dynamic versions of CoVaR.
    Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and Richardson (2010) propose the systemic expected
shortfall (SES ) measure, which—like the exposure CoVaR—tries to capture the down-
side risk of a financial institution conditional on the whole system being in financial
difficulties. More specifically, SES i reports the expected amount that an institution is
undercapitalized (relative to its capital target zai , a fraction z of its assets ai ) in the
event that the financial system is below its aggregate capital target zA,

                            SES i = −E[w1i − zai |W1 < zA].

The empirical SES i measure is derived from a linear combination of marginal expected
shortfall measures (M ES i ) and leverage. More specifically, Acharya, Pedersen, Philip-
pon, and Richardson (2010) propose to measure the systemic expected shortfall as

                        SESti = 0.15 ∗ M ESti + 0.04 ∗ Leveraget .

    This relationship between SES, M ES, and leverage can be justified using a theo-
retical model that incorporates systemic risk externalities. M ES i is computed as the
average return of each firm during the 5% worst days for the market over the past
year. The firm’s market leverage is calculated as one plus the ratio of the book value of


                                            69
debt to the market value of equity. The reliance of Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and
Richardson (2010) on contemporaneous daily returns restricts their analysis to cross-
sectional comparison across banks since applying their method in the time series might
lead to procyclicality due to the volatility paradox. Brownlees and Engle (2010) refine
the estimation methodology for M ES i and propose a further systemic risk measure
called SRISK.
    The distress insurance premium (DIP) proposed by Huang, Zhou, and Zhu (2010) is
a systemic risk measure that reports a hypothetical insurance premium against catas-
trophic losses in a portfolio of financial institutions. The systemic importance of an
individual institution is defined by its marginal contribution to the aggregate distress
insurance premium. Empirically, (risk-neutral) default probabilities are estimated for
each institution using credit default swap (CDS) data. Asset return correlations, needed
to determine the joint default of several banks, are approximated using estimated eq-
uity return correlations. The DIP is then given by the risk-neutral expectation of losses
conditional on exceeding a minimum loss threshold.
    Segoviano and Goodhart (2009) estimate a multivariate joint distribution of banks’
default probabilities employing the non-parametric CIMDO-copula approach, which,
unlike correlations, also captures non-linear dependence structures.
    Another strand of literature makes use of extreme value theory. The advantage of
this theory is that only a few assumptions are needed to characterize the tails of the
distribution. More specifically, extreme value theorem states that the maximum of a
sample of i.i.d. random variables after proper renormalization converges in distribu-
tion to the Gumbel distribution, the Fréchet distribution, or the Weibull distribution.
Danielsson and de Vries (2000) argue that extreme value theory works well only for
very low quantiles. Hartmann, Straetmans, and de Vries (2004) develop a contagion
measure that focuses on extreme events.
    More generally, it is useful to draw an analogy between systemic risk measures and
the literature on contagion and volatility spillovers (see Claessens and Forbes (2001)
for an overview). This literature makes the point that estimates of correlations might
be capturing volatility spillovers, as opposed to pure contagion. Forbes and Rigobon
(2002) make the argument to disentangle interdependence from contagion.
    Finally, some methods build on fully fledged-out structural models. Following the
classic Merton model, Lehar (2005) and Bodie, Gray, and Merton (2007) suggest using
contingent claims analysis that explicitly takes into account the option component of
equity values, derivatives exposures, and potential guarantees. The structural approach

                                           70
allows one to derive the value of banks’ assets and their interdependence structure
across institutions from the observed stock prices and CDS spreads. Such structural
approaches have the advantage of explicitly building on a logically consistent model,
but have the drawback of requiring the implicit assumption that the model holds with
probability one.


6     Conclusion
The literatures on bubbles and financial crises have grown tremendously in the past
decades. While these literatures have provided us with a number of important insights
regarding financial bubbles and crises, a number of important research questions remain.
We will use the conclusion to point out a number of open questions that future research
might address.

    1. How do bubbles start? In most models of bubbles, the bubble cannot start within
       the model; it has to be present from the time the asset starts trading. Hence,
       while the existing literature has given us a number of insights for why bubbles
       may survive, we know much less about their origin.

    2. More research is also needed on how bubbles burst. In particular, most theory
       models of bubbles predict that bubbles burst essentially instantaneously. In prac-
       tice, however, bubbles often deflate over time. What determines the dynamics of
       how bubbles burst?

    3. The recent crisis has rekindled the debate on whether and how central banks
       should target bubbles as part of their policy actions. Should they? If yes, how?
       If not, why?

    4. There is an emerging informal consensus that bubbles fueled by credit differ from
       bubbles that are not fueled by credit. For example, it is sometimes argued that
       regulators and central banks should lean against credit bubbles, but not against
       bubbles not fueled by credit. However, more research is needed on this issue, both
       theoretical (why are credit bubbles more costly from a social perspective?) and
       empirical (how would one identify credit bubbles?).

    5. What macroprudential tools should regulators and central banks deploy? How
       effective are different macroprudential tools and how do they interact with mon-

                                           71
     etary policy? This raises the broader question of the interaction between price
     stability and financial stability and how those goals should be traded off.

  6. The corporate finance literature has developed a number of models that capture
     the sources of financial frictions, but has taken dynamics and calibration less
     seriously. The macro literature has taken dynamics and calibration seriously, but
     often is less specific about the source of the underlying frictions. There seems
     to be large potential in developing a literature that bridges this divide between
     finance (especially research on financial frictions) and macroeconomic models. For
     a survey of existing work in macroeconomics, see Brunnermeier, Eisenbach, and
     Sannikov (2013).

  7. The measurement of systemic risk is still in its infancy. To the extent that future
     regulation should target systemic risk, good measures of such risk are important.
     An analogy can be made to the development of the national account system after
     the Great Depression. Part of this question is theoretical: How should we define
     an operational measure of systemic risk? Part of this question is of an empirical
     nature: Which data should be collected for financial stability purposes, especially
     in light of the newly created Office of Financial Research?

  8. The policy response to the recent financial crisis has mostly focused on incentive
     distortions, both as explanations for the crisis and also as the primary point of at-
     tack for regulatory interventions. An important open issue is the extent to which
     behavioral factors drove the crisis, and how regulation should incorporate them.
     An important challenge in this research agenda is the development of welfare cri-
     teria within models with behavioral distortions such that policy recommendations
     are possible.




References
Abel, A., N. G. Mankiw, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Zeckhauser (1989):
 “Assessing Dynamic Efficiency: Theory and Evidence,” Review of Economic Studies,
 56(1), 1–20.

Abreu, D., and M. K. Brunnermeier (2003): “Bubbles and Crashes,” Economet-
 rica, 71(1), 173–204.

                                           72
Acharya, V. V. (2009): “A Theory of Systemic Risk and Design of Prudential Bank
 Regulation,” Journal of Financial Stability, 5(3), 224–255.

Acharya, V. V., D. Gale, and T. Yorulmazer (2011): “Rollover Risk and Market
 Freezes,” Journal of Finance, 66(4), 1177–1209.

Acharya, V. V., L. H. Pedersen, T. Philippon, and M. Richardson (2010):
 “Measuring Systemic Risk,” Working Paper, New York University.

Acharya, V. V., P. Schnabl, and G. Suarez (2012): “Securitization without Risk
 Transfer,” Journal of Financial Economics, (forthcoming).

Acharya, V. V., and S. Viswanathan (2011): “Leverage, Moral Hazard, and
 Liquidity,” Journal of Finance, 66(1), 99–138.

Acharya, V. V., and T. Yorulmazer (2007): “Too Many to Fail—An Analysis of
 Time-inconsistency in Bank Closure Policies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation,
 16(1), 1–31.

         (2008): “Cash-in-the-Market Pricing and Optimal Resolution of Bank Fail-
  ures,” Review of Financial Studies, 21(6), 2705–2742.

Adams, Z., R. Füss, and R. Gropp (2010): “Modeling Spillover Effects Among
 Financial Institutions: A State-Dependent Sensitivity Value-at-Risk (SDSVaR) Ap-
 proach,” Working Paper, EBS.

Adrian, T., and M. K. Brunnermeier (2008): “CoVaR,” Working Paper, Prince-
 ton University.

Adrian, T., and H. S. Shin (2010): “Liquidity and Leverage,” Journal of Financial
 Intermediation, 19(3), 418 – 437.

Afonso, G., and H. S. Shin (2011): “Precautionary Demand and Liquidity in Pay-
 ment Systems,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43, 589–619.

Aiyagari, S. R. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659–684.

Allen, F., A. Babus, and E. Carletti (2012): “Asset commonality, debt maturity
 and systemic risk,” Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3), 519–534.


                                        73
Allen, F., and D. Gale (1994): “Limited Market Participation and Volatility of
 Asset Prices,” American Economic Review, 84(4), 933–955.

          (1998): “Optimal Financial Crises,” Journal of Finance, 53(4), 1245–1284.

          (2000a): “Bubbles and Crises,” The Economic Journal, 110(460), 236–255.

          (2000b): “Financial Contagion,” Journal of Political Economy, 108(1), 1–33.

          (2004): “Financial Intermediaries and Markets,” Econometrica, 72(4), 1023–
  1061.

        (2007): Understanding Financial Crises, Clarendon Lectures in Finance. Ox-
  ford University Press.

Allen, F., and G. Gorton (1993): “Churning Bubbles,” Review of Economic Stud-
 ies, 60(4), 813–836.

Allen, F., S. Morris, and A. Postlewaite (1993): “Finite Bubbles with Short
 Sale Constraints and Asymmetric Information,” Journal of Economic Theory, 61(2),
 206–229.

Artzner, P., F. Delbaen, J.-M. Eber, and D. Heath (1999): “Coherent Mea-
 sures of Risk,” Mathematical Finance, 9(3), 203–228.

Bagehot, W. (1873): Lombard Street: A description of the money market. H.S. King.

Barth, J. R., A. P. Prabhavivadhana, and G. Yun (2012): “The Eurozone Fi-
 nancial Crisis: Role of Interdependencies between Bank and Sovereign Risk,” Journal
 of Financial Economic Policy, 4(1), 76–97.

Bech, M. L., and K. Soramäki (2001): “Gridlock Resolution in Payments Systems,”
 Danmarks Nationalbank Monetary Review, pp. 67–79.

Bernanke, B. S., and M. Gertler (1989): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
 Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 79(1), 14–31.

Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): “The Financial Acceler-
 ator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics,
 ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford. Elsevier.


                                         74
Bewley, T. (1980): “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” in Models of Monetary
 Economics, ed. by J. Kareken, and N. Wallace. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Bewley, T. F. (1977): “The Permanent Income Hypothesis: A Theoretical Formula-
 tion,” Journal of Economic Theory, 16(2), 252–292.

         (1983): “A Difficulty with the Optimum Quantity of Money,” Econometrica,
  51(5), 1485–1504.

Bhattacharya, S., and D. Gale (1987): “Preference Shocks, Liquidity, and Central
 Bank Policy,” in New Approaches to Monetary Economics, ed. by W. A. Barnett,
 and K. J. Singleton, pp. 69–88. Cambridge University Press.

Bisias, D., M. Flood, A. W. Lo, and S. Valavanis (2012): “A Survey of Systemic
  Risk Analytics,” Office of Financial Research Working Paper.

Blanchard, O. J., and M. W. Watson (1982): “Bubbles, Rational Expectations
  and Financial Markets,” in Crises in the Economic and Financial Structure: Bubbles,
  Bursts, and Shocks, ed. by P. Wachtel. D.C. Heath & Company.

Bodie, Z., D. Gray, and R. Merton (2007): “New Framework for Measuring and
 Managing Macrofinancial Risk and Financial Stability,” NBER Working Paper.

Bolton, P., and O. Jeanne (2011): “Sovereign Default Risk and Bank Fragility in
 Financially Integrated Economies,” IMF Economic Review, 59, 162–194.

Boyson, N. M., C. W. Stahel, and R. M. Stulz (2010): “Hedge Fund Contagion
 and Liquidity Shocks,” Journal of Finance, 65(6), 1789–1816.

Brownlees, C. T., and R. F. Engle (2010): “Volatility, Correlation and Tails for
 Systemic Risk Measurement,” Working Paper, NYU.

Brunnermeier, M. K. (2001): Asset Pricing Under Asymmetric Information: Bub-
 bles, Crashes, Technical Analysis, and Herding. Oxford University Press.

Brunnermeier, M. K. (2008): “Bubbles,” in New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
 ed. by S. N. Durlauf, and L. E. Blume. Palgrave Macmillan.

         (2009): “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008,” Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 23(1), pp. 77–100.


                                         75
Brunnermeier, M. K., and P. Cheridito (2011): “Systemic Risk Management,”
 Working Paper, Princeton University.

Brunnermeier, M. K., A. Crocket, C. Goodhart, A. Persaud, and H. Shin
 (2009): The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation: 11th Geneva Report
 on the World Economy. CEPR.

Brunnermeier, M. K., T. Eisenbach, and Y. Sannikov (2013): “Macroeco-
 nomics with Financial Frictions: A Survey,” in Advances in Economics and Econo-
 metrics, 10th World Congress of the Econometric Society, ed. by D. Acemoglu,
 M. Arellano, and E. Dekel. Cambridge University Press.

Brunnermeier, M. K., L. Garicano, P. R. Lane, M. Pagano, R. Reis,
 T. Santos, D. Thesmar, S. van Nieuwerburgh, and D. Vayanos (2011):
 “European Safe Bonds: ESBies,” Euro-nomics.com.

Brunnermeier, M. K., G. Gorton, and A. Krishnamurthy (2012): “Risk To-
 pography,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011, 26, 149–176.

         (2013): “Liquidity Mismatch,” in Risk Topography: Systemic Risk and Macro
  Modeling, ed. by M. K. Brunnermeier, and A. Krishnamurthy. University of Chicago
  Press.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and A. Krishnamurthy (eds.) (2013): Risk Topography:
 Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling. University of Chicago Press.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and J. Morgan (2010): “Clock Games: Theory and Ex-
 periments,” Games and Economic Behavior, 68(2), 532–550.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and S. Nagel (2004): “Hedge Funds and the Technology
 Bubble,” Journal of Finance, 59(5), 2013–2040.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and M. Oehmke (2012): “The Maturity Rat Race,” Journal
 of Finance, (forthcoming).

Brunnermeier, M. K., and L. H. Pedersen (2005): “Predatory Trading,” Journal
 of Finance, 60(4), 1825–1863.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and L. H. Pedersen (2009): “Market Liquidity and Fund-
 ing Liquidity,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(6), 2201–2238.

                                       76
Brunnermeier, M. K., and Y. Sannikov (2010): “A Macroeconomic Model with
 a Financial Sector,” Working Paper, Princeton University.

Brunnermeier, M. K., A. Simsek, and W. Xiong (2012): “A Welfare Criterion
 for Models with Distorted Beliefs,” Working Paper, Princeton University.

Bryant, J. (1980): “A Model of Reserves, Bank Runs, and Deposit Insurance,” Jour-
 nal of Banking and Finance, 4(4), 335–344.

Caballero, R. J., and A. Krishnamurthy (2008): “Collective Risk Management
 in a Flight to Quality Episode,” Journal of Finance, 63(5), 2195–2230.

Calomiris, C. W., and C. M. Kahn (1991): “The Role of Demandable Debt in
 Structuring Optimal Banking Arrangements,” American Economic Review, 81(3),
 497–513.

Carlstrom, C. T., and T. S. Fuerst (1997): “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and
 Business Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis,” American
 Economic Review, 87(5), 893–910.

Chan-Lau, J. A. (2009): “Co-risk Measures to Assess Systemic Financial Stability,”
 Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.

Chari, V., and R. Jagannathan (1988): “Banking Panics, Information, and Ra-
 tional Expectations Equilibrium,” Journal of Finance, 43(3), 749–761.

Chen, J., H. Hong, and J. C. Stein (2001): “Forecasting Crashes: Trading Vol-
 ume, Past Returns and Conditional Skewness in Stock Prices,” Journal of Financial
 Economics, 61, 345–381.

Cifuentes, R., G. Ferrucci, and H. Shin (2005): “Liquidity Risk and Contagion,”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 3, 556–566.

Claessens, S., and K. Forbes (2001): International Financial Contagion. Springer:
 New York.

Conlon, J. R. (2004): “Simple Finite Horizon Bubbles Robust to Higher Order
 Knowledge,” Econometrica, 72(3), pp. 927–936.

Copeland, A., A. Martin, and M. Walker (2010): “The Tri-Party Repo Market
 before the 2010 Reforms,” Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

                                       77
Cutler, D. M., J. M. Poterba, and L. H. Summers (1989): “What Moves Stock
 Prices?,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 15(3), 4–12.

Dang, T. V., G. Gorton, and B. Holmström (2010): “Ignorance and the Opti-
 mality of Debt for Liquidity Provision,” Working Paper, Yale University.

Danielsson, J., and C. G. de Vries (2000): “Value-at-Risk and Extreme Returns,”
 Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 60, 239–270.

Davila, E. (2011): “Dissecting Fire Sales Externalities,” Working Paper, Harvard
 University.

Degryse, H., and G. Nguyen (2007): “Interbank Exposures: An Empirical Exam-
 ination of Contagion Risk in the Belgian Banking System,” International Journal of
 Central Banking, 3(2), 123–172.

DeLong, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann (1990):
 “Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(4), 703–
 738.

DeMarzo, P. M., R. Kaniel, and I. Kremer (2008): “Relative Wealth Concerns
 and Financial Bubbles,” Review of Financial Studies, 21(1), 19–50.

Diamond, D. W. (1984): “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” The
  Review of Economic Studies, 51(3), 393–414.

          (1997): “Liquidity, Banks, and Markets,” Journal of Political Economy,
  105(5), 928–956.

Diamond, D. W., and P. H. Dybvig (1983): “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
  Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy, 91(3), 401–419.

Diamond, D. W., and R. G. Rajan (2001): “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation,
  and Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(2),
  287–327.

        (2011): “Fear of Fire Sales, Illiquidity Seeking, and Credit Freezes,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 126(2), 557–591.

Diamond, P. A. (1965): “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,” American
  Economic Review, 55(5), 1126–1150.

                                          78
Diba, B. T., and H. I. Grossman (1988): “The Theory of Rational Bubbles in Stock
  Prices,” Economic Journal, 98(392), 746–754.

Doblas-Madrid, A. (2012): “A Robust Model of Bubbles of Multidimensional Un-
 certainty,” Econometrica, (forthcoming).

Dow, J., and G. Gorton (1994): “Arbitrage Chains,” Journal of Finance, 49(3),
 819–849.

Duffie, D. (2012): “Systemic Risk Exposures: A 10-by-10-by-10 Approach,” in Risk
 Topography: Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling, ed. by M. K. Brunnermeier, and
 A. Krishnamurthy. University of Chicago Press.

Duffie, D., and H. Zhu (2011): “Does a Central Clearing Counterparty Reduce
 Counterparty Risk?,” Review of Asset Pricing Studies.

Dufwenberg, M., T. Lindqvist, and E. Moore (2005): “Bubbles and Experience:
 An Experiment,” American Economic Review, 95(5), pp. 1731–1737.

Eisenberg, L., and T. H. Noe (2001): “Systemic Risk in Financial Systems,” Man-
  agement Science, 47(3), 236–249.

Engle, R. F., and S. Manganelli (2004): “CAViaR: Conditional Autoregressive
 Value at Risk by Regression Quantiles,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
 23(4), 367–381.

Englund, P. (1999): “The Swedish banking crisis: roots and consequences,” Oxford
 Review of Economic Policy, 15(3), 80–97.

Evans, G. W. (1991): “Pitfalls in Testing for Explosive Bubbles in Asset Prices,”
  American Economic Review, 81(4), 922–930.

Fair, R. C. (2002): “Events That Shook the Market,” Journal of Business, 75(4),
  713–731.

Farhi, E., M. Golosov, and A. Tsyvinski (2009): “A Theory of Liquidity and
  Regulation of Financial Intermediation,” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 973–
  992.

Farhi, E., and J. Tirole (2012): “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch,
  and Systemic Bailouts.,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 60 – 93.

                                         79
Flood, R. P., and P. M. Garber (1980): “Market Fundamentals versus Price-Level
  Bubbles: The First Tests,” Journal of Political Economy, 88(4), 745–770.

Föllmer, H., and A. Schied (2011): Stochastic Financwe. De Gruyter, 3rd edn.

Forbes, K. J., and R. Rigobon (2002): “No Contagion, Only Interdependence:
  Measuring Stock Market Comovements,” Journal of Finance, 57(5), 2223–2261.

Fostel, A., and J. Geanakoplos (2012): “Tranching, CDS and Asset Prices: Bub-
  bles and Crashes,” AEJ: Macroeconomics, 4(1), 190–225.

Freixas, X., and B. Parigi (1998): “Contagion and Efficiency in Gross and Net
  Interbank Payment Systems,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 7(1), 3 – 31.

Friedman, M., and A. J. Schwartz (1963): A Monetary History of the United
  States 1867-1960. Princeton University Press.

Froot, K. A., and M. Obstfeld (1991): “Intrinsic Bubbles: The Case of Stock
  Prices,” American Economic Review, 81(5), 1189–1214.

Gale, D., and M. Hellwig (1985): “Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The
 One-Period Problem,” Review of Economic Studies, 52(4), 647–663.

Gale, D., and T. Yorulmazer (2011): “Liquidity Hoarding,” Working Paper, New
 York University.

Garber, P. M. (2000): Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias.
 MIT Press, Cambrige, MA.

Garleanu, N., and L. H. Pedersen (2011): “Margin-based Asset Pricing and
 Deviations from the Law of One Price,” Review of Financial Studies, 24(6), 1980–
 2022.

Gauthier, C., A. Lehar, and M. Souissi (2012): “Macroprudential Capital Re-
 quirements and Systemic Risk,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 21(4), 594–618.

Geanakoplos, J. (1997): “Promises Promises,” in The Economy as an Evolving
 Complex System II, ed. by W. B. Arthur, S. Durlauf, and D. Lane. Addison-Wesley.




                                        80
         (2003): “Liquidity, Defaults, and Crashes,” in Advances in Economics and
  Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress, Volume 2, Econo-
  metric Society Monographs. Cambridge University Press.

           (2010): “The Leverage Cycle,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009,
  vol. 24, pp. 1–65. University of Chicago Press.

Geanakoplos, J. D., and H. M. Polemarchakis (1986): “Existence, Regularity,
 and Constrained Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations when the Asset Market is
 Incomplete,” in Uncertainty, Information and Communication: Essays in Honor of
 Kenneth J. Arrow, ed. by W. P. Heller, R. M. Starr, and D. A. Starrett. Cambridge
 University Press.

Gennaioli, N., A. Martin, and S. Rossi (2011): “Sovereign Default, Domestic
 Banks and Financial Institutions,” Working paper, CREI.

Gennotte, G., and H. Leland (1990): “Market Liquidity, Hedging, and Crashes,”
 American Economic Review, 80(5), 999–1021.

Goldstein, I., and A. Pauzner (2005): “Demand-Deposit Contracts and the Prob-
 ability of Bank Runs,” Journal of Finance, 60(3), 1293–1327.

Gorton, G. (1985): “Bank Suspension of Convertibility,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 15, 177–193.

          (1988): “Banking Panics and Business Cycles,” Oxford Economic Papers,
  40(4), pp. 751–781.

         (2010): Slapped by the Invisible Hand. Oxford University Press.

Gorton, G., and A. Metrick (2011): “Securitized banking and the run on repo,”
 Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3), 425–451.

Gorton, G., and G. Pennacchi (1990): “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity
 Creation,” Journal of Finance, 45(1), 49–71.

Graeber, D. (2011): Debt: The First 5,000 Years. Melville House Publishing.

Gromb, D., and D. Vayanos (2002): “Equilibrium and welfare in markets with
 financially constrained arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66(2-3), 361
 – 407.

                                         81
Harris, M., and A. Raviv (1993): “Differences of Opinion Make a Horse Race,”
 Review of Financial Studies, 6(3), 473–506.

Harrison, J. M., and D. Kreps (1978): “Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock
 Market with Heterogeneous Expectations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 89, 323–
 336.

Hart, O., and J. Moore (1994): “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of
 Human Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4), 841–879.

Hart, O. D. (1975): “On the optimality of equilibrium when the market structure is
 incomplete,” Journal of Economic Theory, 11(3), 418 – 443.

Hartmann, P., S. Straetmans, and C. G. de Vries (2004): “Asset Market
 Linkages in Crisis Periods,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 313–326.

Haruvy, E., Y. Lahav, and C. N. Noussair (2007): “Traders’ Expectations in
 Asset Markets: Experimental Evidence,” American Economic Review, 97(5), pp.
 1901–1920.

Haruvy, E., and C. N. Noussair (2006): “The Effect of Short Selling on Bubbles
 and Crashes in Experimental Spot Asset Markets,” Journal of Finance, 61(3), pp.
 1119–1157.

He, Z., I. Khang, and A. Krishnamurthy (2010): “Balance Sheet Adjustment in
 the 2008 Crisis,” IMF Economic Review, 58, 118–156.

He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2012): “A Model of Capital and Crises,” Review
 of Economic Studies, 79(2), 735–777.

Hellwig, M. F. (1994): “Liquidity Provision, banking, and the allocation of interest
 rate risk,” European Economic Review, 38, 1363–1389.

         (2000): “Financial Intermediation with Risk Aversion,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 67(4), 719–742.

Holmström, B., and J. Tirole (1997): “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds,
 and the Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 35–52.

Hong, H., J. Scheinkman, and W. Xiong (2006): “Asset Float and Speculative
 Bubbles,” Journal of Finance, 61(3), 1073–1117.

                                        82
Hong, H., and J. C. Stein (2003): “Differences of Opinion, Short-Sales Constraints,
 and Market Crashes,” Review of Financial Studies, 16(2), 487–525.

          (2007): “Disagreement and the Stock Market,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives, 21(2), 109–128.

Hoshi, T., and A. K. Kashyap (2004): “Japan’s Financial Crisis and Economic
 Stagnation,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1), 3–26.

Huang, X., H. Zhou, and H. Zhu (2010): “Measuring Systemic Risk Contributions,”
 BIS Working Paper.

Jacklin, C. J. (1987): “Demand Deposits, Trading Restrictions and Risk Sharing,”
  in Contractual Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade, ed. by E. C. Prescott, and
  N. Wallace. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.

Jacklin, C. J., and S. Bhattacharya (1988): “Distinguishing Panics and
  Information-based Bank Runs: Welfare and Policy Implications,” Journal of Po-
  litical Economy, 96(3), 568–592.

Jensen, M. C., and W. H. Meckling (1976): “Theory of the Firm: Managerial
  Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  3(4), 305–360.

Jonung, L., L. Kiander, and P. Vartia (eds.) (2009): The Great Financial Crisis
  in Finland and Sweden: The Nordic Experience of Financial Liberalization. Edward
  Elgar.

Jorion, P. (2006): Value at Risk. McGraw-Hill, 3rd edn.

Kaminsky, G. L., and C. M. Reinhart (1999): “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
 Banking and Balance-Of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, 89(3),
 473–500.

Kindleberger, C. P. (1978): Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial
  Crises. Basic Books.

King, R. R., V. L. Smith, A. W. Williams, and M. V. Van Boening (1993):
  “The Robustness of Bubbles and Crashes in Experimental Stock Markets,” in Non-
  linear Dynamics and Evolutionary Economics, ed. by R. H. Day, and P. Chen, pp.
  183–200. Oxford University Press.

                                        83
Kirchler, M., J. Huber, and T. Stöckl (2011): “Thar She Bursts - Reducing
  Confusion Reduces Bubbles,” Working Paper, University of Insbruck.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
  105(2), 211–248.

Kondor, P. (2009): “Risk in Dynamic Arbitrage: The Price Effects of Convergence
 Trading,” Journal of Finance, 64(2), 631–655.

Kreps, D. (1977): “A Note on Fulfilled Expectations Equilibria,” Journal of Economic
 Theory, 14, 32–43.

Krishnamurthy, A., S. Nagel, and D. Orlov (2011): “Sizing Up Repo,” Working
 Paper, Stanford University.

Kupiec, P. (2002): “Stress-testing in a Value at Risk Framework,” in Risk Man-
 agement: Value at Risk and Beyond, ed. by M. Dempster, pp. 76–99. Cambridge
 University Press.

Kyle, A. S., and W. Xiong (2001): “Contagion as a Wealth Effect,” Journal of
 Finance, 56(4), 1401–1440.

Lamont, O. A., and R. H. Thaler (2003): “Can the Market Add and Subtract?
  Mispricing in Tech Stock Carveouts,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(2), 227–268.

Lehar, A. (2005): “Measuring systemic risk: A risk management approach,” Journal
  of Banking and Finance, 29(10), 2577–2603.

Lei, V., C. N. Noussair, and C. R. Plott (2001): “Nonspeculative Bubbles in
  Experimental Asset Markets: Lack of Common Knowledge of Rationality vs. Actual
  Irrationality,” Econometrica, 69(4), 831–859.

Loewenstein, M., and G. A. Willard (2006): “The Limits of Investor Behavior,”
  Journal of Finance, 61(1), 231–258.

Lorenzoni, G. (2008): “Inefficient Credit Booms,” Review of Economic Studies,
  75(3), 809–833.

Manganelli, S., T.-H. Kim, and H. White (2011): “VAR for VaR: Measuring
 Systemic Risk Using Multivariate Regression Quantiles,” unpublished working paper,
 ECB.

                                         84
Martin, A., and J. Ventura (2012): “Economic Growth with Bubbles,” American
 Economic Review, 147(2), 738–758.

Matten, C. (1996): Managing Bank Capital. Wiley.

McKelvey, R. D., and T. R. Palfrey (1992): “An Experimental Study of the
 Centipede Game,” Econometrica, 60(4), 803–836.

Merton, R. C., and A. Perold (1993): “THEORY OF RISK CAPITAL IN FI-
 NANCIAL FIRMS,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 6(3), 16–32.

Miller, E. M. (1977): “Risk, Uncertainty, and Divergence of Opinion,” Journal of
 Finance, 32(4), 1151–1168.

Miron, J. A., and C. D. Romer (1990): “A New Monthly Index of Industrial
 Production, 1884-1940,” Journal of Economic History, 50(2), pp. 321–337.

Mitchell, M., and T. Pulvino (2012): “Arbitrage crashes and the speed of capital,”
 Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3), 469–490, (forthcoming).

Moinas, S., and S. Pouget (2012): “The Bubble Game: An Experimental Study of
 Speculation,” Working Paper, Toulouse School of Economics.

Morris, S. (1996): “Speculative Investor Behavior and Learning,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 111(4), pp. 1111–1133.

Morris, S., A. Postlewaite, and H. S. Shin (1995): “Depth of Knowledge and
 the Effect of Higher Order Uncertainty,” Economic Theory, 6, 453–467.

Morris, S., and H. Shin (2001): “Rethinking Multiple Equilibria in Macroeconomic
 Modelling,” in NBER Marcoeconomics Annual 2000, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and
 K. Rogoff, pp. 139–161. MIT Press.

Neal, L. (1990): The Rise of Financial Capitalism. Cambridge University Press.

        (2012): ”I am Not Master of Events”: Speculations of John Law and Lord
  Londonderry in the Mississippi and South Sea Bubbles. Yale University Press.

Obstfeld, M., and K. S. Rogoff (1996): Foundations of International Macroeco-
 nomics. MIT Press.


                                        85
Ofek, E., and M. Richardson (2003): “DotCom Mania: The Rise and Fall of
 Internet Stock Prices,” Journal of Finance, 58(3), 1113–1137.

Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi (2006): “Was there a Nasdaq bubble in the late
  1990s?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 81(1), 61 – 100.

         (2009): “Technological Revolutions and Stock Prices,” American Economic
  Review, 99(4), pp. 1451–1483.

Patrik, G. S., S. Bernegger, and M. B. Rüegg (1999): “The use of risk adjusted
  capital to support business decision making,” Casualty Actuarial Society Forum, pp.
  243–334.

Porter, D., and V. L. Smith (1995): “Futures contracting and dividend uncertainty
 in experimental asset markets,” Journal of Business, 68, 509–541.

Postlewaite, A., and X. Vives (1987): “Bank Runs as an Equilibrium Phe-
 nomenon,” Journal of Political Economy, 95(3), 485–491.

Radelet, S., J. D. Sachs, R. N. Cooper, and B. P. Bosworth (1998): “The
 East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis, Remedies, Prospects,” Brookings Papers on
 Economic Activity, 1998(1), 1–90.

Rampini, A. A., and S. Viswanathan (2011): “Financial Intermediary Capital,”
 Working Paper, Duke University.

Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoff (2009): This Time is Different: Eight Cen-
 turies of Financial Folly. Princeton University Press.

         (2011): “From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis,” American Economic Review,
  101(5), 1676–1706.

Rochet, J.-C., and X. Vives (2004): “Coordination Failures and the Lender of
 Last Resort: Was Bagehot Right After All?,” Journal of the European Economic
 Association, 2(6), 1116–1147.

Rosenthal, R. (1981): “Games of Perfect Information, Predatory Pricing, and the
 Chain-Store Paradox,” Journal of Economic Theory, 25, 92–100.

Rotemberg, J. J. (2011): “Minimal Settlement Assets in Economies with Intercon-
 nected Financial Obligations,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43(1), 81–108.

                                         86
Samuelson, P. A. (1958): “An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with
  or without the Social Contrivance of Money,” Journal of Political Economy, 66(6),
  467–482.

Sato, Y. (2009): “Ranking Concerns of Fund Managers and the Persistence of Bub-
  bles,” Working Paper, London School of Economics.

Scheinkman, J., and W. Xiong (2003): “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 111(6), 1183–1219.

Schnabel, I., and H. S. Shin (2004): “Liquidity and Contagion: The Crisis of 1763,”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 2(6), 929–968.

Schularick, M., and A. M. Taylor (2012): “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Mone-
  tary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008,” American Economic
  Review, 102(2), 1029–1061.

Segoviano, M., and C. Goodhart (2009): “Banking Stability Measures,” Financial
  Markets Group Working Paper, London School of Economics and Political Science.

Shiller, R. J. (2000): Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press.

Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny (1992): “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity:
  A Market Equilibrium Approach,” Journal of Finance, 47(4), 1343–1366.

         (1997): “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of Finance, 52(1), 35–55.

Simsek, A. (2011): “Belief Disagreements and Collateral Constraints,” Working Paper,
  Harvard University.

Smith, V. L., G. L. Suchanek, and A. W. Williams (1988): “Bubbles, Crashes,
  and Endogenous Expectations in Experimental Spot Asset Markets,” Econometrica,
  56(5), 1119–1151.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1982): “The Inefficiency of the Stock Market Equilibrium,” Review
  of Economic Studies, 49(2), 241–261.

Stiglitz, J. E., and A. Weiss (1981): “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
  Information,” American Economic Review, 71(3), 393–410.



                                         87
Sturzenegger, F., and J. Zettelmeyer (2006): Debt Defaults and Lessons from
  a Decade of Crises. MIT Press.

Sunder, S. (1995): “Experimental Asset Markets,” in The Handbook of Experimental
  Economics, ed. by J. H. Kagel, and A. E. Roth, pp. 445–500. Princeton University
  Press.

Tarashev, N., C. Borio, and K. Tsatsaronis (2009): “The systemic importance
  of financial institutions,” BIS Quarterly Review.

Tasche, D. (1999): “Risk Contributions and Performance Measurement,” Working
  Paper, TU München.

Temin, P., and H.-J. Voth (2004): “Riding the South Sea Bubble,” American
 Economic Review, 94(5), 1654–1668.

Tirole, J. (1982): “On the Possibility of Speculation under Rational Expectations,”
  Econometrica, 50, 1163–1182.

        (1985): “Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations,” Econometrica, 53(5),
  1071–1100.

Townsend, R. M. (1979): “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly
 State Verification,” Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2), 265–293.

Tsanakas, A. (2009): “To split or not to split: Capital allocation with convex risk
  measures,” Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 44(2), 268 – 277.

Upper, C., and A. Worms (2004): “Estimating Bilateral Exposures in the German
 Interbank Market: Is There a Danger of Contagion,” European Economic Review,
 48, 827–849.

Urban, M., J. Dittrich, C. Klüppelberg, and R. Stolting (2003): “Allocation
 of Risk Capital to Insurance Portfolios,” Blätter der DGVM, 26, 389–406.

Van Boening, M. V., A. W. Williams, and S. LaMaster (1993): “Price Bubbles
  and Crashes in Experimental Call Markets,” Economics Letters, 41(2), 179–85.

Vayanos, D. (2004): “Flight to Quality, Flight to Liquidity and the Pricing of Risk,”
  Working paper, London School of Economics.


                                         88
West, K. D. (1987): “A Specification Test for Speculative Bubbles,” Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics, 102(3), 553–580.

White, E. N. (2009): “Lessons from the Great American Real Estate Boom and Bust
 of the 1920s,” NBER working paper 15573.

Wong, A., and T. Fong (2010): “An Analysis of the Interconnectivity among the
 Asia-Pacific Economies,” Hong Kong Monetary Authority Working Paper.

Xiong, W. (2001): “Convergence trading with wealth effects: an amplification mech-
  anism in financial markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 62(2), 247–292.

         (2012): “Bubbles, Crises, and Heterogeneous Beliefs,” in Handbook on Sys-
  temic Risk, ed. by J.-P. Fouque, and J. Langsam. Cambridge University Press.

Xiong, W., and J. Yu (2011): “The Chinese Warrants Bubble,” American Economic
  Review, 101(6), 2723–2753.

Zawadowski, A. (2011): “Entangled Financial Systems,” Working Paper, Boston
  University.




                                        89
