                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HOW DO REGULATORS INFLUENCE MORTGAGE RISK:
                      EVIDENCE FROM AN EMERGING MARKET

                                           John Y. Campbell
                                           Tarun Ramadorai
                                           Benjamin Ranish

                                         Working Paper 18394
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18394


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




We gratefully acknowledge an Indian mortgage provider for providing us with the data, and many
employees of the Indian mortgage provider, Santosh Anagol, Amit Bubna, Jishnu Das, Jennifer Huang,
Ajay Shah, S. Sridhar, Usha Thorat, R. V. Verma, and Vikrant Vig for useful conversations and discussions.
We thank seminar participants at the Econometric Society/European Economics Association Malaga
Conference, the NBER Household Finance Summer Institute, IIM Bangalore, the World Bank, the
Oxford-Man Institute of Quantitative Finance, Saïd Business School, the HKUST Household Finance
Symposium, the NUS-IRES Real Estate Symposium, the NHB-CAFRAL Conference, and the NIPFP-DEA
Conference on International Capital Flows for comments, the International Growth Centre and the
Sloan Foundation for financial support, and Vimal Balasubramaniam for able research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18394.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Regulators Influence Mortgage Risk: Evidence from an Emerging Market
John Y. Campbell, Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish
NBER Working Paper No. 18394
September 2012, Revised July 2013
JEL No. G21

                                               ABSTRACT

To understand the effects of regulation on mortgage risk, it is instructive to track the history of regulatory
changes in a country rather than to rely entirely on cross- country evidence that can be contaminated
by unobserved heterogeneity. However, in developed countries with fairly stable systems of financial
regulation, it is difficult to track these effects. We employ loan-level data on over a million loans disbursed
in India over the 1995 to 2010 period to understand how fast-changing regulation impacted mortgage
lending and risk. We use cross-sectional differences in the time- series variation of delinquency rates,
conditional on initial interest rates, to detect the effects of regulation on mortgage delinquencies.


John Y. Campbell                                       Benjamin Ranish
Morton L. and Carole S.                                Department of Economics
Olshan Professor of Economics                          Littauer Center
Department of Economics                                Harvard University
Harvard University                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
Littauer Center 213                                    branish@fas.harvard.edu
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu

Tarun Ramadorai
University of Oxford
Said Business School
Park End St.
Oxford OX1 1HP
United Kingdom
tarun.ramadorai@sbs.ox.ac.uk




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18394
1     Introduction
How does mortgage regulation in‡uence the structure and performance of housing …nance?
This paper answers the question by analyzing administrative data on over 1.2 million loans
originated by an Indian mortgage provider, relating loan pricing and delinquency rates to
the changing details of Indian mortgage regulation.
    A more common approach to this question is to compare mortgage systems across coun-
tries. Casual observation reveals striking cross-country di¤erences. A recent survey by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF 2011) shows that among developed countries, homeown-
ership rates range from 43% in Germany to about 80% in southern European countries. The
level of mortgage debt in relation to GDP varies from 22% in Italy to above 100% in Denmark
and the Netherlands. The terms of mortgage instruments are overwhelmingly adjustable-
rate in southern Europe, and …xed-rate in the United States. Mortgages are funded using a
wide variety of mechanisms, including deposit-…nanced lending, mortgage-backed securities,
and covered bonds.
    Government involvement in mortgage markets also varies across countries, and it is likely
that this explains at least some of the cross-country variation in housing …nance. However,
it is hard to disentangle regulatory e¤ects from other factors that may a¤ect household
mortgage choice across countries, including historical experiences with interest rate and
in‡ation volatility, which can have long-lasting e¤ects because consumers can be slow to
adopt new …nancial instruments (Campbell 2012).       An appealing alternative approach is
to trace the e¤ects of mortgage regulation over time within a single country rather than
rely entirely on cross-country evidence that can be contaminated by unobserved di¤erences
across countries. The di¢ culty in doing this is that developed countries tend to have fairly
stable systems of …nancial regulation, so one rarely has the opportunity to track the e¤ects
of sharp regulatory changes. Slow changes, such as those that occurred in the US during
the early and mid-2000s, may well be important but it is hard to show this convincingly.
For this reason academic writers and public policy commentators have reached no consensus
on the degree to which regulation, rather than other factors, caused the US mortgage credit


                                              1
boom.1
      Mortgages are rapidly becoming important …nancial instruments in emerging markets.
Here, …nancial regulation is at least as intrusive and much less stable. In addition, long-
lasting historical in‡uences are likely to be less important in emerging markets because their
rapid growth and …nancial evolution reduce consumer inertia.             For this reason, emerging
markets are ideal laboratories in which to examine the e¤ects of mortgage regulation.
      This paper studies the mortgage market in India, a large and complex emerging economy.
India has been studied extensively by the economics profession, which has mainly analyzed
issues of poverty and development (see, for example, Besley and Burgess, 2000, and Banerjee
et al., 2007), or the impact of the Byzantine system of laws and regulations on industrial
organization and …rm output (see Aghion et al., 2008, and von Lilienfeld-Toal, Mookherjee,
and Visaria, 2012 for example).        India underwent an economic liberalization in the early
1990s and subsequently experienced rapid economic growth that accelerated further in the
2000s. During this time the …nancial sector has become much larger and more sophisticated,
but remains highly regulated, with a signi…cantly nationalized banking sector.
      It is only very recently that authors such as Anagol and Kim (2012) have begun to
study India in the context of …nancial regulation and its impacts on fast-changing Indian
capital markets. The provision of housing …nance is evolving particularly rapidly (Tiwari
and Debata 2008, Verma 2012).          Regulatory norms have changed frequently, albeit with
a continuing emphasis on funding housing for low-income households. There is increased
competition between mortgage lenders, and this may have contributed to rapidly increasing
house prices since 2002. Indian mortgages include both …xed and variable rate loans, but
there has been a signi…cant shift over time towards the latter.
      The challenge in emerging markets, India included, is to …nd adequate data.               Many
questions about mortgage …nance can only be answered using microeconomic data, either at
the household level or the loan level. There is now a vast literature looking at such data

  1
    A range of views can be found in Acharya, Richardson, van Nieuwerburgh, and White (2011), Baily
(2011), Ellis (2008), International Monetary Fund (2011), and US Treasury and Department of Housing and
Urban Development (2011), among other sources.



                                                  2
in the US, but it is harder to …nd in less wealthy countries with rapidly changing …nancial
systems.2 We are fortunate to have access to loan-level administrative data from an Indian
mortgage provider.       We analyze over 1.2 million mortgages disbursed by the mortgage
provider between 1995 and 2010, and attempt to understand the determinants of mortgage
rate setting and delinquencies.
       Our ability to use microeconomic data is important because pure time-series variation
in mortgage risk, even if correlated with changing regulation, may also be explained by the
changing state of the macroeconomy. Instead, we measure cross-sectional variation in the
time-series movements of mortgage delinquency, and link this cross-sectional variation to the
incentives created by regulations. One widely used implementation of this approach uses a
regression discontinuity design, seeking to identify a discontinuous change in behavior around
a threshold created by regulation. However this approach confronts numerous challenges, the
most obvious being when regulations do not have clearly identi…able points of discontinuity.
Yet another is when regulatory discontinuities lead to changes in the incentives and behaviors
of market participants, which in turn serve to blur identi…cation near regulatory boundaries.
Both of these issues arise in the Indian context, leading us to pursue an alternate approach.
In particular, we link time-variation in regulatory incentives to cross-sectional variation in
their expected impacts on di¤erent types of mortgages, as well as to geographical variation
across local o¢ ces operated by the mortgage provider.
       Our approach yields two main …ndings on the relation between regulation and mortgage
risk. First, throughout the period of study, small and micro loans are particularly favoured
by the Indian regulatory environment.           We uncover evidence that the implicit subsidies
to such loans show up in a higher propensity for them to default than can be accounted
for by their mortgage rates at issuance and all other determinants in the model.                   This
tendency is highly statistically signi…cant, is greater for micro loans than for small loans
marginally under the subsidy-qualifying threshold, and is observed in all cohorts of loan

   2
    Some recent mortgage studies using US microeconomic data include Adelino, Gerardi, and Willen (2009),
Agarwal et al (2011), Amromin et al (2011), Bhutta, Dokko, and Shan (2010), Demyanyk and van Hemert
(2011), Foote et al (2010), Johnson and Li (2011), Keys et al (2010), Melzer (2011), Mian and Su… (2009),
and Piskorski, Seru, and Vig (2011).


                                                   3
issuance over the sample period. However, …nding evidence of a discontinuity at the subsidy-
qualifying threshold is complicated by the responses of higher-income home-buyers, who
have incentives to bene…t from these subsidies by taking out small loans just underneath
the subsidy-qualifying threshold.     These actions, in turn, would result in a blurring of
the otherwise expected discontinuity in delinquency rates observed on either side of the
threshold.
   As a result, we adopt our alternative approach, and connect the magnitude of the excess
delinquency propensity of small and micro loans to time-series variation in the tightness of the
constraint favoring these loans. The regulator only periodically adjusts the nominal subsidy-
qualifying threshold.   This means that the real value of the constraint on the mortgage
provider to make qualifying loans varies over time. We …nd strong evidence that the excess
delinquency propensity of small and micro loans co-varies signi…cantly with this measure of
constraint tightness, which we view as evidence of the impacts of regulation on mortgage
risk. We also document that there is important geographical variation in delinquency rates,
which operates in a fashion consistent with a strategic response of the mortgage provider to
the regulatory incentives which it faces.
   The second important change that we track in the Indian regulatory environment occurs
in March 2004. At this point, the regulatory de…nition of “non-performing assets,”changes
from previously referring to loans that are six-months delinquent to those that are three-
months delinquent. Since provisioning requirements against delinquencies are tied to this
de…nition, we expect that this change creates incentives for the mortgage provider to monitor
loans earlier, and potentially to improve loan screening.      To investigate, we track loans
as soon as they are ‡agged as delinquent, which is when they are one-month behind on
payments. Following the regulatory change, we …nd that these one-month delinquent loans
are far less likely to subsequently become three-months delinquent. Furthermore, using a
subsample of 10,000 loans for which we have a complete time-series of payment histories, we
uncover evidence that is consistent with greater e¤ort on the part of the mortgage provider
to monitor delinquencies in response to this regulatory change. In particular, we …nd that
debt collection rates on one-month delinquent loans are accelerated in the interval before

                                               4
they hit the new three-month mark for classi…cation as a non-performing asset. Importantly,
perhaps as a result of incentivizing mortgage lenders to act early on delinquent loans, we
…nd that this change substantially lowers the likelihood of experiencing longer-term defaults.
This impact on long-term defaults is even larger than that arising from a 2002 legal change
in the ability of mortgage providers to more easily repossess or restructure non-performing
assets.   Moreover, we identify that the primary impact of the regulation is on improved
ex-post monitoring rather than on better ex-ante screening.
   Taken together, these two …ndings provide compelling evidence that regulatory norms
impact the risk of delinquencies experienced by our Indian mortgage provider on loans is-
sued. Our evidence complements recent …ndings using U.S. data on the impacts of regulatory
norms on mortgage screening (Keys et al. 2011), and is also related to work on how mortgage
credit expansion in the U.S., particularly in sub-prime zipcodes, contributed to the recent
crisis (Mian and Su… 2009). Our evidence on the role played by subsidies in the increased
delinquency rates on small loans contributes to the debate on whether such subsidies in
other countries, such as the U.S. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), had similar e¤ects
(see, for example, Dahl, Evano¤, and Spivey 2000, Kroszner 2008, and Agarwal, Benmelech,
Bergman, and Seru 2012). Finally, our model shows that controlling for a range of determi-
nants of mortgage risk, the time when a loan is issued has signi…cant explanatory power, a
…nding related to the analysis of Demyanyk and van Hemert (2011) who perform a similar
analysis to explain U.S. sub-prime mortgage risk.
   The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 sets the stage by describing the
Indian macroeconomic environment and the Indian system of mortgage regulation during
the quarter century since 1985, together with the mortgage data we employ. Further de-
tails Indian mortgage regulation are provided in an online regulatory appendix (Campbell,
Ramadorai, and Balasubramaniam 2012). Section 3 introduces our model of mortgage delin-
quencies, which we use to explore the e¤ects of regulation on the relative delinquency rates
of di¤erent types of loans.   Section 4 discusses the change in the regulatory de…nition of
non-performing assets in 2004 and its consequences on observed delinquency and repayment
patterns. Section 5 concludes. Additional empirical evidence on the Indian mortgage market

                                              5
is reported in an online empirical appendix (Campbell, Ramadorai, and Ranish 2012).



2     The Macroeconomic and Regulatory Environment

2.1    Macroeconomic Trends

To set the stage, Table 1 summarizes the history of several important Indian macroeconomic
variables over the quarter-century from 1985–2010, including annual real GDP growth, CPI
in‡ation, and government bond yields. Regulatory and macroeconomic reform in the early
1990s was followed by growth in the 4-8% range until the early 2000s, when growth acceler-
ated above 8%, brie‡y slowed again only by the global …nancial crisis in 2008. Meanwhile
in‡ation was high and volatile during the 1990s, with volatility particularly elevated around
the reform period and in 1998–99. A period of more stable in‡ation followed in the 2000s,
but in‡ation accelerated at the very end of our sample period.
    Indian government bond yields over the same period are also quite volatile. The 1-year
yield declines from double-digit levels in the mid-1990s, with considerable volatility in the
late 1990s related to the volatile in‡ation experienced at the same time.       After a low of
about 5% in the early 2000s, the 1-year yield spikes up in 2008, again related to concerns
about in‡ation. The 10-year yield is smoother but also undergoes a large decline from the
mid-1990s until the early 2000s.
    Figure 1 plots real house price indexes, both for India as a whole and for …ve broad
regions. The real rate of house price appreciation for the country as a whole is also reported
in Table 1. We compute these indexes using the mortgage provider’s own property cost data,
but data from the National Housing Bank (NHB) show similar patterns. Indian house prices
were relatively stable until the early 2000s and then began to increase rapidly, particularly in
the south of the country. The southern index peaks in 2008 while some other regions peak
in 2009. Thus India took part in the worldwide housing boom despite many di¤erences in
other aspects of its macroeconomic performance.
    These house price movements are important for our study because they interact with


                                               6
government policies favoring smaller loans. As house prices increase, fewer loans naturally
qualify for favorable regulatory treatment, creating time-series variation in the tightness of
regulatory constraints on mortgage lending. Understanding this e¤ect requires a detailed
explanation of the Indian regulatory system, which we now provide.


2.2    The Regulatory Environment

Mortgages in India are originated by two types of …nancial institutions, banks and housing
…nance companies (HFCs). Banks are regulated by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), while
housing …nance companies are regulated by the National Housing Bank (NHB), but most
regulations apply in fairly similar form to the two types of institution. This fact is important
for our study, as we are unable to publicly identify whether our mortgage provider is a bank
or an HFC.
   Figure 2 summarizes the details of mortgage regulation in India in a relatively parsimo-
nious fashion. The top half of the …gure shows regulations that applied to banks, and the
bottom half to HFCs. The regulations that remained constant throughout the period are
listed in black, whereas the ones that changed over the period are in colored font. In light
of the signi…cant changes that took place from 2001 to 2002, we separate the timeline into
the “…rst period,” i.e. prior to March 2001, and the “second period” which extends from
April 2001 until the end of the sample period. In the middle of the …gure, we summarize
subsidy schemes for micro-lending with the length of the bars accompanying these schemes
identifying their start and end dates relative to the timeline.
   Regulations can be divided into two types: those that restrict the funding of mortgage
lending, and those that incentivize lending to favored borrowers.        Until 2001, mortgage
funding was regulated in a fairly traditional manner, using leverage restrictions on banks
and HFCs, and interest-rate ceilings on deposit-taking HFCs.        From 2002 onwards, these
measures were augmented by capital requirements against risk-weighted assets following
the internationally standard Basel II framework.      The RBI and NHB distinguished small
and large loans, and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios above and below 75%, and set di¤erent risk



                                               7
weights for these di¤erent categories with frequent changes for loans below 75% LTV. In this
way the regulators shifted the risk capital available to banks and HFCs, and the incentives
for aggressive mortgage origination.
   Another noteworthy change in the regulatory environment is highlighted on the timeline,
and occurred on March 31, 2004 for banks, and one year later, i.e., March 31, 2005 for HFCs.
At this time the RBI rede…ned an asset as a “non-performing asset” (or NPA) if payments
(on interest or principal) remained overdue for a period of ninety days or more, from the
previous 180 day period allowed before assets were so classi…ed. One important implication
of the classi…cation of an asset as an NPA is that it incurs provisioning requirements, meaning
that the capital available to a mortgage lender holding such an asset reduces as the lender
is required to hold precautionary capital to cover expected losses.
   Related to this NPA rede…nition, an important law which came into force somewhat
earlier (in July 2002), was the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act. This law enabled the easier recovery
of NPAs via securitization, reconstruction, or direct repossession, bypassing the need for
secured creditors to seek permission from debt recovery tribunals (see von Lilienfeld-Toal,
Mookherjee, and Visaria, 2012, for evidence of the impacts of the establishment of these
tribunals in 1993). In our analysis, we separately evaluate the impact of these two changes,
namely the rede…nition of NPAs in 2004, and the introduction of SARFAESI in 2002, on
delinquencies experienced by the mortgage provider.
   Lending to small borrowers is an important political goal in India. Banks are subject to a
quantity target for Priority-Sector Lending (PSL), which includes loans to agriculture, small
businesses, export credit, a¢ rmative action lending, educational loans, and – of particular
interest to us –mortgages for low-cost housing. The PSL target is 40% of net bank credit for
domestic banks (32% for foreign banks), and there is a severe …nancial penalty for failure to
meet the target, namely, compulsory lending to rural agriculture at a haircut to the repo rate.
This regulation does not directly apply to HFCs, but bank lending to an HFC quali…es for
the PSL target to the extent that the HFC makes mortgage loans that qualify, i.e., are below
the speci…ed nominal PSL threshold.      The overall e¤ect of the PSL system is to provide

                                              8
an incentive, directly for banks, and indirectly for HFCs, to originate small mortgages that
…nance low-cost housing purchases.
   In addition to the PSL system, other schemes have been introduced at various points in
time over the sample period to subsidize new or re…nanced micro-lending –i.e., loans of sizes
well below the PSL-qualifying threshold.     The mid-section of Figure 4 shows the various
schemes that were in place to incentivize mortgage lending in very small loan sizes. These
schemes apply to both banks and HFCs. Most recently, interest rate subventions have been
put in place for the …rst year of repayments on small loans, payments that are passed through
to the borrower in the form of a reduced interest rate, for housing loans up to a maximum
size. Special subsidy and re…nancing schemes in place for very small rural loans (the Golden
Jubilee Rural Housing Finance Scheme or GJRHFS, and the Indira Awas Yojana) and for
borrowers qualifying for a¢ rmative action (the Di¤erential Rate of Interest scheme) are also
shown in the …gure, over the period for which they applied. Taken together, these schemes
increase the subsidy for tiny loans over and above the standard subsidy to PSL-qualifying
loans.
   As is evident from the brief description above, it is not a trivial task to document the
changes in the system of Indian mortgage regulation as these have been frequent, and are
not summarized in any one place. The online regulatory appendix to this paper, Campbell,
Ramadorai, and Balasubramaniam (2012), provides further details about the regulatory
system, and serves as a comprehensive guide to Indian mortgage regulation over the period
of our study.


2.3      Evolution of the Mortgage Market

Both macroeconomic and regulatory forces have contributed to rapid change in the Indian
mortgage market. Table 2 illustrates the changes in three relevant characteristics of mort-
gages issued by our lender: the shares of variable-rate mortgages, small PSL-qualifying loans,
and mortgages with high loan-cost ratios above 75%. The …rst two columns of Table 2, Panel
A show the variable-rate share in the number and value of mortgages disbursed. There has



                                              9
been a dramatic shift in the Indian mortgage system away from …xed-rate and towards
variable-rate mortgages, with one brief interruption in 2004.     Our lender made very few
…xed-rate mortgages after 2007. During the period of transition through 2002, variable-rate
mortgages were somewhat larger on average than …xed-rate mortgages, as shown by their
higher share of value in the second column of the table.
   The remaining columns of Panel A show the share of mortgages that are below the
PSL threshold, and above 75% loan-cost ratio, separately for variable-rate and …xed-rate
mortgages. The share below the PSL threshold peaks in 2001 (for variable-rate mortgages)
and 2000 (for …xed-rate mortgages), and then declines precipitously during the 2000s. The
PSL-qualifying share is somewhat higher for …xed-rate mortgages, re‡ecting their smaller
average size.     The share of mortgages with loan-cost ratio above 75% trends upwards,
increasing particularly rapidly in the early 2000s (for variable-rate mortgages) and late 1990s
(for …xed-rate mortgages).
   Both these trends are driven in part by the increase in house prices during the mid-1990s
and mid-2000s, shown earlier in Table 1 and Figure 1.       Figure 3 illustrates this point in
a di¤erent way.    The solid line in the …gure is the unquali…ed lending share, the fraction
of mortgages disbursed that are above the PSL threshold and thus do not qualify for the
PSL target. This fraction rises as house prices increase, particularly in the mid-1990s and
mid-2000s, but falls discontinuously when the PSL threshold is adjusted. Later in the paper,
we use the unquali…ed lending share as a proxy for the tightness of the regulatory constraint
favoring small loans.
   Figure 3 also reports the intensity of regulatory preference for loans with loan-cost ratio
below 75%. This is measured as the di¤erence in risk weights for loans above and below
the 75% loan-value threshold.      It is zero until January 2002, when it rises rapidly to a
maximum of 0.5 by the middle of 2003.
   Our data display not only time-series variation in the fractions of loans below the PSL
threshold and above 75% loan-cost ratio, but also geographical variation, which arises
naturally from variation in local housing market conditions. Panel B of Table 2 reports the
cross-sectional mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum fractions of PSL-quali…ed

                                              10
and high loan-cost mortgages, calculated across local o¢ ces of our mortgage lender. The
cross-sectional (across local o¢ ces) standard deviations are 19% for PSL-quali…ed loans and
11% for high loan-cost mortgages.       In the empirical work of the next section we exploit
this variation to try to detect geographical variation in the mortgage lender’s responses to
regulatory pressures.
   Table 3 presents more details on cohorts of loans issued in each year. Panel A reports
cross-sectional cohort means of mortgage terms and delinquency rates. Initial interest rates
on variable-rate and …xed-rate mortgages track one another very closely until 2002, and are
both close to the Indian prime rate shown in Table 1, despite some variation in the spread
between long-term and short-term government yields. In the period 2003–06, the variable
mortgage rate is well above the …xed rate and has an unusually high spread over the 1-year
bond yield, a feature shared with the Indian prime rate. This period has a generally high
market share for variable mortgages, but does include an episode in 2004 when our mortgage
lender shifted back towards …xed mortgage issuance. Variable mortgage rates decline after
2008, a period where our lender made few …xed-rate mortgages.
   Panel A also summarizes cohort means of loan maturity, loan-cost ratios, and loan-
income ratios.   The previously discussed increase in loan-cost ratios is visible here too,
but loan maturity and loan-income ratios are much more stable.        This pattern contrasts
with mortgage trends during the 2000s in the US, where loan-income ratios increased while
loan-value ratios were relatively stable (Campbell and Cocco 2012).
   The right-hand column reports the cohort 90-day delinquency rate, the annual probability
that an outstanding and not-yet-delinquent loan experiences a 90-day delinquency, calculated
separately for each disbursal-year cohort and calendar year, and then averaged over calendar
years for each cohort. The early 2000s appear unusual in the sense that the cohort default
rate for mortgages disbursed in these years is high relative to the other cohorts in the
sample period, despite loan characteristics such as loan-to-cost and loan-to-income ratios
not changing much on average.        The 2004 …xed-rate cohort, however, appears to have a
signi…cantly reduced default rate.
   Figure 4 summarizes the history of Indian mortgage delinquency in a simpler way. It

                                              11
plots the overall delinquency rate (the fraction of all outstanding mortgages, regardless of
the date of issue, that are 90 days past due), seasonally adjusted using a regression on
monthly dummies, for both …xed-rate mortgages (solid line) and variable-rate mortgages
(dashed line). The main feature of this …gure is the large spike in delinquencies in 2002–03,
particularly for …xed-rate mortgages. Delinquencies decline to quite low levels by 2005, and
remain low to the end of our sample period despite the weak housing market in 2009–10.
    Panel B of Table 3 shows the cross-sectional standard deviation of loan characteristics
and initial interest rates.         In the early 2000s there is a large spike in the cross-sectional
dispersion of variable mortgage rates. This spike coincides with the period of increased
delinquencies documented earlier, and may re‡ect increased e¤orts by our mortgage lender
to distinguish among borrowers by estimating their default risk and setting mortgage rates
accordingly. For …xed mortgage rates, while the same pattern is not evident in the cross-
sectional dispersion of initial interest rates, there does seem to be an increase in the early
2000s in the cross-sectional dispersion of loan-to-cost ratios, which reduces again in 2004.
    In the remainder of this paper, we explore in more detail the relation between mortgage
regulation and these movements in mortgage delinquencies.



3     A Model of Mortgage Delinquencies
In this section we attempt to shed light on the factors which contributed to changes in
the mortgage delinquency rate over time and across cohorts, paying special attention to
the changing regulations described in the previous section. In order to do so, we propose
and estimate a model of mortgage delinquencies, recognizing that their determinants include
demographic characteristics of borrowers, measurable characteristics of loans, cohort-speci…c
variation, and (imperfectly observable) variation in macroeconomic conditions.
    In our baseline speci…cation, we model the probability of observing a delinquency as a
function of all of these determinants:


         Pr[    ]   =( +      +      +      +        +        +     )¬1   +     (1)


                                                            12
where         is an indicator for an observed 90-day delinquency in loan  with interest-rate
type  (…xed or variable) in cohort  originated in branch , at time . That is,  denotes
the loan origination date and  denotes the observation date.                       The model includes …xed
e¤ects for each interest rate type,          ,   branch   ,   and cohorts,   .   In each case, we drop one
dummy as we have an intercept in the model. The model also includes loan characteristics
 indexed by , and demographic characteristics  indexed by , for each borrower .
These characteristics can potentially vary over time, although in practice most of the ones
we measure are constant over time.                The initial interest rate on the mortgage,  is also
included as an explanatory variable in the model.3                  The coe¢ cient on initial interest rate
and on loan term (in the set of loan characteristics ) have a subscript  to indicate that
separate coe¢ cients are allowed here for …xed and variable rate mortgages; loan term and
initial interest rate do not necessarily relate to risk in the same way for …xed and variable rate
mortgages. In the subsequent sections, we augment this basic speci…cation to include time-
series variation in regulatory thresholds, interacted with dummies to capture cross-sectional
variation in the expected impacts of these changes.
       The model allows for an unobserved macroeconomic shock ¬1 to impact these deter-
minants multiplicatively, and we allow a separate set of shocks to a¤ect …xed and variable
rate mortgages. While in practice the time-series of estimated …xed and variable rate shocks
appear quite similar, this ‡exibility is important, since the macroeconomic shocks that drive
delinquency may be di¤erent if mortgage rates adjust to interest rate movements (Campbell
and Cocco 2012).
       Given the presence of macroeconomic shocks, the estimated coe¢ cients on the branch and
cohort …xed e¤ects, and loan and demographic characteristics show the extent to which these
factors alter the propensity for a loan to default as macro conditions vary.                    To …x ideas,
consider a high estimated value of a particular cohort e¤ect – this would indicate a high
propensity of loans in that cohort to default when times are bad, i.e., when ¬1 is high.

   3
     The model is estimated at the annual frequency ; to eliminate monthly seasonal variation, we de-mean
all left- and right-hand side variables at the monthly frequency and add back the annual mean. This change
is innocuous, having little impact on our results.



                                                       13
The choice of ¬1 rather than  as the macroeconomic shock in‡uencing delinquency
at time  captures the fact that 90-day delinquencies are not realized contemporaneously
with deteriorations in macroeconomic circumstances. Rather, we expect to see delinquencies
materialize some period of time after negative macroeconomic shocks, as delinquencies result
from borrower-level cash-‡ow problems, which likely occur with a lag.
       We employ a two-stage estimation procedure, in which the …rst stage comprises  cross-
sectional regressions estimated across all loans outstanding, and not yet delinquent, in each
year  2  .      In the second stage, we employ the classical minimum distance estimator
(see, for example, Wooldridge 2002) to extract estimates of  and the static parameters of
the model. As a check on our procedure, we con…rm that two-stage estimation produces
estimates that are very close to those obtained via single-step estimation using non-linear
least squares.     To obtain standard errors for the second stage estimates we use a cross-
sectional correlation consistent bootstrap procedure, in which we draw a set of time periods
equal to the total number of years (15) in our data 1   15
                                                                 2  with replacement, and

assemble a simulated dataset for each bootstrap draw . We then re-run the second stage
regressions for  = 500 draws.
       Figure 5 plots a weighted average of the estimated macroeconomic shocks for …xed and
variable rate mortgages,  . The …gure also shows two di¤erent measures of macroeconomic
conditions: real GDP growth, and the average real rate of growth in corporate sales, …rm
…xed assets, and …rm net worth estimated from the population of Indian …rms available
in the Prowess database.4         The …gure, in which all series are standardized for ease of
comparison, shows that estimated  seem closely, although not perfectly related to these
other measures. All three measures indicate that 2002 and 2003 were periods of particularly
poor macroeconomic conditions, with a complete recovery in the Indian macro environment
only by 2005. Thus our model explains the spike in delinquencies in 2002–03, illustrated in
Figure 4, by macroeconomic shocks occurring at that time.

   4
    This database comprises the population of listed and large unlisted Indian …rms, and is considered to
be the main source of information on Indian corporates (see, for example, von Lilienfeld-Toal, Mookherjee,
and Visaria, 2012).



                                                   14
3.1    Household- and Loan-Level Determinants of Delinquency

The demographic variables that we employ include the borrower’s gender, marital status,
number of dependents, and dummies for age (up to age 35, 36-45, and 46 and above), for
education (high-school measured by higher-secondary certi…cate or HSC, college, postgradu-
ate, and missing), for a …nance-related educational quali…cation, and for a repeat borrower.
The loan characteristics include the loan-to-cost ratio, log loan amount, log loan-to-income
ratio, and dummies for whether the loan was paid by salary deduction or via a special scheme
with the employer, as well as dummies for special loan characteristics (tranched issuances
and re…nancings), speci…c loan purposes (home extension or improvement), and mortgage
contract terms (loan maturities 6-10 years, 11-15 years, or 16 years and above, estimated
separately for …xed and variable-rate mortgages). We also include a dummy for mortgages
observed in the …rst year of issuance.
   To control for house-price movements, we also include in the set of loan characteristics
regional house-price appreciation up to time  from the time of the disbursal of the loan.
For variable-rate loans only, we control for the change in the 1-year Indian government bond
yield since issuance.   Finally, we include a dummy variable which takes the value of 1 if
a loan is disbursed from a branch in the 12 months prior to a state election, to capture
the possibility (documented by Cole 2009 for Indian agricultural lending) that in election
seasons there may be pressure to disburse politically expedient loans, which have a higher
propensity to be delinquent.
   Table 4 reports the estimated coe¢ cients on these demographic and loan characteristics.
These are typically statistically signi…cant, with the theoretically expected sign.    Older
male and repeat borrowers have a higher delinquency rate, while more educated borrowers
have a lower rate. Interestingly, however, a …nance-related educational quali…cation slightly
increases the delinquency rate, possibly because …nancial-sector income is more volatile.
Mortgages with higher loan-income and loan-cost ratios are more likely to become delinquent,
but the absolute size of a loan lowers the delinquency rate.     Loans paid through salary
deduction or administered through employers have lower delinquency rates.        Loans with



                                             15
long maturity have higher delinquency rates, as do …xed-rate mortgages. The latter result
may be related to the generally downward trend of interest rates during this period in India,
although our variable that measures the change in the Indian one-year government bond rate
since issuance (for variable-rate mortgages only) does not enter the regression signi…cantly.
Regional house prices have a powerful e¤ect on delinquency, as one would expect, but we do
not …nd any evidence that loans disbursed in election seasons are unusually likely to become
delinquent.
   All of these variables are signi…cant in the presence of the initial mortgage interest rate,
which however enters the regression signi…cantly as well. This implies that the mortgage
lender does have information relevant for predicting delinquency, and uses it to set rates, but
does not fully adjust the initial mortgage rate to the probability of delinquency conditional
on observable borrower and loan characteristics.


3.2    Regulation and Delinquencies: PSL Norms

In order to assess the impact of regulation on delinquencies, we next include regulatory
variables in our regression along with the demographic and loan characteristics.       Table 5
reports the results. The top part of the table reports variables related to PSL norms, while
the bottom part looks at the e¤ect of risk weights on mortgages with high loan-cost ratios.
   Table 5 includes three speci…cations, labeled A, B, and C. Speci…cation A includes a
piecewise linear function of log loan size, with a kink at the PSL threshold. In addition,
the slope below the PSL threshold is interacted with the unquali…ed lending share, which as
previously discussed we use as a proxy for the intensity of regulatory pressure to originate
small loans. When the unquali…ed lending share is high, house prices are high relative to
the PSL threshold and the mortgage lender is particularly keen to originate PSL-qualifying
loans which are in short supply. Consistent with this view, we …nd that delinquency rates
increase as loan sizes get smaller, but the e¤ect is statistically signi…cant only below the PSL
threshold, and the slope of this relationship gets steeper when the unquali…ed lending share
is high.



                                              16
   Figure 6 summarizes this result graphically.      The top panel of the …gure shows the
variation in the delinquency rate associated with log loan size relative to the PSL threshold.
Above the threshold, there is almost no e¤ect, but the smallest loans have a delinquency
rate that is 1.5% higher when the unquali…ed lending share is one standard deviation below
its mean, and over 2% higher when the unquali…ed lending share is one standard deviation
above its mean.
   Speci…cation B considers geographic variation in delinquency rates and PSL-quali…ed
lending.   This speci…cation retains the variables from speci…cation A, which continue to
have very similar estimated coe¢ cients, but adds three new variables.        The …rst is the
unquali…ed lending share in the sub-branch originating each loan. This has a negative coef-
…cient, consistent with the view that loans originated in wealthy areas (where PSL-qualifying
loans are relatively scarce) are safer than loans originated in poor areas.   Then, the sub-
branch-speci…c unquali…ed lending share is demeaned in each cohort (to avoid contaminating
the interpretation of the coe¢ cients we have discussed so far), and interacted with both loan
size below the PSL threshold, and the interaction of this variable with the overall unqual-
i…ed lending share (creating a triple interaction). Both these interactions are statistically
signi…cant and negative. This tells us, …rst, that the spread in delinquency rates between
poor and wealthy areas is narrower for smaller loans, and second, that the narrowing of the
delinquency spread for small loans is stronger when there is more intense regulatory pressure
to originate small loans.   Putting these e¤ects together, the mortgage lender appears to
respond to regulatory incentives to originate small loans by increasing risky small lending
particularly in sub-branches that do relatively little PSL-qualifying lending. Such a reaction
may be rational given the overall lower risk of loans originated in these sub-branches.
   The bottom panel of Figure 6 illustrates this result by plotting the spread in delinquency
rates between a sub-branch with an unquali…ed lending share one standard deviation below
the mean, and a sub-branch with an unquali…ed lending share one standard deviation above
the mean. The spread narrows as loan size declines, but this narrowing is negligible when the
overall unquali…ed lending share is one standard deviation below the mean, and substantial
(about 50 basis points for loans two standard deviations smaller than the PSL threshold)

                                             17
when the overall unquali…ed lending share is one standard deviation above the mean.
   The …nal speci…cation in Table 5, speci…cation C, shows that the time-series and cross-
sectional e¤ects on mortgage risk, discussed above, can be summarized using a single variable
interacted with loan size, the sub-branch-speci…c unquali…ed lending share. In other words,
the pattern of mortgage risk in our data is similar to what we would expect if each sub-
branch of the mortgage lender were an independent entity responding to regulatory pressure
summarized by the sub-branch’s own unquali…ed lending share.
   The patterns in mortgage risk shown in Table 5 suggest that the mortgage lender responds
to regulatory pressure by increasing the volume of PSL-qualifying loans. Table 6 reports
some more direct evidence that this is the case. Panel A of the table looks at four changes
in the PSL threshold, and records growth rates of mortgage lending within narrow bands of
loan size (either 1% or 2.5%) around the old and new thresholds. Since the old threshold
becomes irrelevant for PSL-qualifying lending, while the new threshold becomes relevant, one
would expect regulatory pressure to increase lending immediately above the old threshold
relative to lending immediately below, and to increase lending immediately below the new
threshold relative to lending immediately above.       Panel A of Table 6 reports the average
of lending growth above minus below the old threshold, and below minus above the new
threshold, within one year of the threshold change. The estimated e¤ect is large, at 41%
for a 1% band and 30% for a 2.5% band, although it also has a large standard error.
   Panel B of Table 6 looks at geographical variation in the volume of PSL-qualifying lend-
ing.   We estimate a regression predicting the change in log share of sub-branch lending
below last month’s PSL threshold, using the lagged sub-branch PSL share, a dummy for a
PSL threshold change, and the dummy interacted with the lagged sub-branch PSL share.
An increase in the threshold lowers the propensity to make loans below the old threshold,
and this e¤ect is stronger in sub-branches with low PSL shares, that is in sub-branches in
wealthy areas. The interaction e¤ect has the sign we would expect given the results of Table
5, although it is not statistically signi…cant.




                                                  18
3.3    Regulation and Delinquencies: Risk Weights

We also use our regression (1) to examine the e¤ect of changing risk weights for mortgage
loans with high loan-cost ratios. The bottom part of Table 5 predicts delinquencies using
a piecewise linear function of the loan-cost ratio, with kinks at 65% and 85%. The slope
in the intermediate range between 65% and 85%, which is most a¤ected by risk weights, is
interacted with the di¤erence in risk weights between loans above and below a 75% loan-
to-value ratio.   As the mortgage provider reports only the similar loan-to-cost ratio, the
in‡ection points at loan-to-cost ratios of 65% and 85% are equivalent to an assumption that
loan-to-cost ratios above 85% are always above 75 % loan-to-value, and conversely for loans
below loan-to-cost ratios of 65%.
   The results of this exercise are not much a¤ected by the choice of speci…cation A, B,
or C. In all cases the e¤ect of the loan-cost ratio on delinquency is strongest in the inter-
mediate range. This is consistent with the view that extremely low loan-cost ratios have
little impact on loan risk (since the loan is extremely well collateralized already), while ex-
tremely high loan-cost ratios are unusual loans that are only made in special circumstances
to particularly high-quality borrowers.    The interaction e¤ect is negative, implying that
high risk weights for mortgages with high loan-cost ratios tend to reduce delinquency rates
for these mortgages relative to loans with lower loan-cost ratios. However, the interaction
e¤ect is not statistically signi…cant. Figure 7 illustrates the result graphically for the case
of speci…cation A.
   Despite not being greatly statistically signi…cant, our …ndings here are consonant with
the suggestion of Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2008) that capital requirements against risk-
weighted assets should be countercyclically adjusted.      Reductions in the risk-weight on
housing …nance in our time-series follow a period of low GDP growth, and are associated
with higher levels of mortgage delinquencies for high loan-cost ratio loans issued in those
cohorts. This suggests that Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein’s policy can in‡uence the riskiness
of mortgage lending.




                                              19
4     Impact of the Regulatory Classi…cation of Non-Performing
      Assets
In this section we examine another regulatory change that took place during our sample
period. On March 31, 2004 for banks, and March 31, 2005 for HFCs, the classi…cation of
“non-performing assets”(or NPAs) was changed to 90 days past due from the previous time
period of 180 days past due. This regulatory reclassi…cation of 90-day delinquencies, and
its implications for provisioning requirements, may have contributed to the unusually low
90-day delinquency rates reported in Table 3 for more recent loan cohorts. One mechanism
by which this might occur is that the reclassi…cation may have given our mortgage lender
the incentive to more intensively monitor shorter-term delinquencies (say 30 days past due),
and to take earlier action to forestall 90-day delinquency. As described earlier, we do not
take a …rm stand on the exact month of delinquency in which there might be a discontinuity,
but rather, track loans before and after the regulatory change, across their time-path of
delinquency.
    We therefore evaluate the expected loss given a delinquency before and after the regu-
latory reclassi…cation. This expected loss is the product of the probability of experiencing
a delinquency and the loss given delinquency. Table 7 looks at the …rst of these two ele-
ments, computing transition probabilities of loans that hit the 30-day delinquency threshold
to the 90-day delinquency mark, as well as the transition probability of 90-day delinquencies
to the 180-day delinquent mark.       The table shows that across the entire sample period,
22.7% (22.8%) of 30-day (90-day) delinquent loans eventually become 90 days (180 days)
delinquent.
    As we are unable to publicly identify whether the mortgage provider is a bank or an HFC,
we use the earlier RBI implementation date of 31 March 2004 as the date of the regulatory
change, to cover all possibilities.   When we look separately at the pre-April 2004 period
for the 30-day delinquencies, the transition probability is 29%, which is almost twice as
high as the post-March 2004 transition probability of 14.9%, and the reduction, of 14.1% is
highly statistically signi…cant. Clearly, following the change in the de…nition of NPAs to the

                                              20
shorter 90-day limit, the mortgage provider substantially reduced this transition probability,
potentially by exerting e¤ort to pursue borrowers more aggressively. The 90-day to 180-day
transition probability also reduces following the 2004 reclassi…cation, but by a much smaller
2.3%, suggesting that once the loan becomes classi…ed as an NPA, there are relatively fewer
incentives to take action. Another possibility, of course, is that the loans reaching the 90-day
delinquency mark are simply very di¢ cult to collect on despite the lender’s exertions.5
    To better understand the magnitude of loss given delinquency, we acquire a sample
of 10,000 loans from the total population of loans.              As our focus is to understand the
determinants of mortgage risk, we randomly sample 2,500 …xed-rate and 2,500 variable-
rate loans from the set of 90-day delinquent loans, and a further 2,500 …xed-rate and 2,500
variable-rate loans from the set of loans that do not experience a 90-day delinquency. In
each sub-sample of 2,500 loans, we further ensure that we sample an equal number (1,250)
from the early period in the data (disbursed prior to January 2000) and the later period
(disbursed between January 2000 and December 2004). We have veri…ed that this 10,000
loan sample has statistically indistinguishable characteristics from the population of loans
from which we draw. For each one of these 10,000 loans, we are able to track the full payment
history over time, as well as deviations from contracted repayments. We can compute the
latter as we are also given the equated monthly installment (EMI) for each of these loans in
each month, which is the expected monthly principal repayment plus interest amount. We
ensure that we weight any measures constructed using this sample, so that they are re‡ective
of the larger population of loans from which the sampling occurred.
    For each loan in the sample, we construct a measure of losses accrued over time. To do
so, we accumulate payments and EMI over time, and compute the “cumulative installment
de…cit”(or CID) as Min(0, cumulative payment-cumulative EMI)/EMI. This measure takes
the value of zero if monthly payments exceed or equal the EMI, and is negative otherwise,

   5
     It is also worth noting here that the 2002 implementation of SARFAESI, described above, allowed for
easier restructuring and repossession of delinquent loans. However the small change in the 90-180 day
transition probability despite this regulatory change mirrors the insigni…cant post-SARFAESI change in the
  CID debt collection rate that we de…ne and analyze below. These results suggest that at least for housing
loans, this particular regulatory change may not have had very large e¤ects.



                                                    21
indicating when borrowers are in arrears. The cumulation ensures that if overpayments are
made to redress arrears, these are allowed to push the measure towards zero. The division
by EMI puts the cumulative installment de…cit into units of required monthly payments.
   Figure 8 plots the CID measure around 30-day delinquencies, before and after the regu-
latory change to the de…nition of NPAs. The measure is cross-sectionally demeaned by both
cohort-year and calendar-year, to ensure that we are not picking up cohort or macroeconomic
e¤ects. In both panels of Figure 8, date 0 is the …rst date that the loan is declared 30-days
delinquent (values below 1 are possible because of the cross-sectional demeaning). The top
panel shows that prior to the change in the regulatory de…nition of NPAs, loans declared
30-days delinquent on average in‡icted a cost on the mortgage provider of roughly 1.1 EMIs
after a year. Post-March 2004, there is a substantial recovery in this number, with such
30-delinquent loans roughly 0.3 EMIs delinquent 12 months later. The bottom panel of the
…gure shows that this change in the behavior of the CID after the regulatory rede…nition of
NPAs is highly statistically signi…cant.
   We undertake this analysis more formally by estimating how changes in the CID vary
following a 30-day delinquency, but prior to hitting the 90-day threshold, both before and
after the regulatory rede…nition of the NPA period. To do so, we estimate expected debt
collection rates – changes in the CID – as a polynomial function of the level of the CID
prior to the 90-day delinquency mark (i.e., a CID level of ¬3), allowing for a jump in the
rate at the 90-day delinquency mark, and modelled as a linear function of the CID beyond
the 90-day delinquency mark. As before, we include time- and cohort-speci…c …xed e¤ects
during estimation to ensure that we are not merely picking up some of the broader changes
detected earlier in the regulatory and macroeconomic environment.
   Figure 9 shows how the estimated debt collection rate varies before and after the 90-
day delinquency threshold, before and after the regulatory rede…nition of NPAs in March
2004. The …gure clearly reveals that following the regulatory rede…nition of NPAs, the debt
collection rate prior to hitting the 90-day mark increased substantially relative to the pre-
regulatory change period, with a signi…cant discontinuity at the 90-day threshold, where the



                                             22
debt collection rate falls sharply.6 We also consider whether the introduction of SARFAESI
had any signi…cant impacts on the ability to collect on debts, and …nd that while there is
a mild increase in the pre-90 day debt collection rate, it is dwarfed by the change following
the NPA rede…nition (moreover, the small discontinuity evident in this line at the 90-day
mark is statistically insigni…cant).
      While these changes to debt collection rates are clearly evident in the data, one potential
worry is that the rede…nition of NPAs from 180 to 90 days simply shifted the inevitable
recovery of cash from delinquent borrowers by the 90-day di¤erence between these two dates.
In other words, perhaps the change merely provided a time-value improvement in the net
cash ‡ows of the mortgage provider, but no more substantial impacts.
      To address this question, Figure 10 shows the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
the change in the CID (time- and cohort-demeaned) in the year following the …rst 30 day
delinquency.     This CDF is plotted for three time periods, namely, January 1995 to June
2002, when SARFAESI was …rst implemented; July 2002 to March 2004, the date of the
rede…nition of NPAs; and post-April 2004 until the end of the sample period in 2010. We
plot the …gure on a log scale to focus attention on the very worst cases (i.e., those loans with
the greatest degradation in CID over the year following the date of …rst 30-day delinquency),
as these loans are the most likely candidates for a complete write-o¤.
      The …gure shows that the post-NPA rede…nition CDF …rst-order stochastically dominates
both the pre- and post-SARFAESI CDFs, showing a substantial reduction in the incidence
of high degradation in the CID. While SARFAESI appears to have had some bene…cial
impacts for the very worst cases, this is dwarfed by the large impact of the NPA rede…nition.
These substantial impacts on eventual bad debts of this regulatory rede…nition are striking,
as it appears that there are important real bene…ts to incentivizing mortgage providers to
detect and take early action on delinquencies.
      Finally, in Figure 11 we document some evidence that the change in the regulatory

  6
    The increase in the debt collection rate prior to the 90-day delinquency mark, and the discontinuity
at that mark are both economically and statistically signi…cant. The online empirical appendix plots
the di¤erence between the pre- and post- NPA rede…nition debt collection rates with associated bootstrap
con…dence intervals.


                                                  23
classi…cation of NPAs a¤ected mortgage origination as well as mortgage monitoring practices.
This …gure reports the same curve as in Figure 10, separately for loans originated in a
six-month window before the NPA reclassi…cation and in a six-month window after the
reclassi…cation.   The left tail of the distribution is noticeably thicker for loans originated
before the reclassi…cation, even though both cohorts of loans are experiencing delinquency
after the reclassi…cation and hence are subject to post-reclassi…cation monitoring by the
mortgage lender.     This implies that the reclassi…cation induced the mortgage lender to
tighten mortgage origination standards slightly as well as to monitor mortgages more closely.
    In summary, a simple change in the regulatory de…nition of NPAs appears to have signif-
icantly moderated mortgage delinquencies. The impacts are visible in both the probability
of delinquency and the eventual loss given delinquency, and they are stronger for mortgages
originated after the NPA reclassi…cation.



5     Conclusion
The Indian regulatory and macroeconomic environment has changed dramatically during
the last two decades. A fast-developing housing …nance system has coped with signi…cant
variation in default rates and interest rates, and regulatory changes in the incentives to
originate mortgages in general, and small loans in particular. We have presented evidence
that regulatory subsidies for low-cost housing distorted the e¢ cient markets relationship
between interest rates and subsequent delinquencies, and that changes to the de…nition of
non-performing assets impacted behavior in response to early evidence of payment delin-
quencies. While it is di¢ cult to generalize …ndings from one country, the latter results on
the change in the regulatory de…nition of NPAs do suggest that even seemingly innocuous
changes in regulatory de…nitions can have important impacts on mortgage monitoring and
origination practices, and hence on mortgage risk.
    We view our approach of linking time-variation in regulation with expected cross-sectional
impacts on di¤erent types of mortgages as a potentially appealing alternative for studies
analyzing the impacts of regulation on market outcomes, especially in situations where dis-


                                              24
continuities are hard to identify, or in environments where the discontinuities at thresholds
are blurred by the responses of market participants. Overall, our paper contributes to the
growing body of literature on the impacts of regulators and regulatory norms on risks in
…nancial markets.




                                             25
  References

Acharya, Viral V., Matthew Richardson, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, and Lawrence J. White,
    2011, Guaranteed to Fail: Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Debacle of Mortgage
    Finance, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Adelino, Manuel, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen, 2009, “Renegotiating Home
    Mortgages: Evidence from the Subprime Crisis”, unpublished paper, Federal Reserve
    Bank of Boston.

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Dou-
    glas D. Evano¤, 2011, “The Role of Securitization in Mortgage Renegotiation”, Dice
    Center Working Paper 2011-2, Ohio State University.

Agarwal, Sumit, Nittai Bergman, Efraim Benmelech, and Amit Seru, 2012, Did the Com-
    munity Reinvestment Act lead to Risky Lending?

Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen J. Redding, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2008, “The
    Unequal E¤ects of Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in In-
    dia”, American Economic Review, 98(4), 1397–1412.

Amromin, Gene, Jennifer Huang, Clemens Sialm, and Edward Zhong, 2011, “Complex
    Mortgages,” unpublished paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and University of
    Texas at Austin.

Anagol, Santosh, and Hugh Kim, 2012, “The Impact of Shrouded Fees: Evidence from a
    Natural Experiment in the Indian Mutual Funds Market”, American Economic Review,
    102(1), 576-593.

Baily, Martin N., 2011, ed., The Future of Housing Finance: Restructuring the U.S. Resi-
    dential Mortgage Market, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC.

Banerjee, Abhijeet, Shawn Cole, Esther Du‡o, and Leigh Linden, 2007, “Remedying Edu-
    cation: Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 122(3), 1235-1264.

                                          26
Besley, Tim, and Robin Burgess, 2000, “Land Reform, Poverty Reduction and Growth:
    Evidence from India”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (2), 389-430.

Bhutta, Neil, Jane Dokko, and Hui Shan, 2010, “The Depth of Negative Equity and Mort-
    gage Default Decisions,”FEDS Working Paper 2010-35, Federal Reserve Board.

Campbell, John Y., 2012, “Mortgage Market Design”, unpublished paper, Harvard Univer-
    sity.

Campbell, John Y. and Joao F. Cocco, 2012, “A Model of Mortgage Default”, unpublished
    paper, Harvard University and London Business School.

Campbell, John Y., Tarun Ramadorai, and Vimal Balasubramaniam, 2012, “Prudential
    Regulation of Housing Finance in India 1995-2011”, regulatory appendix, available at:
    http://intranet.sbs.ox.ac.uk/tarun_ramadorai/TarunPapers/PrudentialRegulationAppendix.pdf.


Campbell, John Y., Tarun Ramadorai, and Benjamin Ranish, 2012, “Appendix to Camp-
    bell, Ramadorai, and Ranish”, empirical appendix, available at:
    http://intranet.sbs.ox.ac.uk/tarun_ramadorai/TarunPapers/MortgageEmpiricalAppendix.pdf.


Campbell, Tim S. and J. Kimball Dietrich, 1983, “The Determinants of Default on Insured
    Conventional Residential Mortgage Loans”, Journal of Finance 38, 1569–1581.

Cole, Shawn A., 2009, “Fixing Market Failures or Fixing Elections? Elections, Banks and
    Agricultural Lending in India”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1,
    219–50.

Dahl, Drew, Douglass Evano¤, and Michael Spivey, 2000, “Does the Community Reinvest-
    ment Act In‡uence Lending? An analysis of Changes in Bank Low-Income Mortgage
    Activity,”Working Paper no.2000-06. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago

Demyanyk, Yuliya, and Otto van Hemert, 2011, “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage
    Crisis”, Review of Financial Studies, 24, 1848-1880.



                                                     27
Duca, John V. and Stuart S. Rosenthal, 1994, “Do Mortgage Rates Vary Based on House-
    hold Default Characteristics? Evidence Based on Rate Sorting and Credit Rationing”,
    Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 8, 99–113.

Ellis, Luci, 2008, “The Housing Meltdown: Why Did It Happen in the United States?”,
    Bank for International Settlements Working Paper 259.

Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi, Lorenz Goette, and Paul Willen, 2010, “Reducing
    Foreclosures: No Easy Answers,”NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, 89–138.

Hunt, Stefan, 2010, “Informed Traders and Convergence to Market E¢ ciency: Evidence
    from a New Commodity Futures Exchange”, unpublished paper, Harvard University.

International Monetary Fund, 2011, “Housing Finance and Financial Stability – Back to
    Basics?”, Chapter 3 in Global Financial Stability Report, April 2011: Durable Financial
    Stability – Getting There from Here, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

Johnson, Kathleen W. and Geng Li, 2011, “Are Adjustable-Rate Mortgage Borrowers Bor-
    rowing Constrained?”, FEDS Working Paper 2011-21, Federal Reserve Board, Wash-
    ington, DC.

Kashyap, Anil, Raghuram Rajan, and Jeremy Stein, 2008,“Rethinking Capital Regulation”,
    in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium on Maintaining Stability in a
    Changing Financial System, 431-471.

Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, “Did Securitiza-
    tion Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans”, Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 125, 307–362.

Kroszner, Randall, 2008, “The Community Reinvestment Act and the Recent Mortgage
    Crisis,”speech at the Confronting Concentrated Poverty Policy Forum.

von Lilienfeld-Toal, Dilip Mookherjee and Sujata Visaria, 2012, “The Distributive Impact
    of Reforms in Credit Enforcement: Evidence from Indian Debt Recovery Tribunals”,

                                           28
    Econometrica, 89, 497-558.

Melzer, Brian T., 2011, “Mortgage Debt Overhang: Reduced Investment by Homeowners
    with Negative Equity”, unpublished paper, Northwestern University.

Mian, Atif and Amir Su…, 2009, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evi-
    dence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124,
    1449–1496.

Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, 2011, “Securitization and Distressed Loan
    Renegotiation: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Crisis”, Journal of Financial
    Economics 97, 369–397.

Tiwari, Piyush and Pradeep Debata, 2008, “Mortgage Market in India”, Chapter 2 in
    Danny Ben-Shahar, Charles Ka Yui Leung, and Seow Eng Ong eds. Mortgage Markets
    Worldwide, Blackwell.

U.S. Treasury and Department of Housing and Urban Development, 2011, Reforming Amer-
    ica’s Housing Market: A Report to Congress, Washington, DC.

Verma, R.V., 2012, “Evolution of the Indian Housing Finance System and Housing Market”,
    Chapter 14 in Ashok Bardhan, Robert H. Edelstein, and Cynthia A. Kroll eds. Global
    Housing Markets: Crises, Policies, and Institutions, John Wiley.

Wooldridge, Je¤rey M., 2002, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT
    Press, Cambridge, MA.




                                          29
