                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   LAND AND HOUSE PRICE MEASUREMENT IN CHINA

                                           Yongheng Deng
                                           Joseph Gyourko
                                               Jing Wu

                                        Working Paper 18403
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18403


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




This paper was prepared for the Reserve Bank of Australia and Bank for International Settlements
conference on “Property Markets and Financial Stability” in August of 2012. We appreciate the comments
of Haibin Zhu and other conference participants on an earlier draft, and gratefully acknowledge Jia
He and Mingying Xu for excellent research assistance. Gyourko thanks the Global Research Initiatives
Project of the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania for financial support. Deng and Wu thank
the Institute of Real Estate Studies at National University of Singapore for financial support. Wu also
thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support (No. 71003060). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Yongheng Deng, Joseph Gyourko, and Jing Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Land and House Price Measurement in China
Yongheng Deng, Joseph Gyourko, and Jing Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 18403
September 2012
JEL No. R0,R14,R3,R31

                                              ABSTRACT

We provide the first multi-city, constant quality land price index for 35 major markets in China. While
there is meaningful heterogeneity in land price growth across cities, on average the last nine years
have seen land values skyrocket in many markets, not just those on or near the coast. The typical market
has experienced double-digit compound average annual growth in real, constant-quality land values.
The 2009-2010 stimulus period typically saw large surges in prices. Three notable characteristics
about the land value appreciation series are their strong mean reversion at annual frequencies, the strong
common factor in their movement, and their very high volatility. Quantities, not just prices, have been
sharply increasing in recent years. The typical amount of space supplied via land auctions in our 35
city sample has doubled since 2008. Some local political economy traits such as the time the local
Chinese Communist Party leader has been in office are correlated with land supply volume.

We also investigate the quality of the two most prominent house price indexes in China, and conclude
that a traditional hedonic index more accurately reflects how house prices have changed over time
in eight major markets in China. Repeat sales indexes have become standard in many countries, but
they are not as useful in emerging markets such as China because the bulk of the housing stock is relatively
new and has not traded multiple times. A hedonic index shows much higher house price growth over
time that do officially published series for the eight markets examined.


Yongheng Deng                                        Jing Wu
Institute of Real Estate Studies                     Institute of Real Estate Studies
National University of Singapore                     Tsinghua University
Singapore                                            100084 Beijing, P.R.China
 ydeng@nus.edu.sg                                    ireswujing@tsinghua.edu.cn

Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu
    I.       Introduction

         The stability of residential property markets has become an important topic for

policy makers and scholars ever since the collapse of the subprime mortgage market in

the United States helped precipitate the largest economic crisis seen in that country since

the Great Depression. Many commentators now are raising questions about the stability

of house prices in China given its extraordinary boom in values and its growing share of

global growth.1

         In this paper, we take a closer look at the Chinese housing markets, investigating

two of their features in detail. One is the land market. China is virtually unique globally

in that transactions prices of vacant land are regularly observed. We construct constant

quality land price indexes for 35 major cities and analyze their characteristics.

         The other aspect of the housing market studied here is how best to measure price

appreciation. Without an accurate gauge of real, constant quality prices, neither investors

nor policy makers can be well-informed about the true condition of the property markets.

Ever since Case and Shiller (1987) popularized repeat sales price indexes in the United

States, they have become the gold standard for house price measurement, replacing the

older hedonic techniques that were used to adjust for quality drift in the housing stock.

However, China, along with many emerging markets, provides a unique challenge to the

use of repeat sales indexes because there is plentiful new construction but few cases of

multiple sales of existing untis. Drawing on the work of Wu, Deng and Liu (2011), we

show that the older hedonic modeling approach generates a more accurate picture of

house price growth in Chinese markets.

1
  See the reports in Foreign Affairs (“China's Real Estate Bubble May Have Just Popped”, Dec 18th, 2011),
the New York Times (“Will China Break”, Dec 18th, 2011) or the Financial Times (“Chinese property: a
lofty ceiling”, Dec 13th, 2011) for some recent examples.

                                                                                                       3
        The first part of the paper reports results on land price appreciation and sales

quantity growth based on a new and unique data set on residential land markets across 35

major Chinese cities. Key stylized facts about Chinese land markets include the

following. Residential land values have skyrocketed in China over our 2003-2011

sample period. Even with the recent pullback in land prices in 201l observed in many

markets, the average annual compound rate of real, constant quality land price growth

still is above 10% in the typical market and exceeds 20% per annum in eleven cities.

Extremely high rates of price appreciation are not restricted to the big coastal region

markets such as Beijing and Shanghai, which experienced real annual growth rates of

20.2% and 23.7%, respectively. In fact, the city of Hefei, the capital of Anhui province

in central China, has the highest real annual average growth rate of 30.1%.2 In addition,

the markets of Changsha, Chongqing, Lanzhou, Nanjing, and Tianjin are almost

indistinguishable from Beijing and Shanghai in the magnitudes of their land price growth.

The first three of those cities are in the central or western region of the country. In

addition, there is heterogeneity in the magnitude of price growth across markets, with

eight (Jinan, Kunming, Nanchang, Shijiazhuang, Qingdao, Yinchuan, Xian, and

Wulumuqi) seeing real land prices grow at less than 10% a year on average. Only one

market, Wulumuqi, has negative price growth over its time in our sample, and we have

data on that city for only five years.

        While there are strong common year effects in land price appreciation, city fixed

effects cannot explain virtually any of the variation. Thus, prices tend to move in the

same way across most markets in a given year, possibly due to shifts in the Chinese


2
 Technically, Xining has a higher annual rate of appreciation at 49.9%, but we only have three years of
data on that market.

                                                                                                          4
macro environment or national market sentiment. There also is large mean reversion in

annual price growth, on the order of 35%. This is quite different from what other

researchers have found for U.S. housing (not land) markets over short horizons such as a

year. A preliminary investigation suggests that frequent adjustment of central

government policies is a factor in explaining this pattern. Mean reversion in land price

growth is larger if land prices were increasing in the previous year. This is consistent

with evidence that the Chinese government intervenes regularly to tame the property

market.

       Land prices also are quite volatile—3-5 times more so than house prices

according to our data. Construction costs are fairly flat in our sample period and

construction worker wages grow strongly but with relatively low variation about trend, so

the volatility in house prices appears to be driven by the land market, not by other factors

of production.

       We also document the supply side of local land markets, showing a doubling of

space supplied via land auctions just since 2008. City fixed effects are influential in

explaining the variation in new supply, but there also is an economically meaningful

common, national component present. In addition, we provide evidence that local

political economy factors can help explain the variation in supply over time within a

given market. Land sales volume is higher the more recently the local Chinese

Communist Party chief took over. It also is higher if local government has been spending

more than it takes in in budgetary revenues, forcing it to rely more on land sales as an

important source of funds.




                                                                                           5
         The second part of our paper focuses on measurement of house price changes in

China. Most of the housing stock is relatively new and has not transacted multiple times.

Hence, it is impractical to construct house prices indexes using paired repeat sales

transaction data. Presently, there are two widely-known price series reported in China.

One reflects the simple average of transactions prices within each city on new housing

units, with no attempt to control for heterogeneity in the quality of the housing units and

markets. The other reflects the comparison of the average prices of new units sold in

individual housing complexes during different stages of the complexes’ sales periods.

This series is an average of changes in complex-based average prices over different sale

stages and over time.

         The behavior of the simple average series varies widely across markets. It shows

more starkly rising prices in bigger, more developed coastal markets than in smaller, less

developed interior ones. The second series based on changes in average prices within a

housing complex exhibits little price growth over time and little volatility in general.

Relying on the analysis in Wu, Deng and Liu (2011), we show that both indexes suffer

from severe biases. The simple average house price index underestimates true constant

quality price growth due to falling quality over our sample period.3 The comparison of

complex-level average pricing across sales stages over time also suffers from downward

bias due to both unobserved unit-level heterogeneity and developers’ strategic pricing

behavior (i.e., Chinese residential housing developers typically sell the better units with

higher prices earlier, and gradually drop prices in later stages.) We contrast these two

series with a traditional hedonic-based index that we estimate separately, and argue that

3
 One important factor appears to be inferior location or site quality, as rapid urbanization pushes new
buildings further out along the urban periphery of many Chinese cities. The underlying hedonic traits
controlled for in our estimation are described below in more detail.

                                                                                                          6
the hedonic house price index more accurately reflects changes in price appreciation over

time in the eight major markets for which we have data for this part of the analysis. The

simple hedonic model indicates that house price growth has been very high in virtually all

markets.

          The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section begins by describing the

unique land price data that we amassed for major Chinese markets. Changes in real

constant quality land prices are then estimated, along with a description of how quantities

changed on the supply side. This section closes with a brief examination of the drivers of

the price and quantity change series. Section III then turns to the issue of how best to

measure house price changes in an emerging market like China. As just noted, we

provide a real, constant quality hedonic price index for newly-built homes in eight major

cities and contrast it with the existing official indexes. Section IV concludes.



    II.      Land Markets in China: Measurement and Analysis

             a. Data Collection and Creation of Constant Quality Land Price Indexes

          With very rare exceptions, researchers typically do not have access to data on raw

land values because sales of land parcels separately from the buildings on them are

seldom observed.4 A special feature of the Chinese market is that sales by local

governments of the right to use land over long periods of time occur regularly in each

city, and have been consistently recorded since 2003. Legally, the Chinese government

retains ultimate ownership of all urban land, so what we observe is the transfer of a

leasehold interest. A 1988 constitutional amendment allows the purchase of use rights

4
  In the U.S. context, Haughwout, Orr and Bedoll (2008) is one counterexample. There are also land
transactions observed in Singapore and Hong Kong SAR. See Ching and Fu (2003) and Ooi, Sirmans,
Turnbull (2006) for a discussion of land transactions in Singapore and Hong Kong SAR, respectively.

                                                                                                 7
for up to 70 years for residential properties. All future rental payments are included in

the upfront price paid by the purchaser, so we treat the initial lump sum payment as the

transactions price of the land parcel.

         The 2003 start date is due to a May 2002 ruling by the Ministry of Land and

Resources (MLR) which required all residential and commercial land parcel leasehold

purchases subsequent to July 2002 to be sold via some type of public auction process. 5

Values since then reasonably can be expected to reflect fair market values. The MLR

also requires the local land authority to publicly report the winning bidder and the

transactions price. Furthermore, it is standard procedure for the local authority selling the

parcel to publish detailed information on the parcel’s address, size, designated usage,

land conditions on delivery, and major planning indicators such as floor area ratio.

         Wu, Gyourko and Deng (2012) were the first to collect these data on land sales

for the capital city of Beijing. In this paper, we expand that effort to include information

on the 35 major cities depicted in Figure 1. To our knowledge, this is the first

comprehensive description of major local land markets in China. More specifically, we

worked with Soufun, a leading real estate data vendor in China, to obtain the data for

residential land parcel transactions from each local land authority’s web site.6 Table 1

reports summary statistics on the number of cities covered by year, along with the
5
  Prior to this ruling called the 11th Provision, most transactions of urban land parcels were done by
negotiation between a developer and a local government. This process was criticized for being opaque and
open to corruption. For our purposes, the prices that resulted seem likely to be below free market levels,
with the degree unknown and possibly changing over time depending upon local circumstances. Currently,
all transactions must be done via public auctions, including regular English auctions (pai mai), two-stage
auctions (gua pai), and sealed biddings (zhao biao). See Cai, Henderson and Zhang (2009) for a
comparison of these three types of auctions.
6
  Our data exclude parcels wholly designated for public housing units because the pricing mechanism for
those sites is different. Public housing programs in China include low-rent units (lian zu fang), public
rental units (gong gong zu lin fang), affordable housing units (jing ji shi yong fang) and price-controlled
units (xian jia fang). Typically the parcels designated for low-rent units would be directly allocated by
local governments, and parcels for price-controlled units are required to transact via public auctions. There
is a mixture of possible outcomes for public rental units and affordable housing units.

                                                                                                           8
number of land parcel transactions and the square footage involved. There is complete

data dating back to 2003 for 15 markets. Another seven begin in 2004, with the

remainder starting more recently. There is an average of about 25 transactions per city in

the initial year, with that number ranging typically ranging from about 27 to 50 in

subsequent years.7

        Land parcels in China are priced in terms of the floor area of housing permitted to

be built on the parcel, instead of in terms of the land area. Real prices in constant 2009

yuan per square meter of permitted space are computed by deflating with the relevant

monthly CPI series for each city. Figure 2 plots the simple means of these real values

over time for each market. There is substantial heterogeneity in prices across markets,

and one can see the mean reversion that will be documented more formally below. The

growing dispersion apparent in this figure is misleading, as it is partially due to the

inclusion of added markets over time. For example, if we restrict the analysis to the 15

markets with complete data throughout our sample period, in 2003 land was nearly eight

times more costly in the most expensive market (2,693 yuan per square meter of floor

area in Hangzhou) than in the least expensive city (352 yuan in Chongqing). By 2011,

the gap was just over five times (i.e., with Shanghai at 5,470 yuan and Nanning at 997

yuan). This is not a small absolute difference by any means, but still pales in comparison

to the nearly 25 times gap between Shanghai and Wulumuqi (222 yuan) in 2011 for the

full sample.

        We do not work with the unadjusted transactions prices in the analysis below

because the raw means may be driven by quality changes that could arise for a number of


7
 We actually observe the specific date of the land sales, but have limited sample sizes at monthly and
quarterly frequencies. Hence, our analysis does not investigate higher frequency periods.

                                                                                                    9
reasons. One is that the highest quality sites might be sold first, so that the change in the

unadjusted mean values would understate the true constant quality rate of price

appreciation. On the other hand, local governments might reserve the good parcels and

only list them during the more recent booming periods of the stimulus years, which

would result in an overestimation on price growth in the simple average series. In

addition, some land parcels were not leveled on delivery in a few cities in the early years

of our sample. Not controlling for that would result in the overestimation of true,

constant quality price growth.8 It also is possible that sales of high quality parcels occur

whenever the local government has the greatest need for revenue. Thus, the bias could

go in either direction for different markets.

         Consequently, we follow Wu, Gyourko and Deng (2012) in creating constant

quality land price indexes for each market. Our city-level hedonic is estimated via

ordinary least squares (OLS), with the log of the real transaction price as the dependent

variable. The explanatory variables include the following: (a) the parcel’s distance to the

center of the corresponding city (D_CENTER), which is measured after mapping the

precise location of each site with GIS software; (b) the distance to the nearest subway

station (D_SUBWAY); this variable is relevant in 10 of the 35 cities with operating

subway systems during our sample period; (c) district dummies which control for

local/neighborhood-level fixed effects not captured by the two previous location controls;

(d) a set of physical attributes including the size of the parcel (in land area; SIZE), the



8
  If a land parcel is not leveled on delivery, the purchaser has to pay additional cost for relocating previous
occupiers of the parcel, removing the existing buildings, and so forth, which would negatively affect the
transaction price of the parcel. Before 2003, whether a parcel was leveled upon delivery was a key part of
the negotiation between the developer and the local government. After that, most land parcels sold via
public auctions are leveled on delivery, although there were a few exceptions in some cities, especially
during the early years. We directly control for this in the hedonic estimation as described below.

                                                                                                           10
density permitted on the site when built (FAR), and whether the parcel is leveled on

delivery (LEVEL); (e) in some cases a small portion of a residential land parcel is

designated for affiliated commercial properties, public establishments, or public housing

units; we control for such conditions via the dummies of COMMERCIAL, PUBLIC and

PH, respectively; (f) the parcel’s transaction form as reflected in whether it was

purchased via sealed bidding (BIDDING), regular English auction (AUCTION), or two-

stage auction (the default group); and (g) year dummies, whose coefficients are used to

create the constant quality price index.

          Our land price hedonic works at least tolerably well in each of the 35 cities. The

coefficients on the quality controls generally are consistent with expectations, and we

always can reject the null that there is no explanatory power for our right-hand side

variables. Adjusted R-squared values vary from a low of 0.17 (Wulumuqi, whose data

begin in 2006) to a high of 0.72 (Fuzhou, whose data begin in 2004). Appendix Table 1

reports some summary statistics on these underlying regressions, all of which are

available upon request.9 The land price index in each city is constructed from the

estimated coefficients of the time dummies, with 2009 as the base year (i.e., year 2009 =

100).10



             b. Real, Constant-Quality Land Price Appreciation from 2003-2011

9
  We also conducted a two-stage Heckman estimation to control for potential bias arising from the fact that
there were a total of 614 parcels listed that failed to result in transactions (either because there were no
bidders if there was an auction or the bid prices were lower than the local governments’ reserve prices,
which is relevant for cases involving sealed bids). If these failures are disproportionately concentrated in
certain periods such as the financial crisis, selection bias would result in an overestimation of the price
index for that period. We could not find any statistically significant impact for the inverse Mills ratio
estimated from the first-stage probit model.
10
   Average annual appreciation in our hedonic index is about five percentage points higher than in the
unadjusted price series, which suggests that parcel quality has been falling over time on average. This does
vary by time and market to some extent.

                                                                                                         11
           Implied real, constant-quality compounded average annual appreciation rates for

each of the 35 cities are listed in Table 2. Among the 22 markets with data back at least

to 2004, there are only two in which constant quality land price growth is appreciating at

an average per annum compound rate below 10% (Nanchang and Qingdao, at 7.8% and

5.9%, respectively). Nine have experienced average compound annual growth rates

above 20%. Naturally, this implies extremely large aggregate growth in real land values.

The greatest price appreciation has occurred in Chongqing, which saw prices escalate by

577% since 2003. The analogous figures for Beijing and Shanghai, respectively, are

336% and 448% (since 2003).11 Six of the fifteen markets with data back to 2003 have

average compound annual growth rates above 20%, which implies their land prices have

grown by more than 330% since then. Qingdao’s low 5.9% per annum average

compound growth has led to 2011 prices that are 58% higher than in 2003.

           Summary statistics on the distribution of annual appreciation rates are presented

in Table 3. Double-digit average annual price appreciation is the norm, with the simple

average across markets only twice being below 10% and negative only during 2007-

2008. The 34 markets with data for that time period were almost evenly split between

those experiencing positive and negative price growth. Even though average real land

price growth was slightly positive in 2010-2011, more markets saw price declines than

increases that period.

           The extremely high volatility of land markets also can be seen in these data.

There are very wide swings in the mean appreciation rates across individual years, with

evidence of mean reversion at annual frequencies. The average absolute difference in

mean price growth rates across consecutive time periods is 24.5%. The swing upon
11
     Hefei’s real land values grew by an even larger 531% since 2004.

                                                                                           12
entering the global financial crisis from 2006-07 to 2007-08 was -51.7 percentage points,

and the decline from 2009-10 to 2010-11 following the end of the stimulus was -28.8

percentage points. The gaps between the highest and lowest appreciating markets within

any given year also are extremely wide. Those differences range from 60 percentage

points in 2003-04 to 165 percentage points in 2005-06. While most markets tend to move

in the same direction within any one year, individual cities can and do experience

outsized booms and busts at given points in time. And, there generally are a handful of

local markets in which land prices fall in any given year.

         Table 4 provides additional insight into just how volatile land prices have been in

Chinese cities. Given that land is the residual claimant on property value in standard

models, we would expect it to be more volatile than house prices overall. The top panel

of Table 4 compares simple mean growth rates of land and house prices in our sample of

cities, along with similar measures for construction costs and wages in the construction

industry.12 The bottom panel then reports the annual standard deviations of those

variables.

         Land price appreciation well exceeds overall house price growth in all but two

years: 2008 and 2011, when we estimate that land prices either dropped or stagnated,

while house prices increased modestly. In contrast, construction costs were fairly stable

over our sample period, with the highest rate of cost growth being 6.8% in 2008.

Construction wages grew by more on average in each year, but wage growth still pales



12
  The house price growth rate is derived from the constant quality price index for newly-built house units,
which will be described in detail in Section III. Construction costs and wages in the construction industry
are both reported by the National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC); since no city-level statistics are
available for these two series, the series in the corresponding provinces in which the cities are located are
adopted instead. All four series in Table 4 are in real terms and are deflated by the CPI index in each city.
Construction cost and wage data for 2011 are not yet available.

                                                                                                         13
compared to that of land price appreciation. Standard deviations in land prices range

from 22%-42%, depending upon the year, so the volatility is quite high. These

magnitudes are 3-4+ times the standard deviation of any other factor price reported in the

table.

         Figure 3 plots each city’s log index value, with the price in 2009 set to 100.

Figure 4 then plots real land price appreciation rates for the same set of cities. Here, one

begins to see the common movement in price growth across markets. The strong

influence of a common, national effect on city-level land price appreciation is more

evident from simple regressions of annual price appreciation rates on year dummies and

city dummies. Table 5 reports summary statistics from city and year fixed effects

regressions. Year dummies alone can account for 24% of the variation in annual land

price growth in the 35 markets depicted in Figure 4. This is more than four times the

R2=5% arising from a regression on city dummies alone. And, one cannot reject the null

hypothesis that the city fixed effects jointly equal zero. These factors are largely

orthogonal to one another, as including them together yields a R2=0.28. Thus, some

common, national effect can account for over one-fifth of the variation depicted in Figure

4, while there does not appear to be any fixed city trait that can explain much of it.

         This raises the question of whether there are time-varying local market

characteristics which can explain the variation in land price growth. To investigate this,

we created a number of variables that reflect demand, supply and credit conditions in

each market. The demand for residential land is derived from the demand for housing

itself, so one variable is a measure of the supply-demand balance in the housing market

(hsdratioi,t). More specifically, it is the ratio of the floor area of newly-built housing



                                                                                             14
listed in city i and year t (hlistedi,t) to the floor area of newly-built housing that was sold

in the same city and year (hsoldi,t), as defined here:

     (1) hsdratioi,t = hlistedi,t / hsoldi,t.13

In the regression model estimated below, we introduce the one year lagged term,

hsdratioi,t-1, in order to avoid potential reverse causality. This variable should be

negatively correlated with the change in local land prices, as a higher value of this ratio

indicates increasing oversupply in the housing market.

         We also control for expected nonfarm employment growth in the city using a

variable akin to the one developed by Bartik (1991). This variable, epgrowthi,t, is

calculated as the weighted average of national industrial sector employment growth rates,

where the weights reflect each city’s share of that industry’s aggregate employment.

More specifically,



where et is the national employment level in all nonfarm industries, ei,j,t is city i’s

employment in industry j in year t,         i,j,t   is the national employment level in industry j

outside of city i, and the j subscript indexes the 18 nonfarm employment sectors in

China.14 This variable should be positively correlated with the change in local land

prices, as it is close to being a pure demand shifter.

         In the U.S., credit markets are thought by many to have played a prominent role in

helping generate the stark rises in housing markets seen in many markets. For China, we


13
   The numerator and denominator are based on data provided by the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural
Development (MHURD). Each reflects activity permitted by a local housing authority. This variable is
only available through 2010.
14
   All employment data are from the National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC). Because industrial
classifications were adjusted in 2003, this variable is available in a consistent format beginning in 2004.
Currently the data are only available through 2010.

                                                                                                        15
proxy for local credit market conditions with the amount of new loans issued to

developers by year in each market, denominated in billions of 2009 yuan.15 The specific

measure used in the regression analysis below is developloan3yri,t, which is the lagged,

three-year average of these loan amounts (i.e., the average for the three years from t-3 to

t-1). This variable is expected to be positively correlated with changes in local land

prices to the extent that better liquidity conditions in the local property market allow

developers to bid up land prices.

         To see if time-varying local market conditions influence land markets, the log

change in the individual market land price indexes is regressed on these factors plus year

dummies in a random effects estimation as follows:

     (3) dlogLPi,t = α + β∙epgrowthi,t + γ∙hsdratioi,t-1 + δ∙developloan3yri,t + φ∙yeart + εi,t,

where dlogLPi,t is the log change in city i’s annual land price index and all other variables

are as described above.16 The results are reported in the first column of Table 6. Note

that this table only uses data through 2010 because that is the latest year available from

some regressors.

         Each coefficient has the expected sign, with those on the supply-demand

conditions and liquidity measures being statistically significant at standard confidence

levels. The expected employment growth variable is significant at the 12% level (t-

statistic ≈ 1.6). The second column of the table augments this baseline specification by

including interactions of each local trait with the time after 2008 (i.e., years 2009 and

2010) which capture the period after the global financial crisis began and China instituted

its massive stimulus program. Here, we see that virtually all of the impact of the time-

15
  Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC).
16
  We also experimented with directly controlling for city fixed effects. The standard Hausman test
indicates the random effects specification is preferred. In any event, the results are not materially affected.

                                                                                                           16
varying local traits is due to variation in the years prior to the Chinese stimulus. While

caution is in order given the limited degrees of freedom involved, we cannot find any

local trait that is strongly correlated with land price changes in a statistical or economic

sense during the stimulus period.17

         In one sense, it is comforting to know that our proxies for local market

fundamentals and credit conditions work as any simple economic model would predict,

especially given the limited time series over which we can estimate the relationships.18

However, it still is the case that these effects are small relative to the impact of the

common national effects reflected in the coefficients on the year dummies. On average,

the typical ‘year effect’ is about 30 percent, which is roughly equal to the standard

deviation of the log change in annual land prices for the cities in our sample. Thus, local

land price appreciation has been driven much more in recent years by a common, national

effect than by local market factors. This suggests that changes in sentiment about the


17
   Even prior to the stimulus, the economic importance of these traits is limited. Computing standardized
marginal effects of the three local characteristics using the coefficients from column 2 of Table 6 yields the
following: (a) a one standard deviation increase in expected employment growth in a city is associated
with one-fifth of a standard deviation increase in its log change of land prices; (b) a one standard deviation
increase in the ratio of floor space listed relative to that sold in a market in the previous year is associated
with half of a standard deviation lower log change of local land prices; and (c) a one standard deviation
increase in the lagged average of developer loans in the city is associated with about one-tenth of a standard
deviation increase the log change in land prices.
18
   We experimented with other local traits, but they were insignificant and/or did not change the basic tenor
of the results reported in Table 6. For example, we also collected data on local infrastructure investments
related to transportation, environmental projects (e.g., drainage, purification, gardening and greening), and
so-called basic infrastructure (e.g., water supply) as reported by the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural
Development of China (MHURD). Those measures are highly positively correlated with our developer
loan variable (ρ ranges from 0.77 to 0.86 depending upon the specific infrastructure measure). Including
one of these infrastructure variables in lieu of our credit market proxy yields very similar results to those
reported in Table 6. We also developed a measure of expected time on the market using data on local
housing inventory and the amount of sales. This variable is positively correlated with our supply-demand
ratio, and has no influence independent of hsdratio. However, it is correlated with log land price changes
in the expected way. This highlights that our goal here is not to claim some type of tight casual relationship
for a specific variable. We have too short a time frame and lack plausibly exogenous variation for such a
convincing analysis. Rather, our point is to note that there are various local traits that plausibly capture
fundamental conditions which are correlated with land price appreciation in ways that a simple economic
model would predict.

                                                                                                            17
country’s economic prospects will influence local land markets more than will the

supply-demand fundamentals of those markets themselves.

        One other noteworthy feature of Figure 4’s plot of annual land price appreciation

is the apparent mean reversion in the series. Table 7 reports results from very simple

models of the log change in current land price appreciation on lagged appreciation,

controlling for time and city fixed effects (in most cases). One does not want to make too

much of these findings given the limited time series (and the fact that we do not have data

over a complete housing cycle), but the findings confirm the visual impression delivered

by Figure 4. Essentially, if land price growth is 1 percentage point higher this period, it is

about 0.35% lower next period (column 1). This is quite different from what researchers

have found in the housing market in U.S., where there is strong persistence in housing

price growth across years and mean reversion over longer periods such as five year

intervals (e.g., Case and Shiller (1987), Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1991), Glaeser, et.

al. (2010)).

        This naturally raises the questions of why this pattern exists in the data, and

whether the volatility in the land market provides useful information to understand

housing market movements. We do not answer that question here, but Table 8 provides

some intriguing insight into one possible factor. The Chinese government is known to

intervene in the housing market, especially to tame it. For instance, when housing

markets in some coastal-region cities started to boom in 2004-05, the central government

issued a series of intervention policies between late 2005 and early 2006 to cool the

market. Similar patterns also apply to the cases of intense interventions in late 2007,

whose effect was later intertwined with the unexpected global financial crisis, and most



                                                                                           18
recently in the second half of 2010. The stimulus following the U.S. financial crisis is a

counterexample of intervention to boost the market. Besides the huge stimulus package,

in December 2008 the central government also unfolded several measures focusing on the

real estate sector for the purpose of encouraging housing consumption (State Council

Degree, No. [2008]131), which at least partially may have fueled the skyrocketing house

prices and land prices in 2009.

        The results in Table 8 lend credence to a role for government in its specifications,

the first of which interacts the lagged land price appreciation term with a dummy variable

indicating the direction of land price growth in the previous year. The results indicate

that mean reversion is larger if land prices were increasing in the previous year.

Subsequent specifications in the table investigate whether local fiscal conditions also

might have played a role. Those specifications include a triple interaction that includes

the size of the local fiscal deficit in the previous year. The variable, deficiti,t, is calculated

as the ratio between local budgetary fiscal expenditure and budgetary income in city i and

year t, or more specifically,

        (4) deficiti,t = bexpi,t / binci,t

where bexpi,t is city i’s budgetary fiscal expenditure in year t, and binci,t is the budgetary

fiscal income. In the analysis, deficiti,t serves as the proxy of local government’s fiscal

pressures and reliance on land sales.19 The coefficients on that term are not statistically

significant at standard confidence levels, but the sign is such that mean reversion from

19
   In China, local governments’ fiscal income mainly comes from two sources: budgetary income from
local tax, and off-budget income, most of which is from land sales. Under the current “tax revenue sharing
system” established in 1994, local governments could only retain 40-50% of the budgetary income, but are
burdened with 70-80% of the budgetary expenditure, which imposes heavy fiscal pressure for them.
Consequently, local governments have to rely on land sales as a major off-budget fiscal income source. In
2010, total land sales income reached 2914.7 billion yuan nationally, equaling 74.1% of local governments’
budgetary income (Ministry of Finance of China). See Tsui (2005) for more details about the public
finance system in current China.

                                                                                                       19
price growth booms is smaller if the local government has been running larger deficits.

Perhaps those governments have less of an incentive to actively implement any

countervailing policies emanating from the central government in Beijing. In contrast,

when price growth has been falling, such cities might have an incentive to be especially

aggressive in reversing the decline in prices, which would lead to the larger mean

reversion effect from such periods. The pattern of these results is consistent with this

expectation, although it is at most marginally significant. We certainly have not

established any causal relationships here, but this does serve to illustrate the potential

usefulness of a rich panel of observations on local land markets.



             c. Stylized Facts about Quantities: The Volume of Land Sales, 2003-2010

        Figure 5 plots the floor area sold by year across our sample of markets, with Table

9 reporting summary statistics on the amount of space supplied. Note that the supply of

space has increased greatly, and this is not solely due to the rise in the number of cities

covered in our sample. The aggregate supply of space has roughly doubled just since

2008, when all 35 cities are included in the sample. Figure 5 also depicts some

convergence in the flow amount of new space supplied across markets over time.20

        Table 10 reports results analogous to those above in Table 5 as to whether this

movement in supply can be explained by city-level or national fixed effects. Both factors

are empirically relevant, although city fixed effects can explain more of the variation. It

is not surprising to find significant city fixed effects here, as the amount of space supplied

certainly is linked with market scale. However, there are statistically and economically


20
  There is a similar convergence if we restrict the sample to the 15 markets for which we have consistent
data back to 2003.

                                                                                                        20
meaningful year effects, so we cannot reject the null hypothesis of a strong common or

national effect in new supply.

        Table 11 reports some simple regressions to see if time-varying city traits can

explain any of the variance in the supply series. Here, besides the city and year fixed

effects, we introduce two local politics variables. One measures the degree of budgetary

deficit in the previous year as defined above, and the other measures the length of time

(in years) that the top local Chinese Communist Party (CCP) officer has been in his (or

her) position. The results in column 1 of this table show that if the city government was

spending a lot relative to its revenues last year, it was likely to sell more land this year.

In addition, more land gets supplied the newer the top Communist Party leader is in the

local government.21 While these should be viewed as simple correlations because we

have no causally identifying variation, the results strongly suggest that local political

economy considerations probably play an economically meaningful role in land supply.

The second column of Table 11 includes interaction terms with the stimulus period of

2009-2010. Both coefficients are positive, but neither has a t-statistic above 1. Columns

3 and 4 then investigate whether current deficit situations (not just lagged ones) are

correlated with supply conditions (this variable is only available through 2010). The

answer is yes, and the finding that CCP officers new to their offices sell more land is

robust to these changes in specifications.

        In sum, city and year fixed effects can explain about 60% of the variation in the

supply of new space annually in our 35 market sample. Local political economy factors


21
  Other research suggests that performance in boosting local economic growth is a key determinant of local
officers’ career path in China (Li and Zhou, 2005). The newly appointed officers are strongly incentivized
to expand government expenditure or investment to build political capital for their future promotions, and
thus generate higher demand for fiscal revenues.

                                                                                                       21
also appear to be empirically relevant, as the fiscal balance of the city and whether the

local CCP chief is new to his or her job also are correlated with supply.



            d. Some Comments on Very Recent Changes in Chinese Land Market Data

        The widespread, but not universal, declines in real constant quality land prices in

2011 are similar in nature to what happened in 2008 as the global financial crisis

unfolded. Nineteen markets saw real land values fall in 2011 versus sixteen in 2008.

Those earlier period declines were quickly reversed by the massive Chinese government

stimulus in 2009 and 2010. Only time will tell if something similar occurs this time.

        There still is substantial heterogeneity across markets, even in the most recent

data, so it remains inaccurate to claim that there is some single national Chinese land or

property market. Sixteen markets still experienced positive land price appreciation in

2011, with nine of them having double-digit price growth (and each of these nine were in

the interior of the country).22 There were some very big price declines in 2011, too, with

10 of the 19 decliners experiencing double-digit drops. Many of these markets were

along or near China’s coast.23

        We have also collected data for the first quarter of 2012. These city-level samples

are small, so we do not report price index or change data based on them. However, there

are stark falls in transactions volume, whether measured by the number of parcels sold or

by the permitted square footage on those parcels. Using the latter metric, 2012(1)

volumes are 65% of 2011(1) levels and 46% of 2010(1) levels, on average. In only 6 of

22
   Those markets are Changchun (30.8%), Changsha (59.8%), Chongqing (21.2%), Haerbin (18.1%),
Huhehoate (108.6%), Wuhan (13.6%), Xian (14.0%), Xining (62.4%), and Zhengzhou (16.1%).
23
   The biggest decliners were Beijing (-44.2%), Fuzhou (-27.7%), Guangzhou (-43.0%), Shanghai (-
18.0%), and Qingdao (-16.6%). The other coastal markets of Dalian, Ningbo, Hangzhou, Shenzhen and
Xiamen were either flat or slightly negative.

                                                                                              22
our 35 markets is permitted square footage on sold parcels in the first quarter of 2012

greater than that in the first quarter of 2011; the analogous number when comparing

2012(1) to 2010(1) is seven24. Twenty-one of the 35 markets (or 60% of our sample)

have 2012(1) permitted square footage levels that are at least 50% below 2010(1) levels

prevailing in the final year of the stimulus. The changes here are especially stark among

the coastal markets: Beijing’s numbers are down 75%; Shanghai’s are down 91%;

Fuzhou’s are down 96%; Dalian’s are down 92%; Qingdao’s are down 91%; Ningbo’s

are down 89%; Guangzhou and Xiamen had no land sales in 2012(1), so there levels are

down 100%. These percentage changes are not artificially high because of the

comparison with the 2010(1) stimulus period. Twenty-two of our 35 markets have

permitted square footage on sold land parcels in 2012(1) that are more than 50% below

their 2011(1) levels.

            In sum, transactions volumes in the land market have plummeted in most (but not

all) major Chinese cities. This suggests that demand by private developers is very low. It

is well known that house prices around the world do not follow a random walk and tend

to be sticky downward with quantities falling before prices do. If this is the case in

China, then these most recent transactions data are foreboding and bear close scrutiny

going forward. If they do not reverse to a significant extent, one would expect sharp

price declines in the near future.



     III.      What Is the True Level of Housing Price Growth in China? Measurement and
               Analysis



24
  Only Changsha, Changchun, Chengdu, Jinan, Wuhan, Yinchuan and Zhengzhou have 2012(1) permitted
square footage levels above those during the 2010(1) stimulus period.

                                                                                             23
         Measuring house price growth may seem like a straightforward matter given the

now widespread acceptance of the repeat sales methodology reintroduced and

popularized by Case and Shiller (1987, 1989).25 However, it is not so in China (and other

emerging markets), where a significant portion of the housing stock consists of new (or

relatively new) housing units that have not yet been sold multiple times. Obviously, a

repeat sales index captures price changes of existing homes, which by definition are the

only ones that have been sold more than once.

         China reports two house price series, each of which is based exclusively on the

values of newly-built housing units. According to statistics published by Ministry of

Housing and Urban-Rural Development of China, 64% of all the floor space in units

transacted in 2010 was from newly-built units, so accurately measuring the price change

on new units captures much of the variation in the value of entire housing stock in

China.26 One series is the called the Average Selling Price of Newly-Built Residential

Index. It reflects the simple average of transactions prices (total sales values divided by

total size of housing unit transacted) on new housing units, and is based on statistics

reported by all developers in each market. It makes no attempt to control for any quality

differentials across markets or drift (positive or negative) in housing units over time. It is

available for all markets across China. The other series, which is officially termed “Price

Indices in 70 Large and Medium-Sized Cities” (or “70 Cities Index” for short), is a

measure of changes in average prices on units sales within individual housing complexes

over sales stage or time periods. More specifically, this index is calculated by first


25
  Their work is based on the seminal contribution of Bailey, Muth and Nourse (1963).
26
  Ideally, one would like to capture price changes on existing homes, too, but the reported transactions
prices of existing units presently are not considered of high quality in China, at least partially because an
unknown number of people are reporting lower values to avoid transaction taxes and capital gain taxes.

                                                                                                         24
computing the average sales price of new units each month, by housing complex. The

monthly series then is the transactions volume-weighted average of each complex’s

average price changes over time.

        Figure 6 plots each series for the eight major markets reported in Wu, Deng and

Gyourko (2012) between 2006 Q1 and 2010 Q4,27 with Table 12 reporting the implied

average compound price growth for each series over our sample period. There are two

noteworthy features of these data. First, data from the “70 Cities Index” never shows

much price appreciation in any of the eight major markets. In some but not all of these

cities, the simple average price index also exhibits relatively little growth and volatility.

Second, the two series are not highly correlated with one another.

        If these data are to be believed, the “70 Cities Index” in particular sends a

comforting message about the state of housing markets in major Chinese cities, in that it

does not indicate there has been a great boom that might have led to substantial

overpricing (relative to underlying fundamentals) of house prices in these places.

However, Wu, Deng and Liu (2011) provide good reasons to believe these series are

biased downward, possibly quite substantially. For example, it is well known that price

growth calculations based on simple averages will overstate (understate) the true change

in constant quality values to the extent that quality rises (falls) over time. To determine

the extent of heterogeneity across markets and quality drift over time, one must go to the

data.

        The continuous suburbanization of sites as urban growth has skyrocketed in major

Chinese cities means that new units are being produced in housing complexes farther

27
  The average price index started in the mid-1990s, and the “70 Cities Index” began in 1997. Both indexes
significantly adjusted their coverage or estimation method in the second half of 2005. Hence, we display
each series here only since 2006 Q1.

                                                                                                      25
away from the urban core. Using data on an anonymous Chinese market, Wu, Deng and

Liu (2011) report that the average distance from the city center increased by 50% just

between 2004 and 2007 (i.e., from 4.2 kilometers to 6.1 kilometers). If this is typical of

most rapidly growing markets, then location quality has changed a lot in recent years. In

the U.S. context, this would not be a signal of lower quality, as sorting into suburban sites

often is associated with higher location quality, particularly as higher income households

sort into homes located in high quality school districts. There is no reason to expect any

such spatial sorting in China, and Wu, Deng and Liu (2011) report results from a hedonic

house price regression (see below for more on their model and the hedonic approach)

indicating that not controlling for the fact that new housing units are being built farther

out from the urban core is associated with over a 14% underestimation of constant quality

prices. Hence, the rapid growth in urban Chinese markets is associated with units being

built on lower quality sites, and not controlling for this feature results in a meaningful

underestimation of constant quality price growth over a period as short as three years.28

         Increasing density is another trait of new housing complexes that suggests quality

has deteriorated over time. Based on data from various issues of the Statistics Yearbook

of China, Wu, Deng and Liu (2011) calculate that permitted floor area ratios (FAR)

increased by over 60% between 2000 and 2010 (i.e., from 2.15 in 2000 to 3.57 in 2010).

Their hedonic analysis using micro data on an unnamed Chinese housing market does not

indicate this severely depresses prices, but increasing density is considered a disamenity




28
  That said, accurately controlling for this trait is difficult in a period of extremely high growth. If the true
center of activity is changing, we would expect an unchanging noisy measure to lead to a downwardly-
biased hedonic price.

                                                                                                             26
in any reasonable housing or urban model, so it is yet another reason why the two

government indexes might understate true price growth, all else constant.29

        Strategic pricing behavior by developers is yet another reason why the second “70

Cities Index” might substantially understate true house price appreciation. As Wu, Deng

and Liu (2011) argue, the tradeoff between setting a higher price and the carry costs of

unsold units as reflected in their time on the market is likely to lead developers to price

their units so the last units sold are of lower price. In their empirical analysis using data

from the same anonymous Chinese housing market, they provide results from a hedonic

regression consistent with this conclusion, as the last unit sold in a typical housing

complex goes for 11% less than the first unit from the same complex. Thus, not being

able to control for the timing of sales, which the “70 Cities Index” does not do, is likely

to lead to substantial underestimation of the true price increase.

        Even if individual housing unit quality has not deteriorated over time (and it could

have increased), all this suggests that the quality of the housing complexes in which the

units are located has fallen over time, at least partially because of their inferior

locations.30 Not being able to control for this downward quality drift means that both




29
   The ceteris paribus assumption is critical here, of course. Increasing density may bring other benefits
such as more and better restaurants, improved infrastructure, and the like. The entire package could result
in higher overall quality for a given location. However, we are concerned here with the direct impact of
more structure on a given amount of land. That is a disamenity and the direct effect should be to lower
prices. The hedonic model by Wu, Deng and Liu (2011) also suggests a significantly negative effect of
high density.
30
   The vast majority (95%+) of new housing units are situated in condominium-like high rise complexes
according to recent issues of the Statistics Yearbook of China. The rest are so-called landed houses, by
which is meant the units are detached or attached and sited on their own plots of land. In this report, we
focus exclusively on the former type of housing unit.

                                                                                                        27
indexes reported by the government underestimate the true extent of house price

growth.31

         Therefore, we apply the hedonic estimation approach to the eight major cities

reported by Wu, Gyourko and Deng (2012). All the newly-built housing units transacted

between 2006 and 2010 in these cities are included in the calculation.32 The resulting

series and their real average compound growth rates are also reported in Figure 6 and

Table 12. There are two noteworthy features of the comparison between this constant

quality index and the two existing official indexes. First, in each of the eight cities the

hedonic indexes grow much faster than the “70 Cities Index”. The deviation from the

real average compound price growth rates varies from 1.71 percentage points in Wuhan

to 4.93 percentage points in Beijing. This implies that the bias arising from the strategic

pricing behavior by developers in the newly-built markets is important. The “70 Cities

Index”, which presently is the most influential house price indicator in China, appears to

be fairly unreliable in terms of reflecting price changes over time.33

         The relationship between the hedonic index and the average selling price is mixed.

The average compound growth rate of the hedonic index is higher in the cities of Beijing,

Shanghai, and Xian, but fairly similar in Tianjin, Hangzhou, Wuhan, and Shenzhen. In

Chengdu, the average price index grew faster than the hedonic price index during the

sample period. As suggested above, the key potential bias facing the simple average

31
   Technically, the bias results because omitted quality change that is reflected in the residual of the price
estimation equation is negatively correlated with estimated price change (i.e., because quality is falling over
time). See Wu, Deng and Liu (2011) for a derivation.
32
   In the calculation, all the units transacted in the sample period in one city are pooled in a hedonic model.
After controlling for the major locational and physical attributes, the hedonic price index is calculated
based on the time dummy coefficients. See Wu, Deng and Liu (2011) for the example in one city and more
details about the calculation process.
33
   NBSC regularly updates and reports the “70 Cities Index” each month. But in most cities, NBSC does
not directly report the average price, but the aggregated transaction volume and its total value only.
Therefore, the former series is much more well-known to the public.

                                                                                                           28
method is due to quality shifts of transacted units, whose effects would vary with time

and city. In general, the eight cities covered here are the most developed cities in China,

in which the process of urban expansion started earlier and thus has slowed in recent

years. Comparably, the effect of urban expansion in the average price index would be

more important in the emerging cites. Even though it seems that the bias in the average

price index in these eight major markets would not significantly affect our judgment of

their market conditions during the sample period, we still would not want to extrapolate

that conclusion to other markets or to the national level.34

           Another difference is that the average price series is always more volatile than the

hedonic price index, which at least partially results from the fluctuation of sold units’

quality. This effect is especially important in relatively small markets such as Shenzhen

and Xian, and will make the change of the average price index in specific periods less

reliable (for example, the sharp fluctuation of the average price index in Shenzhen in

2009 and 2010). Even in large markets like Beijing and Shanghai, such an effect could

also lead to very different results in some periods like late 2010.



     IV.       Summary and Conclusions

           This paper reports the first results and summary statistics on conditions in Chinese

land markets using new data based on auction sales from 2003-2011 in 35 major cities.

While there is meaningful heterogeneity in land price growth across markets, on average

the last nine years have seen land values skyrocket in many markets, not just those on the



34
  As calculated by Wu, Deng and Liu (2011), the real average growth rate of the aggregated average price
index in 35 major cities was significantly lower than that of the hedonic price index (1.87% and 3.94%,
respectively).

                                                                                                     29
coasts. The typical market has experienced double-digit compound annual growth in real

values on average.

        Three notable characteristics about the land value appreciation series are its strong

mean reversion at annual frequencies, the strong common factor in its movement, and its

very high volatility. Mean reversion is about 35% across years. Year dummies account

for just over one-fifth of the variation in the data, while city fixed effects are not

statistically significant. Volatility is quite high, and a comparison with other factors of

production used in housing shows that the volatility in house prices is being driven by the

land market, not construction costs or construction sector wages.

        Quantities, not just prices, have been sharply increasing in recent years. The

typical amount of space supplied has doubled since 2008. Flow supply is better

explained by city fixed effects, although there is some common, year effect, too. Local

political economy factors can account for some of the time series variation over time

within cities on the supply side.

        We also investigated the quality of the two most prominent house price indexes in

China, and concluded that a traditional hedonic index would more accurately reflect how

house prices have changed over time in eight major markets in China. Repeat sales

indexes have become standard in many markets, but they are not as useful in emerging

markets such as China because the bulk of the housing stock is relatively new and has not

traded multiple times. China’s most prominent index which reflects changes in the

averages of sales values within a housing complex over time shows very little volatility

and limited overall price appreciation. It appears to suffer from severe downward bias

for the reasons discussed in Wu, Deng and Liu (2011). A simpler average price index



                                                                                              30
also published in China shows marked rises in some markets, but not in others. It appears

most biased where quality change has been the greatest—which tends to be in the smaller

and emerging markets. We conclude that simple hedonic indexes that can control for

basic unit traits, as well as location quality of the housing complex in which it is situated,

more accurately capture changes in house prices over time in most markets. Those series

show very high house price appreciation over time and appear to more accurately reflect

the path of prices in Chinese markets.

       We believe these data will serve as the foundation for much broader and in-depth

future work on Chinese land and housing markets. There is much more to be done in

investigating how local market traits might better explain the time series variation

documented here. Other potentially important questions include whether changes in local

land markets are good predictors of what will happen to housing prices in the future and

whether there is an economically important collateral channel effect on non-real estate

sector firms through the Chinese finance system.




                                                                                            31
Selected References

Bailey, Martin, Richard Muth and Hugh Nourse (1963). “A Regression Method for Real
Estate Price Index Construction.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol.
58, No. 304: 933-942.
Bartik, Timothy (1991). Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development
Policies? Kalamazoo: Upjohn Press.
Cai, Hongbin, Vernon Henderson, and Qinghua Zhang (2009). “China’s Land Market
Auctions: Evidence of Corruption,” NBER Working Paper #15067.
Case, Karl and Robert Shiller (1987). “Prices of Single Family Homes Since 1970: New
Indexes for Four Cities,” New England Economic Review, Sep/Oct: 45-56.
Case, Karl and Robert Shiller (1989). “The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family
Homes,” American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 1: 125-137.
Ching, Stephen and Yuming Fu (2003). “Contestability of the Urban Land Market: An
Event Study of Hong Kong Land Auctions,” Regional Science and Urban Economics,
Vol. 33, No. 6: 695-720.
Cutler, David, James Poterba and Lawrence Summers (1991). “Speculative Dynamics,”
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 53, No. 3: 529-546.
Glaeser, Edward, Joseph Gyourko, Eduardo Morales, and Charles Nathanson (2010).
“Housing Dynamics,” working paper, October 2010.
Haughwout, Andrew, James Orr and David Bedoll (2008). “The Price of Land in the
New York Metropolitan Area,” Current Issues in Economics and Finance, Vol. 14, No. 3:
1-7.
Li, Hongbin and Li-an Zhou (2005). “Political Turnover and Economic Performance: The
Incentive Role of Personnel Control in China,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 89,
No. 9/10: 1743-1762.
Ooi, Joseph, C.F. Sirmans and Geoffrey Turnbull (2006). “Price Formation Under Small
Numbers Competition: Evidence from Land Auctions in Singapore,” Real Estate
Economics, Vol. 34, No. 1: 51-76.
Tsui, Kai-yuen (2005). “Local Tax System, Intergovernmental Transfers and China's
Local Fiscal Disparities,” Journal of Comparative Economics, Vol. 33, No. 1: 173-196.
Wu, Jing, Yongheng Deng and Hongyu Liu (2011). “House Price Index Construction in
the Nascent Housing Market: The Case of China,” National University of Singapore,
Institute of Real Estate Studies Working Paper Series, IRES2011-017.
Wu, Jing, Joseph Gyourko and Yongheng Deng (2012). “Evaluating Conditions in Major
Chinese Housing Markets,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 42, No. 2:
531-543.




                                                                                    32
                           Figure 1: Land Market Dataset Coverage




Note: the cities are labeled by the starting year of the land data in the dataset.




                                                                                     33
                  Figure 2: Real Average Residential Land Prices in 35 Major Chinese Markets (2009 Yuan)

  yuan per sq.m. of floor area
                                                                                                           Beijing
10000                                                                                                      Tianjin
                                                                                                           Shijiazhuang
                                                                                                           Taiyuan
9000                                                                                                       Huhehaote
                                                                                                           Shenyang
                                                                                                           Dalian
                                                                                                           Changchun
8000                                                                                                       Haerbin
                                                                                                           Shanghai
                                                                                                           Nanjing
7000                                                                                                       Hangzhou
                                                                                                           Ningbo
                                                                                                           Hefei
6000                                                                                                       Fuzhou
                                                                                                           Xiamen
                                                                                                           Nanchang
5000                                                                                                       Jinan
                                                                                                           Qingdao
                                                                                                           Zhengzhou
4000                                                                                                       Wuhan
                                                                                                           Changsha
                                                                                                           Guangzhou
                                                                                                           Shenzhen
3000                                                                                                       Nanning
                                                                                                           Haikou
                                                                                                           Chongqing
2000                                                                                                       Chengdu
                                                                                                           Guiyang
                                                                                                           Kunming
1000                                                                                                       Xian
                                                                                                           Lanzhou
                                                                                                           Xining
   0                                                                                                       Yinchuan
           2003         2004     2005     2006      2007      2008      2009      2010      2011           Wulumuqi




                                                                                                                          34
                                Figure 3: Log Real Land Price Index, 35 Chinese Cities, 2003-2011


log (Land Price Index)                                                                               Beijing
                                                                                                     Tianjin
 6.0                                                                                                 Shijiazhuang
                                                                                                     Taiyuan
                                                                                                     Huhehaote
                                                                                                     Shenyang
                                                                                                     Dalian
                                                                                                     Changchun
                                                                                                     Haerbin
 5.0                                                                                                 Shanghai
                                                                                                     Nanjing
                                                                                                     Hangzhou
                                                                                                     Ningbo
                                                                                                     Hefei
                                                                                                     Fuzhou
                                                                                                     Xiamen
                                                                                                     Nanchang
 4.0                                                                                                 Jinan
                                                                                                     Qingdao
                                                                                                     Zhengzhou
                                                                                                     Wuhan
                                                                                                     Changsha
                                                                                                     Guangzhou
                                                                                                     Shenzhen
                                                                                                     Nanning
 3.0                                                                                                 Haikou
                                                                                                     Chongqing
                                                                                                     Chengdu
                                                                                                     Guiyang
                                                                                                     Kunming
                                                                                                     Xian
                                                                                                     Lanzhou
                                                                                                     Xining
 2.0                                                                                                 Yinchuan
          2003           2004       2005     2006      2007      2008      2009     2010      2011   Wulumuqi




                                                                                                                    35
                     Figure 4: Real Land Price Appreciation by Year, 35 Chinese Cities, 2003-2011

Percentage Change
                                                                                                    Beijing
                                                                                                    Tianjin
    150%
                                                                                                    Shijiazhuang
                                                                                                    Taiyuan
                                                                                                    Huhehaote
                                                                                                    Shenyang
                                                                                                    Dalian
                                                                                                    Changchun
    100%                                                                                            Haerbin
                                                                                                    Shanghai
                                                                                                    Nanjing
                                                                                                    Hangzhou
                                                                                                    Ningbo
                                                                                                    Hefei
     50%                                                                                            Fuzhou
                                                                                                    Xiamen
                                                                                                    Nanchang
                                                                                                    Jinan
                                                                                                    Qingdao
                                                                                                    Zhengzhou
      0%                                                                                            Wuhan
                                                                                                    Changsha
                                                                                                    Guangzhou
                                                                                                    Shenzhen
                                                                                                    Nanning
                                                                                                    Haikou
                                                                                                    Chongqing
    -50%                                                                                            Chengdu
                                                                                                    Guiyang
                                                                                                    Kunming
                                                                                                    Xian
                                                                                                    Lanzhou
                                                                                                    Xining
   -100%                                                                                            Yinchuan
              2004   2005       2006       2007        2008       2009       2010       2011        Wulumuqi


                                                                                                                   36
                        Figure 5: Floor Area Sold by Year, 35 Chinese Cities, 2003-2011 (millions of square meters)

        Floor Area
(millions of square meters)                                                                                           Beijing
                                                                                                                      Tianjin
30                                                                                                                    Shijiazhuang
                                                                                                                      Taiyuan
                                                                                                                      Huhehaote
                                                                                                                      Shenyang
                                                                                                                      Dalian
25                                                                                                                    Changchun
                                                                                                                      Haerbin
                                                                                                                      Shanghai
                                                                                                                      Nanjing
                                                                                                                      Hangzhou
20                                                                                                                    Ningbo
                                                                                                                      Hefei
                                                                                                                      Fuzhou
                                                                                                                      Xiamen
                                                                                                                      Nanchang
                                                                                                                      Jinan
15
                                                                                                                      Qingdao
                                                                                                                      Zhengzhou
                                                                                                                      Wuhan
                                                                                                                      Changsha
                                                                                                                      Guangzhou
10                                                                                                                    Shenzhen
                                                                                                                      Nanning
                                                                                                                      Haikou
                                                                                                                      Chongqing
                                                                                                                      Chengdu
 5                                                                                                                    Guiyang
                                                                                                                      Kunming
                                                                                                                      Xian
                                                                                                                      Lanzhou
                                                                                                                      Xining
 0                                                                                                                    Yinchuan
        2003           2004        2005        2006         2007        2008        2009         2010        2011     Wulumuqi

                                                                                                                                 37
                                                                             Figure 6: Comparison of Real Newly-Built Housing Price Indexes (2006 Q1 = 100)

350                                                                           350                                                                          350                                                                          350
                           Average Index                                                                 Average Index                                                                Average Index                                                                Average Index
300                        70 City Index                                      300                        70 City Index                                     300                        70 City Index                                     300                        70 City Index
                           Hedonic Index                                                                 Hedonic Index                                                                Hedonic Index                                                                Hedonic Index
250                                                                           250                                                                          250                                                                          250

200                                                                           200                                                                          200                                                                          200

150                                                                           150                                                                          150                                                                          150

100                                                                           100                                                                          100                                                                          100

50                                                                             50                                                                           50                                                                           50
      06Q1
             06Q3
                    07Q1
                            07Q3
                                   08Q1
                                          08Q3
                                                 09Q1
                                                        09Q3
                                                               10Q1
                                                                      10Q3



                                                                                    06Q1
                                                                                           06Q3
                                                                                                  07Q1
                                                                                                          07Q3
                                                                                                                 08Q1
                                                                                                                        08Q3
                                                                                                                               09Q1
                                                                                                                                      09Q3
                                                                                                                                             10Q1
                                                                                                                                                    10Q3



                                                                                                                                                                 06Q1
                                                                                                                                                                        06Q3
                                                                                                                                                                               07Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                       07Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                              08Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                     08Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            09Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   09Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10Q3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              06Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     06Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            07Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    07Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           08Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  08Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         09Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                09Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10Q3
                             (A) Beijing                                                                   (B) Tianjin                                                            (C) Shanghai                                                                 (D) Hangzhou

350                                                                           350                                                                          350                                                                          350
                           Average Index                                                                 Average Index                                                                Average Index                                                                Average Index
300                        70 City Index                                      300                        70 City Index                                     300                        70 City Index                                     300                        70 City Index
                           Hedonic Index                                                                 Hedonic Index                                                                Hedonic Index                                                                Hedonic Index
250                                                                           250                                                                          250                                                                          250

200                                                                           200                                                                          200                                                                          200

150                                                                           150                                                                          150                                                                          150

100                                                                           100                                                                          100                                                                          100

50                                                                             50                                                                           50                                                                           50
      06Q1
             06Q3
                    07Q1
                            07Q3
                                   08Q1
                                          08Q3
                                                 09Q1
                                                        09Q3
                                                               10Q1
                                                                      10Q3



                                                                                    06Q1
                                                                                           06Q3
                                                                                                  07Q1
                                                                                                          07Q3
                                                                                                                 08Q1
                                                                                                                        08Q3
                                                                                                                               09Q1
                                                                                                                                      09Q3
                                                                                                                                             10Q1
                                                                                                                                                    10Q3



                                                                                                                                                                 06Q1
                                                                                                                                                                        06Q3
                                                                                                                                                                               07Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                       07Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                              08Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                     08Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            09Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   09Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10Q3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              06Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     06Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            07Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    07Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           08Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  08Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         09Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                09Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10Q3
                             (E) Wuhan                                                                     (F) Shenzhen                                                           (G) Chengdu                                                                         (H) Xian
      Source: NBSC and authors’ calculations; see the text for details.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     38
             Table 1 Sample Volume of the Land Transaction Dataset

              Number of         Number of Land      Total Floor Area of Land Parcels
             Cities Covered      Parcels Sold             Sold (million sq.m.)
  2003              15               378                         44.40
  2004              22               681                         70.62
  2005              24               773                         93.49
  2006              33              1133                        182.68
  2007              34              1413                        246.47
  2008              35               963                        169.83
  2009              35              1564                        281.33
  2010              35              1759                        336.37
  2011              35              1749                        288.15
Aggregated           -             10413                       1713.34




                                                                                       39
   Table 2: Compounded Real Annual Appreciation Rates in Constant Quality Land Values, 35 Major Chinese Markets (2009 Yuan)

15 Markets, 2003-2011      7 Markets, 2004-2011    2 Markets, 2005-2011    9 Markets, 2006-2011    1 Market, 2007-2011   1 Market, 2008-2011
        (8 years)                (7 years)              (6 years)                 (5 years)             (4 years)              (3 years)
Chongqing         27.0%      Hefei         30.1%   Lanzhou        20.7%    Huhehaote        19.7% Yinchuan      8.9%     Xining      49.9%
 Shanghai         23.7%   Changsha         20.3%   Guiyang        12.4%      Haikou         17.8%
Hangzhou          21.8%     Tianjin        20.2%                             Taiyuan        12.2%
  Nanjing         20.5%     Fuzhou         17.7%                             Haerbin        10.8%
  Beijing         20.2%   Changchun        13.9%                              Jinan          7.2%
 Shenzhen         20.1%   Shenyang         13.7%                              Xian           6.9%
  Xiamen          18.7%   Zhengzhou        10.3%                          Shijiazhuang       5.1%
  Ningbo          18.5%                                                     Kunming          2.0%
 Chengdu          16.7%                                                    Wulumuqi         -2.9%
  Dalian          15.8%
Guangzhou         14.7%
  Wuhan           13.3%
 Nanning          12.3%
Nanchang           7.8%
 Qingdao           5.9%




                                                                                                                                          40
                       Table 3: Annual Real Land Price Appreciation, Summary Statistics, 35 Major Chinese Markets

                                    2003-2004   2004-2005   2005-2006    2006-2007    2007-2008   2008-2009    2009-2010   2010-2011
             Mean                    32.1%         12.2%       23.5%        46.4%        -5.3%       28.5%        31.4%       2.57%
       Standard Deviation            21.7%         23.1%       40.5%        42.1%        24.0%       30.7%        29.4%     30.22%
              Max                    64.1%         47.2%     128.8%       131.2%         38.6%       93.1%        83.6%    108.58%
              Min                     4.4%        -28.0%      -36.1%       -29.2%       -59.9%      -20.2%       -31.6%      -44.2%
        Number of Cities               15           22          24           33           34          35           35          35
Number with Positive Appreciation      15           15          17           28           18          27           29          16
Number with Negative Appreciation       0            7           7            5           16           8            6          19




                                                                                                                                41
    Table 4: Average Annual Growth Rates and Standard Deviations, Land Prices, House Prices, Construction Costs and Wages

A. Mean of Annual Real Growth Rate
                                2004     2005       2006     2007     2008     2009     2010    2011
         House Price            4.14%    5.56%      6.72%   13.60%    8.18%    9.17%   23.31%   8.47%
          Land Price           32.07%   12.22%     23.51%   46.39%   -5.34%   28.46%   31.36%   2.57%
      Construction Cost         6.26%    0.12%      0.22%    1.26%    6.77%   -1.87%    1.76%     -
  Construction Industry Wage    8.24%   12.38%     14.19%   10.73%    8.56%   14.62%   10.26%     -
  Number of Cities Included      15       22         25       33       34       35       35      35
B. Standard Deviation of Annual Real Growth Rate
                                2004     2005       2006     2007     2008     2009     2010     2011
         House Price            4.91%    3.64%      6.13%   12.41%    8.31%    6.39%   11.60%    7.82%
          Land Price           21.68%   23.06%     40.52%   42.11%   23.98%   30.72%   29.44%   30.22%
      Construction Cost         2.23%    1.68%      1.39%    1.38%    2.49%    1.31%    1.29%      -
  Construction Industry Wage    5.78%    4.29%      4.61%    5.07%    4.33%    9.01%    4.89%      -
  Number of Cities Included      15       22         25       33       34       35       35       35




                                                                                                                            42
                                     Table 5: Can Year and City Fixed Effects Explain Local Land Price Growth?
                                            (Dependent Variable: Log Change in Real Annual Land Price Index)

Independent Variables                                                        (1)                 (2)               (3)
Year Fixed Effects                                                          Yes                  No               Yes
City Fixed Effects                                                           No                  Yes              Yes
R2                                                                         0.24                 0.05             0.28
Adjusted R2                                                                0.21                -0.11             0.13
F Stat. for the Joint Test of All Year Fixed Effects Equaling 0            9.89***                 -             8.89***
F Stat. for the Joint Test of All City Fixed Effects Equaling 0               -                 0.30             0.37
Number of Observations                                                      233                  233              233
Note:* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                                                           43
                              Table 6: Can Time-Varying Local Traits Explain Local Land Price Growth? (2003-2010)
                                                (Dependent Variable: Log Change in Annual Land Price Index)

Independent Variables                                                              (1)                         (2)
Expected Employment Growth
                                                                                   0.0825                      0.1722**
(epgrowthi,t)
                                                                                  (0.0530)                    (0.0696)
expgrowthi,t * 2009/10
                                                                                                              -0.2120*
                                                                                    -
                                                                                                              (0.1089)
Previous Supply-Demand Balance in Housing
                                                                                  -0.1245**                   -0.1570*
(hsdratioi,t-1)
                                                                                  (0.0603)                    (0.0852)
hsdratioi,t-1 * 2009/10
                                                                                                               0.0231
                                                                                    -
                                                                                                              (0.1222)
Previous 3-Year Average Loan Volumes to Developers
                                                                                   0.0019*                     0.0013
(developloan3yri,t)
                                                                                  (0.0011)                    (0.0017)
developloan3yri,t * 2009/10
                                                                                                               0.0011
                                                                                    -
                                                                                                              (0.0023)
Year Fixed Effects                                                                Yes                         Yes
City Fixed Effects                                                                 No                          No
R2                                                                                0.27                        0.29
Number of Observations                                                             183                         183
Note: (1) Standard errors in parentheses
     (2) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
     (3) 16 observations are dropped due to the missing value in hsdratioi,t-1.




                                                                                                                          44
                                     Table 7: Mean Reversion in Annual Land Price Growth
                             (Dependent Variable: Log Change in Annual Real Land Price Index)

        Independent Variables                     (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)
        dlog(LPi,t-1)                           -0.3527         -0.4427          -0.4243        -0.5961
                                                (0.0764)***     (0.0891)***      (0.0749)***    (0.0864)***
        dlog(LPi,t-2)                              -            -0.1905             -           -0.3806
                                                   -            (0.0888)**          -           (0.0868)***
        YEAR2006                                -0.0156            -                -              -
                                                (0.0909)           -                -              -
        YEAR2007                                 0.2479          0.3149             -              -
                                                (0.0891)***     (0.0875)***         -              -
        YEAR2008                                -0.1850         -0.1175             -              -
                                                (0.0857)**      (0.0885)            -              -
        YEAR2009                                -0.0273          0.0302             -              -
                                                (0.0887)        (0.0840)            -              -
        YEAR2010                                 0.1151          0.1459             -              -
                                                (0.0849)        (0.0865)*           -              -
        YEAR2011                                -0.1354         -0.0567             -              -
                                                (0.0849)        (0.0832)            -              -
        Constant                                 0.2114          0.1978           0.2131         0.3038
                                                (0.0732)***     (0.0734)***      (0.0249)***    (0.0330)***
        City Fixed Effects                       Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes
        R2                                       0.34            0.36             0.12           0.17
        Number of Observations                   198             163              198            163
Note: (1) Standard errors in parentheses
     (2) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                                              45
                                                Table 8: Augmented Mean Reversion Estimates
                                (Dependent Variable: Log Change in Real Annual Land Price Index)

       Independent Variables                               (1)              (2)              (3)           (4)
       dlog(LPi,t-1) * (dlog(LPi,t-1)≥0)               -0.4323          -1.1490          -0.5528       -1.6853
                                                       (0.1173)***      (0.5071)**       (0.1203)***   (0.5165)***

       dlog(LPi,t-1) * (dlog(LPi,t-1)≥0) *                 -             0.4626               -         0.8139
       deficiti,t-1                                        -            (0.3674)              -        (0.3860)**

       dlog(LPi,t-1) * (dlog(LPi,t-1)<0)               -0.2039           0.3254          -0.1770        0.7549
                                                       (0.1831)         (0.8092)         (0.1963)      (0.8846)

       dlog(LPi,t-1) * (dlog(LPi,t-1)<0) *                 -            -0.3903               -        -0.6748
       deficiti,t-1                                        -            (0.5952)              -        (0.6557)

       Constant                                         0.2290           0.2177           0.2542        0.2888
                                                       (0.0759)***      (0.0777)***      (0.0391)***   (0.0424)***
       Year Fixed Effects                                Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes
       City Fixed Effects                                Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes
       R2                                               0.34             0.29             0.13          0.09
       Number of Observations                            198              163              198           163
Note: (1) Standard errors in parentheses
     (2) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                                                     46
Table 9: Summary Statistics on Floor Area Sold, 2003-2010, 35 Chinese Markets (millions of square meters)

                                Standard                                                 Number of
                    Mean                    25 Percentile   Median     75 Percentile
                                Deviation                                              Cities Included
       2003          2.86         3.13          0.53         1.89          4.52               15
       2004          3.25         3.43          1.16         2.52          3.58               22
       2005          3.98         4.31          1.32         2.59          5.55               24
       2006          5.62         6.25          1.68         3.79          6.02               33
       2007          7.46         7.17          2.11         4.33         11.35               34
       2008          5.34         4.29          2.52         4.41          7.48               35
       2009          8.04         5.72          4.55         6.20         12.36               35
       2010         10.13         6.94          5.21         7.36         13.45               35
       2011          9.26         7.84          3.20         6.33         12.96               35




                                                                                                            47
                                  Table 10: Can Year and City Fixed Effects Explain Local Land Supply Volume?
                               Dependent Variable: Log (Annual Land Supply Volume) (in million sq.m. of floor area)

                                                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)
Year Fixed Effects                                                       Yes                   No                   Yes
City Fixed Effects                                                        No                  Yes                   Yes
R2                                                                      0.22                 0.42                  0.68
Adjusted R2                                                             0.20                 0.34                  0.60
F Stat. for the Joint Test of All Year Fixed Effects Equaling 0         8.34***                  -                18.18***
F Stat. for the Joint Test of All City Fixed Effects Equaling 0            -                 5.03***               8.87***
Number of Observations                                                   268                  268                   268
Note:* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                                                             48
                                   Table 11: Can Politics Factors Explain Local Land Supply Volume? (2003-2010)
                             (Dependent Variable: Log of Annual Land Supply Volume (in million sq.m. of floor area))

Independent Variables                                            (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
Degree of Budgetary Deficit in the Previous Year
                                                                0.9488**           0.7862*
(deficiti,t-1)                                                                                         -                 -
                                                               (0.4253)           (0.4573)
deficiti,t-1*2009/10
                                                                                   0.3012
                                                                  -                                    -                 -
                                                                                  (0.3084)
Degree of Budgetary Deficit in the Current Year
                                                                                                      1.1884***         1.0838**
(deficiti,t)                                                      -                 -
                                                                                                     (0.4407)          (0.4840)
deficiti,t*2009/10
                                                                                                                        0.1372
                                                                  -                 -                  -
                                                                                                                       (0.2931)
Length of CCP Top Officer in Current Position
                                                               -0.0558*           -0.0713**          -0.0569**         -0.0674*
(lengthi,t)
                                                               (0.0285)           (0.0344)           (0.0283)          (0.0344)
lengthi,t *2009/10
                                                                                   0.0406                               0.0273
                                                                  -                                    -
                                                                                  (0.0523)                             (0.0522)
Year Fixed Effects                                              Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
City Fixed Effects                                              Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
R2                                                              0.22              0.21               0.19              0.19
Number of observations                                          234               234                234               234
Note: (1) Standard errors in parentheses
     (2) * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                                                                   49
                                Table 12 Average Real Compound Quarterly House Price Growth Rates (2003-2010)

                                           City                 “Average Index”   “70 Cities Index”   Hedonic Index
                                         Beijing                    4.00%              1.83%             6.77%
                                         Tianjin                    2.95%              1.18%             2.90%
                                        Shanghai                    2.63%              0.25%             4.61%
                                        Hangzhou                    4.08%              1.17%             3.54%
                                         Wuhan                      2.56%              0.54%             2.25%
                                        Shenzhen                    3.78%              0.01%             3.40%
                                        Chengdu                     3.06%              0.27%             2.08%
                                          Xian                      0.73%              0.89%             2.84%

Source: NBSC and authors’ calculations; see the text for details.




                                                                                                                      50
Appendix Table 1 Summary of Land Price Hedonic Models in 35 Major Cities

    City            Starting Year       Num. of Obs.        Adjusted R2
    Beijing             2003                 355               0.640
    Tianjin             2004                 369               0.459
 Shijiazhuang           2006                  94               0.425
    Taiyuan             2006                 141               0.360
  Huhehaote             2006                 276               0.325
  Shenyang              2004                 654               0.494
    Dalian              2003                 473               0.620
  Changchun             2004                 373               0.350
    Haerbin             2006                 354               0.525
   Shanghai             2003                 460               0.653
    Nanjing             2003                 367               0.592
  Hangzhou              2003                 565               0.663
    Ningbo              2003                 239               0.491
     Hefei              2004                 336               0.561
    Fuzhou              2004                 153               0.723
    Xiamen              2003                 150               0.715
  Nanchang              2003                 251               0.379
     Jinan              2006                 232               0.367
   Qingdao              2003                 161               0.444
  Zhengzhou             2004                 214               0.242
    Wuhan               2003                 486               0.418
  Changsha              2004                 495               0.294
  Guangzhou             2003                 139               0.380
   Shenzhen             2003                  66               0.455
   Nanning              2003                 218               0.237
    Haikou              2006                  61               0.184
  Chongqing             2003                 906               0.584
   Chengdu              2003                 553               0.694
   Guiyang              2005                 162               0.177
   Kunming              2006                 175               0.251
     Xian               2006                 357               0.437
   Lanzhou              2005                  76               0.485
    Xining              2008                  93               0.240
   Yinchuan             2007                  97               0.348
  Wulumuqi              2006                 317               0.171




                                                                           51
