NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF INTANGIBLE CAPITAL IN THE TRANSFORMATION AND GROWTH
OF THE CHINESE ECONOMY
Charles R. Hulten
Janet X. Hao
Working Paper 18405
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18405

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

We would like to thank Bart van Ark, Harry Wu, Nancy Humphrey, and Mark Dutz, as well as the
participants in the 2011 NBER Summer Institute workshop, a 2012 workshop of The Conference Board,
and a 2012 OECD conference, for comments on earlier drafts. We also thank Natalie Lam for helping
us collect the data. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Program on Intangibles at The Conference
Board, and the World Input-Output Data project. Opinions, interpretations, and any remaining errors
are solely the responsibility of the authors.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Charles R. Hulten and Janet X. Hao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Role Of Intangible Capital in the Transformation and Growth of the Chinese Economy
Charles R. Hulten and Janet X. Hao
NBER Working Paper No. 18405
September 2012
JEL No. O11,O30,O47,O53
ABSTRACT
Investment in a broad array of intangible capital – R&D, organizational capital, worker training, and
brand equity – has occurred in many of the most advanced world economies and has been found to
be an important source of economic growth. This evidence suggests that intangible capital formation
may play an important role in China’s reform-driven transformation to a more market-oriented open
economy. Though the literature on intangible capital is expanding, there has as yet been no general
assessment of its role in China’s rapid economic growth. This paper seeks to fill this gap by estimating
how much intangible investment has taken place there over the last two decades. The importance of
this capital as a driver of China’s recent growth is then assessed using a growth accounting framework,
and the results compared to similar findings for the U.S., Japan, the U.K., Germany, France, Italy,
and Spain, as well as Japan during its high growth period. The paper also looks beyond the growth
accounting framework to the role of saving rates and long-run convergence in shaping longer-term
growth prospects. It also focuses on the problem of accurate economic measurement in an economy
undergoing rapid transformation.

Charles R. Hulten
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Room 3114, Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hulten@econ.umd.edu
Janet X. Hao
The Conference Board
845 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10022
Janet.Hao@conference-board.org

The Role of Intangible Capital in the Transformation and Growth of the Chinese Economy

The reforms to the Chinese economy that began in 1978 have been a spectacular success. China
has become a formidable producer and exporter of manufactured goods, with real Gross
Domestic Product growing at or near double digit rates. At this pace, it will soon become the
world’s largest economy. At the same time, China remains a relatively poor country by world
standards. According to World Bank estimates, GDP per capita in 2009 was $6,770 when
adjusted for purchasing-power parity, but only $3,590 without this adjustment.
Recent Chinese reforms have aimed at raising incomes by capturing more of the value
added by technology, a process that involves moving up the global supply chain from
manufacturing to increased product and process innovation. A 2007 OECD assessment
documented the acceleration in patents, engineers, research and development spending, and high
technology exports (China has become the leading exporter of information technology products).
However, successful innovation involves more than science and technology, and one of the
objectives of the current study is to expand the frame of reference to include co-investments in
product design and marketing, and in organizational capabilities and human capital (collectively
termed “intangibles”). Investments in a broad array of intangible capital have occurred in many
of the most advanced world economies, and in the U.S., the rate of business intangible
investment has increased significantly over time and now surpasses that of tangible capital
(Corrado and Hulten (2010)). 1 Intangible capital is also an important source of economic
growth in many of these economies (van Ark, Hao, Corrado, and Hulten (2009)).

1

The intangible investments in this paper are limited to the capital produced within business enterprises.
We do not attempt to estimate the intangibles arising from investments in human capital or public sector
3

This evidence suggests that intangible capital formation may play an important role in
China’s reform-driven transformation to a more market-oriented open economy. The
privatization of many state-owned enterprises requires an investment in new organizational
capabilities and business models, as does progress along the global value chain to a more
knowledge-intensive economy. Though the literature on intangible capital is expanding, there
has as yet been no general assessment of its role in China’s recent growth. This paper seeks to
fill this gap by estimating how much intangible investment has taken place there over the last
two decades, and assessing the importance of this capital as a driver of China’s past economic
growth using the model developed by Solow (1957) and Jorgenson and Griliches (1967), as
extended to include intangibles by Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009). In this “sources-ofgrowth” model, an increase in growth in output per worker is driven by two general factors:
capital formation and total factor productivity.
This model has been employed extensively to gain insights into the growth process, and
Krugman (1994) uses it to speak to the question of where a high-growth country is heading in the
future. If a high rate of output growth is achieved primarily through capital formation, he argues
that output growth will tend to slow over time because of diminishing marginal returns to capital
(Krugman’s growth by “perspiration”). On the other hand, if output growth is primarily driven
by improvements in TFP, a high rate of growth is more sustainable (Krugman’s growth by
‘inspiration”). Our estimates allow us to explore the perspiration-inspiration dichotomy for the
case of China using a concept of capital expanded to include intangibles, and then to compare

basic research, not because they are unimportant, but because their value is hard to calculate from the data
available. Our enterprise intangibles differ from the accounting intangibles carried on enterprise balance
sheets.
4

our results to those obtained by van Ark et. al. (2009) for the U.S., Japan, Germany, and other
advanced economies. We also compare the recent growth experience of China to that of Japan
during its high growth era using estimates from Nishimizu and Hulten (1978).
Perspiration and inspiration are unquestionably important determinants of whether
China’s high growth rates are sustainable, but they are not the only considerations. A country’s
growth rate may be high because it is in the early stages of convergence to a higher long-run
growth path, and both the perspiration and inspiration effects may be exaggerated during this
period. A higher rate of TFP growth may occur because of the inward diffusion of technology
from other countries and because of the transitional effects of restructuring; a higher rate of
capital formation is due, in part, to the feedback of rapid output growth on investment. The
effects of both technological diffusion and restructuring diminish in importance as the economy
matures and approaches the prevailing best-practice technology frontier, and the rate of capital
formation declines as output growth slows and as diminishing returns to capital set in. Thus,
China’s current growth rates, impressive as they are, do not necessarily imply that its income per
capita will overtake or surpass that of the more mature economies of the U.S. and other high
income countries.2
The convergence-to-steady-state-growth model of Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992),
provides a framework that looks through transitory convergence effects to the long-run growth
path of an economy. Based on the Solow (1956) model of economic growth, this alternative
2

The convergence effect underlies the forecasts of China’s future growth shown in the recent World
Bank report, China 2030. The growth rate of real GDP shown in Table 1 of that report is estimated to fall
to 5.0 percent in the period 2026-2030, from the 9.9 percent average annual rate of the years 1995-2010.
The report also notes the possibility that China might be caught in a middle-income growth trap, thought
this is prospect is discounted.
5

approach shifts the focus of the empirical analysis away from the historical growth rates of the
sources-of-growth model to the “reduced form” factors determining the long-run levels of output
per worker that are the ultimate goal of economic development policy. While not a crystal ball,
the MRW model provides a well-organized conceptual framework for discussing the potential
long-run effects of China’s tangible and intangible investment rates, which are explicit
arguments of the model as well as estimates of this paper. The “parable” of long-run growth is
also suitable for discussing the effects of restructuring of the Chinese economy and the effort to
reduce the rate of population growth.
Any empirical attempt to understand China’s recent and prospective macroeconomic
performance is greatly hampered by uncertainty about the accuracy of the data. Many past
studies have had to grapple with this problem, which is summarized in detail in the recent study
by Wu (2011). China is a country in transition from pre-1978 economic structures (and
accounting practices) toward an emerging modern economy, and aggregate data thus refer to
different economic systems whose boundaries are shifting over time. The measurement of
intangible capital also poses significant measurement problems. This form of capital has yet to
be fully incorporated into national income accounting practice, and estimates must rely on the
availability of other data sources and on assumptions about key variables. This is a problem in
data-rich countries like the U.S., and it poses greater difficulties in transitional countries like
China whose data systems are less well developed. This imprecision should be kept in mind
when interpreting the results.

6

II. ECONOMIC REFORM AND INTANGIBLE CAPITAL
The 1978 economic reforms have occurred in three stages, each recognizing the need to improve
the organizational and technological structure of firms (Aizenman and Geng (2009)). During the
first phase, from 1978 to 1984, most firms were state-owned enterprises (SOEs), initially under
government control. The reforms of this period gave the SOEs’ management more power to
make decisions. In the second stage of the reforms, from 1984 to 1992, the government
introduced more market-driven management, while retaining part of the central planning system.
SOEs could sell their products in the market at a price up to 20 percent higher than the price in
the central planning system. The third stage, from 1992 to the present, saw the privatization of
many of the SOEs. Over this period, the number of SOEs fell from 74,066 in 1992 to 20,680 in
2007.3
Chinese economic policy continues to evolve, with an increased emphasis on science and
technology. The 2007 OECD report cited the 2006 report “Medium to Long Term Strategic Plan
for the Development of Science and Technology (2006-2020)” of the China State Council as
setting out the “key priorities in science and technology” (page 17). The overarching goal is to
make China an “innovation-oriented” society by the year 2020 and – over the longer term -- one
of the world’s leading ”innovative economies” with an emphasis on the development of
“indigenous” or “home-grown innovation” (page 17).
Whether this emphasis on innovation translates into a successful outcome in terms of
technological leadership is another matter. China’s economic prowess is built on its success in
3

Bai, Lu, and Tao (2008) and Aizenman and Geng (2009) stress that the shift from state ownership to
“private” status is not an either-or affair, but involves varying degrees of independence from state control.
The process was gradual and selective.
7

manufacturing goods, not on the design and marketing of these goods, and Breznitz and
Murphree (2011) have argued that the country’s technological strength currently lies in
perfecting innovations created elsewhere, not in basic innovation.4 Moreover, any success at
moving up the global supply chain will bring Chinese firms into direct competition with the likes
of Apple Computer, about which Michael Mandel (2006) has observed:
“Grab your iPod, flip it over, and read the script at the bottom. It says: ‘Designed by
Apple in California. Assembled in China.’ Where the gizmo is made is immaterial to its
popularity. It is great design, technical innovation, and savvy marketing that have helped
Apple Computer sell more than 40 million iPods.”
The salience of this point is reinforced by the study by Linden, Dedrick, and Kraemer (2009) in
which they found that “the iPod and its components accounted for about 41,000 jobs worldwide
in 2006, of which about 27,000 were outside the U.S. and 14,000 in the U.S.” However, “U.S.
workers earned $753 million, while workers outside the U.S. earned $318 million” because the
more highly compensated professional workers were in the U.S. In other words, much of the
value-capture from the iPod accrues to the non-production activities of the company. It has also
been argued that China does not capture much of the value created of the iPhones assembled
there. According to Xing and Detert (2010), the wholesale cost of a phone shipped from China
is $178.96, but the Chinese component of value added is only $6.50, or 3.6% of the total. The
country’s emphasis on the development of science and technology can be seen, in this light, as an

4

In a recent interview about the book, Run of the Red Queen: Government, Innovation, Globalization,
and Economic Growth in China, by David Barboza, one of the authors, Breznitz, observes that “China's
companies are extremely efficient at creating new versions, often simpler, cheaper and more efficient, of
technologies and products shortly after they are invented and marketed elsewhere in the world.” He goes
on to say that China is weak in “novel-product innovation,” but suggests that this may change over time
(New York Tines Economix article August 4, 2011).
8

attempt to move along the global value chain, in order to capture a greater share of the value
added.5
Product design and marketing are not the only intangibles of importance for China’s
reform-driven growth. The country is undergoing fundamental structural changes in the
organization of the economy, and the shift away from SOE’s is evidence of the magnitude of the
changes taking place. These structural changes involve fundamental changes in the way
enterprises are managed: changes in the way decisions are made, changes in the structure of
incentives and employee evaluation, and, more generally, changes in the “culture” of the firm.
The critical importance of this kind of change for economic performance is stressed in the
important paper by Prescott and Vissher (1980). They view the firm as essentially a store of
organizational knowledge that defines the capabilities and future potential of the enterprise.6 To
realize this potential, the firm must make investments in the requisite operational procedures and
infrastructural systems.7

5

The evolution of global supply chains has had a significant impact on the distribution of value-added
across countries and the distribution of income within countries (see, for examples, Koopman et. al. (2010)
and Timmer et. al. (2011), and the references contained therein). This is a large and complex topic with
great importance for China’s efforts to improve its position in the global value chain.

6

This view provides an answer to the Coasian question of why firms per se exist at all in an environment
in which the Invisible Hand is the ultimate efficient manager: the firm is the embodiment of the essential
information infrastructure and operating procedures needed for effective decision making. This
infrastructure platform, along with brand equity and intellectual property, is generally firm specific,
though some parts can be outsourced.

7

Such investments include expenses incurred for worker training and job-matching, and the development
of management systems and business models. Lucas (1978), and Bloom and Van Reenan (2007), point to
the importance of the management function, as does Lev (2001), who also stresses the importance of
organizational capital in the formulation of business models. Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2005) point out that
the organizational costs associated with the adoption of information technology greatly exceed, on
average, the direct costs of the IT investments in hardware and software. When the value of a full range
of intangible capital is measured at its production cost, it can explain the majority of the gap between the
book value of a typical firm’s equity and the corresponding market value (Hulten and Hao (2008) and
9

The organizational capital of an enterprise affects more than decisions about innovation.
It touches every aspect of a firm’s operations and planning. The importance of organizational
efficiency for developing countries is underscored by Bloom et. al. (2010), who report “evidence
that firms in developing countries are often badly managed, which substantially reduces their
productivity (page 620).” They go on to say that recent work following Bloom and Van Reenan
(2007, 2010) finds that “developing countries like Brazil, China, and India have significantly
lower average management scores than firms in the United States, Japan and Western Europe
(page 621).” These are essentially microeconomic findings, but they have important
implications for the macroeconomic growth estimates of this paper.
III. China’s Investment in Business Intangibles
The practical problem with measuring intangible capital arises from an important
asymmetry between tangible and intangible capital. Unlike tangible capital, the bulk of the
intangible capital used in the business sector originates within firms, and there are thus no market
transactions with which to value the investment. Intangibles must therefore be imputed from
data outside the available accounting frameworks, or from assumptions and approximations.
Another important asymmetry arises from the fact that many intangibles lack a physical
embodiment (hence the name) because they represent the organization or control over certain
types of knowledge. Because knowledge is nonrival, it can often be appropriated by competitors
to the detriment of the innovator (though not necessarily at zero cost). The fact that many private
companies do have R&D programs is, however, evidence that they are successful in capturing

Hulten, Hao, and Jaeger (2010)). See also McGrattan and Prescott (2010) for a different approach to
valuation.
10

some value from their investment. Our estimates attempt to measure this value as it is reflected
in the cost of making the investment. They therefore refer to the commercial value of this
investment and thus exclude the broader social value.8
Our estimates of the cost of China’s intangible capital are shown in Table 1. This table
follows the classification system developed in Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005, 2009) as
closely as possible to enable a comparison (the corresponding aggregate time series are shown in
Table 6, as part of a comparison of tangible and intangible investment time trends). Table 1
gives estimates of the rate of intangible investment as a fraction of GDP for the total economy
and the market portion of the economy.9 The overall results indicate a substantial effort at
investment in intangible capital (7.47 percent of GDP for the total economy in 2006, and 7.06
percent of GDP for the market sector). Moreover, the rate has increased over time, from 3.79
percent in 1990 to 7.47 percent for the total-economy estimate. The 7.47 percent rate for 2006 is
distributed across three main categories in the following proportions: computerized information
(software), 25 percent; innovative property, 51 percent; and economic competencies, 24 percent.
The market economy results are similarly distributed. The subcomponents of the three
categories also show a degree of diversity. One implication of these estimates is that the scope
of intangible investment is much broader than R&D spending alone, which accounts for only18

8

This approach assumes that firms are willing to invest in intangible assets up to the point that the
discounted present value of the expected income stream just equals the cost of producing or acquiring the
marginal asset. This assumption is symmetric with the usual treatment of tangible capital (e.g., Jorgenson
(1963)).

9

The GDP estimates in this table are expanded to include the value of the internal intangible investment
produced. The separate market economy estimates are made for purposes of comparison with the
intangible investment rates estimated for various countries, but they are provided only for 2006 because
of the availability of the required input/output tables. Data sources are described in a data appendix
available from the authors.
11

percent of the total–economy intangible rate. This point should be kept in mind when
interpreting the various OECD science and technology indicators available for China, which tend
to focus more narrowly on the technology aspects of the innovation process.
China’s intangible investment rate is substantial and growing, but how does it compare to
other countries? To address this question, we examine the experience of China in light of the
corresponding rates of intangible investment in the world’s largest economies, which we obtain
from the study by van Ark, Hao, Corrado, and Hulten (2009). The result is shown in Table 2,
which shows that China’s 7.06 percent investment rate (market economy) is comparable to the
estimates for Germany and France, as well as Italy and Spain, but well behind the three leaders.
It seems reasonable to conclude, on the basis of these estimates, that China’s commitment to
building a knowledge-based economy is roughly consistent with the corresponding efforts in the
world’s leading economies, in so far as that commitment can be proxied by the intangible
investment rate.
Whether this investment in innovation translates into a successful outcome in terms of
technological leadership is another matter. Half of the intangible investment rate in China is due
to two categories: software and architectural and engineering design. These two items are tied
to investments in tangible capital (ITC and residential structures), and a more focused measure of
organizational and product/process innovation would exclude them. The result of this exclusion
is shown in the last row of Table 2. The adjusted rate for China is only 3.56 percent for 2006,
substantially less than the corresponding adjusted U.S. rate of 8.61 percent, 6.78 and 6.65 percent
for Japan and the U.K., respectively, and 5.21 and 5.20 percent for France and Germany.

12

IV. INTANGIBLE CAPITAL IN THE ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
Formal models of economic growth are usually based on the assumption that a stable
aggregate production function exists that relates output, Qt, to labor input, Lt, and to the stock of
tangible capital, Kt. In the form used in the empirical growth models of Solow (1957) and
Jorgenson and Griliches (1967), a multiplicative (Hicksian) efficiency term, At, is added in order
to allow for costless changes in the efficiency with which the inputs are used, resulting in a
production function of the form Qt = AtF(Lt, Kt,). The Qt variable is an index of the volume of
the total output of consumption and the two types of investment (see equation (4) below). The
term At is typically associated with costless technological and organizational change, over and
above any investment in R&D, such as the diffusion of technology developed elsewhere and the
reallocation of resources from less to more productive firms.
Firms invest in intangible capital in order to increase future profits, suggesting that this
form of capital does not play a role in the production of contemporaneous output. On the other
hand, intangible investment uses resources that might have been devoted to other uses and is thus
a valid part of the contemporaneous output mix. This conceptual issue can be resolved by
reformulating the problem in terms of profits, and treating the implied meta production function
as a process that includes product development and sales (Hulten (2012)). In this reformulation,
output is interpreted as the volume developed, produced, and sold, providing a rationale for

13

including non-production intangible inputs and outputs in the structure of production.10 The
resulting meta production function has the following form:
(1)

Q(Ct, It, Nt) = AtF(Lt, Kt, Rt).

The output index Qt now includes intangible investment, Nt, and the list of inputs includes the
net stock of accumulated intangible capital.
Aggregate production is typically assumed to take place under constant returns to scale to
capital and labor in neoclassical formulations of production and growth. A competitive
equilibrium is also assumed in which labor and capital are paid the value of their marginal
products. Under there circumstances, the following accounting identity can be derived directly
from the production function:
(2)

PCtCt + PItIt + PNtNt = PKtKt + PLtLt + PRtRt .

Applied to the aggregate economy, this is an expanded form of the well-known identity between
GDP and Gross Domestic Income (GDI) on which national accounting practice is based.
Because these accounts have traditionally omitted most intangibles from both sides of the
accounting identity, their inclusion has the effect of increasing GDP as conventionally measured.
Moreover, when both side of this identity are divided by the current value of (expanded) GDP,
the identity can be expressed as
(2’)

sCt + sIt + sNt = sLt + sKt + sRt = 1.

10

In many earlier formulations, R&D capital and software were treated as current inputs to the production
function, but not as outputs. This includes much of the literature on endogenous growth. Corrado, Hulten,
and Sichel (2009) were the first to treat these items symmetrically in the growth accounting context.
14

Tables 1 and 2 focused on the size of the intangible investment share, sN. As we shall see, the
size of labor’s income share, sLt, is also an issue of major importance for the analysis of China’s
growth.
The prices in the accounting identity (2) refer to the corresponding quantity variables.
Those on the left-hand side are product prices, but only the first two prices are determined by
market transactions because the bulk of intangible investment is produced within the firm. Its
price must be interpreted as a shadow value and imputed, and finding an appropriate imputation
procedure is one of the most unsettled issues in the emerging literature on macro intangibles.
The prices on the right-side of (2) are input prices, with PLt denoting the wage and PKt and PRt
representing the Jorgensonian user costs of capital (imputed as per Jorgenson (1963) and
Jorgenson and Griliches (1967)). Under the competitive market assumptions of the model, the
input prices are equal to the corresponding value of marginal product, and the shares are
therefore equal to the corresponding output elasticities.
A. The Sources-of-Growth Model
The investment rates of Tables 1 and 2 indicate the scale of the commitment to future
economic growth. The historical importance of intangible capital as a source of past growth is a
separate question, one which has traditionally been addressed by the Solow-Jorgenson-Griliches
sources-of-growth model. This empirical model is based the production function (1) without
intangibles, under the assumptions of constant returns to scale and competitive equilibrium. In
this conventional case, the shares sKt, sRt, sLt, can be used as proxies for the corresponding output
elasticities. Output per worker can then be decomposed into the growth rates of tangible and
intangible capital stocks, also expressed in per worker terms and weighted by the respective
15

shares. The residual portion of the former not explained by the latter is the total factor
productivity growth (TFPG) residual:

(3)

.
t
 t L t

Q t L t
K K
R Rt
A
TFPGt 
     st     st   Lt  .
Q t Lt
At
K t Lt
R t Lt

The growth rate of output in this formulation is the sum of the share-weighted growth rates of the
constituent outputs:
(4)

.
.
.
Q t
C Ct
I It
N Nt
 st
 st  st
.
Qt
Ct
Nt
It

The variables involving dots are the annual growth rates of the variables in the production
function (1).
TFP growth is measured as a residual in (3), and under the assumptions of the
conventional model without intangibles, it is equal to the growth rate of the shift term, At of the
production function. However, it is at this point that the price paid for extending the
conventional production framework to incorporate intangibles, as per (1), becomes an issue. It is
shown in Hulten (2012) that the optimal investment decision about firm-specific intellectual
capital involves monopolistic elements, with the important implications that prices are no longer
equal to the value of the marginal products. As a result, the income shares are no longer equal to
the corresponding output elasticities and the sources-of-growth model (5) yields a biased
estimate of At.11 While a monopolistic bias is not surprising given the firm-specific nature of

11

The approach to non-current inputs advocated in Hulten (2012) is based on the model of advertising
developed by Nerlove and Arrow (1962), expanded in the 2011 paper to include R&D, and is explicitly a
non-competitive model with a mark-up of price over marginal cost. This leads to the problem studied by
Hall (1988), who shows that the existence of a mark up of price over marginal cost, and the resulting
disconnect between shares and elasticities introduces a bias in the link between TFP and At. This is the
16

intellectual property, the size of the bias may not be all that large because of the nature of the
technological competition for market share and the implied pricing strategies.
The conventional model of productivity analysis treats technological change as both
autonomous and costless (“Manna from Heaven”). The introduction of intangibles into the
analysis allows for a higher degree of endogeneity in the innovation process, but TFP does not
disappear when corrected for the presence of intangibles. The residual contains factors other
than innovation, such as variations in capital utilization, shocks to the economic systems, the
effects of changing the policy environment, omitted variables like human and infrastructure
capital, and errors in measurement.
Two components of the TFP residual deserve special attention. First, it captures the
effect of reallocating resources from lower to higher productivity producers. This is potentially
an important effect of the Chinese reforms, given the diminished importance of state-owned
enterprises (Bai et. al. (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009)). The cross-sectional survey by
Dollar and Wei (2007) found evidence of unequal returns to capital among firms and that the
SOE’s had systematically lower returns, suggesting potential benefits from further reallocation.
Second, TFP embodies the technology captured by users other than the original innovator. This
capture is not costless, but is generally less costly than the full development costs of the original
innovation. This is potentially an important source of TFP growth for countries like China that

price paid for the internal consistency of the sources-of-growth meta model when expanded to include
intangibles. However, the bias in the shares does not invalidate the adding-up condition (2’).
17

start with lower levels of technology.12 Both the diffusion and reallocation effects suggest a
significant role for TFP in the growth of China, at least in the near term.
TFP competes with capital formation as a source of growth in Equation (3). The
dichotomy between the two for any given rate of growth in output per worker is important for
understanding the path ahead, for the reasons pointed out by Krugman (1994) with his distinction
between perspiration and inspiration. As noted in the introduction, China’s high rate of output
growth is generally thought to be more sustainable if it is driven by the latter more than the
former, if capital accumulation is subject to diminishing returns to scale. However, there is a
major caveat to the perspiration-inspiration dichotomy. To the extent that China’s TFP growth is
driven by reallocation and diffusion, inspiration cum TFP is itself not immune from the
diminishing-returns problem. The productivity-enhancing benefits of reallocating economic
activity to more productive firms is likely to diminish as the relative importance of the SOEs
declines. Moreover, opportunities for appropriating best-practice technology via diffusion
decline as the best-practice technology frontier is approached.
B. The Sources of Growth and Labor’s Share of Income
It is not surprising that a large literature has evolved in the sources-of-growth tradition,
given the size and importance of China’s economy.13 The literature is too extensive to review
here, but Wu (2011) provides a good summary and, in particular, one that draws out two key
12

The 2007 OECD report can be read as suggesting that China is a major beneficiary of technological
diffusion (e.g., more emphasis on the “D” part of R&D), and, as noted previously, Breznitz and Murphree
(2011) have argued that China’s strength currently lies in perfecting innovations created elsewhere, not in
basic innovation. Moreover, the contribution of technological diffusion to TFP growth is not solely a
matter of technology, but also has an important management dimension (Bloom et. al. (2010)).

13

This literature includes Chow (1993), Borensztein and Ostry (1996), Woo (1998) , Qian (2000, 2003),
Chow and Li (2002), Young (2003), Maddison (2007), Bosworth and Collins (2008), Brandt and Zhu
(2010), and Wu, (2011).
18

issues. First, there is substantial disagreement about the true size of China’s labor share, sLt,
which is low by international standards. The study by Bai and Qian (2010) reports that the share
fell from an average of just under 60 percent for the period 1978 to 1998 to around 48 percent
after 2004. That was the year in which a substantial accounting change occurred, which explains
about one half of the overall decline. This change involved the way the income of SOEs,
collective farms, and individual business owners was divided between labor and capital. The rest
was attributable to structural shifts in the economy.
The pattern reported by Bai and Qian has an important implication for growth accounting.
Since labor’s share of income is a proxy for the corresponding output elasticity in the sources-ofgrowth framework, and since the shares sum to one, the larger the labor share, the smaller is the
share associated with capital. A look at equation (3) shows that capital’s share leverages the
growth rate of the corresponding capital stock, so the larger the share, the greater the impact of
the associated capital growth and, other things equal, the smaller the share left over for the TFP
residual (see, for example, Hulten and Isaksson (2007) for the magnitude of these impacts across
countries). This issue is particularly important for China, given the extraordinarily high
investment rates and rapid growth in the capital stocks.
The paper by Gollin (2002) shows that China’s lower measured labor share is by no
means the exception among lower and lower middle income countries. However, he attributes
the lower labor share in these countries to the misattribution of much of the income accruing to
proprietors and the self-employed to capital. When imputations are made that reclassify part of
this income to labor, Gollin finds that labor’s share (in the early 1990s) rises significantly in the
lower income countries, from 47 percent to the 65-75 percent range. This result has been taken
19

as justification for using a labor share at or above 60 percent regardless of the data obtained from
official accounts.14 A 60 percent labor share is used by Bosworth and Collins (2008) in their
study of Chinese growth. Wu (2011) also uses this figure as one of the alternatives he considers
in this study, along with the 40 percent labor share used in Chow (1963), and the share as
actually measured. This procedure is a welcome and appropriate acknowledgement of the
problem, and it allows the reader to see the range of estimates and choose among the alternatives.
C. Estimates of China’s Sources of Growth
The problem of data accuracy goes beyond the question of labor’s share. Wu also points
to problems with other variables that enter the sources-of-growth model, and makes alternative
estimates of real output, capital, and labor. In many cases, these estimates diverge considerably
from the corresponding official data. He finds, for example, that his alternative estimate of real
output grew at an average annual rate of 9.4 percent over the period 2001 to 2008, versus the
“official” rate of 10.5 percent. The gap is much wider in the preceding period 1991 to 2001, 7.0
versus 9.9 percent. Wu also finds a gap between the “official” estimates of labor and capital and
his estimates. As a result, the rate of TFP growth computed as per (3) is significantly lower
using his alternative measures. When combined with the effects of different assumptions about

14

Gollin’s results make a valuable contribution to this difficult problem. They point to the need for
improving official data and suggest a way to proceed until improvements are made. However, there is a
deeper conceptual problem. The division of self-employment income into the return to either labor or
capital (tangible and intangible) may be an appropriate accounting convention for a modern industrial
economy, but it is not necessarily appropriate for the economic activity originating in the informal, or
traditional, sectors of a low income economy. On any given work day, a self-employed person may be
simultaneously both a proprietor/manager/entrepreneur and a worker. It is thus unclear how to isolate the
separate marginal products of labor and capital required for the growth accounting exercise (if they even
exist, given the high degree of jointness in the use of time). Nor is it clear that the marginal product of
labor, if it can be clearly defined, is approximately equal to the wage the proprietor might earn in the next
best labor force alternative in the informal sector.
20

labor’s share, TFP’s contribution to the growth in output per worker is found to range from a low
of 13 percent to a high of 45 for the period 2001-2008, and -26 percent to 50 percent for the
period 1991 to 2001.15
D. Intangible Capital as a Source of China’s Growth
The range of plausible TFP estimates is far too large to have any confidence about its role
in the growth process, or to settle the associated perspiration-inspiration problem. However, the
main focus of this paper is on the role of intangibles as a source of growth. Proceeding in the
spirit of Wu’s multiple alternatives, we show results for two assumptions about the labor share:
in our first variant, we use the average factor shares of the countries included in the van Ark et.
al. study (the “EIB shares”), and compare these results to the outcome obtained directly from the
data (“China shares”). We use the “official” data from the NBS which, though probably biased
upward, provide a baseline for comparison with a broader range of cross-national studies.
Table 3 shows our results, both with and without intangibles, for the years 2000 to 2008.
In both cases, the introduction of intangibles in the analysis leads to a restatement of the relative
importance of the various sources. The contribution of intangible capital is around one-sixth of
the growth in output per worker using either factor-share assumption, where its implicit
contribution was previously zero. Put differently, the omission of intangibles exaggerates the
importance of the other traditional sources. One implication is that while TFP continues to be a

15

In other words, whether or not TFP growth is a significant factor in China’s growth depends on how
you measure it. This finding recalls the earlier “Tyranny of Numbers” debate between Young (1995) and
Hsieh (12999, 2002) about the role of TFP in the growth of the Asian Tigers. In that debate, the role
assigned to TFP (and to perspiration versus inspiration) turned on whether TFP growth was measured
using quantities, as in equation (3) of this paper, or formulating the problem in terms of prices (the “dual”
to (3)).
21

significant source of growth, the perspiration-inspiration debate is tilted towards overall capital,
although the assumption about the size of labor’s share continues to matter (both with and
without intangibles). Finally, the introduction of intangibles does little to change the growth rate
of real GDP per worker (compare the columns 1 and 2 in the first row to columns 3 and 4).
The sources of growth results for China are compared to the leading economies of the
world in Table 4. Again, it is not a surprise that the Chinese growth rates dominate the
corresponding rates in other countries. However, while the share-weighted growth rate of
China’s intangibles is more than twice that of the other countries, its relative percentage
contribution is the smallest for every other economy except Japan’s, where it is essentially the
same. In the U.S., intangibles contribute 30 percent of the 2000-2006 growth rate, while the
Chinese rate is only half of the U.S. figure. China’s continued reliance on tangible capital
growth suggests a continued emphasis on manufacturing production.
The comparisons in Table 4 refer to countries at different stages of development. China
is seemingly a country in the earlier stages of reform-induced development and is therefore not
directly comparable to the other countries in Table 4, which are at a more mature position in their
respective economic evolution. A more apt comparison would be between China’s recent
growth and that of Japan during its high growth era.16 This comparison is shown in Table 5
using results from Nishimizu and Hulten (1978), in which the sources of Japanese growth were
estimated for the years 1955-71. This study did not include intangible capital, but did use two
estimates of tangible capital and a common labor share of 45 percent. The comparison between

16

This comparison is made, for example, in a 2010 article in the Economist magazine, which also
discusses some of the deeper issues involved in the comparison.
22

the high-growth era of Japan and the recent experience of China reveals a similarity not present
in the preceding table. Labor productivity growth rates are similarly large, and the growth in
capital per worker played an important role, as did the growth of TFP. A look back at Table 4
shows that Japan’s rapid growth rate has abated as its economy began to experience some of the
problems of mature economies. Income per capita in Japan is currently only about 70 percent 0f
the corresponding U.S. figure.
V. THE CONVERGENCE HYPOTHESIS
A. The Mankiw, Romer, Weil Model
The patterns in Tables 4 and 5 do not prove that China is following a similar path to that
of Japan. However, China cannot grow forever at 8 to 10 percent per year, as the World Bank
report China 2030 notes, and the comparison of Japan in these tables is instructive in light of the
“Japan as Number One” claims made during that country’s high growth era. The patterns of
these tables are consistent with the hypothesis that China is in the early stages of convergence to
a higher, reform-induced, growth path of the sort described by Barro (1991). If so, the
convergence hypothesis predicts that its growth must ultimately slow.
To examine this possibility and its implications, we use a variant of the convergence
model developed by Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992). This model is particularly useful in the
current context because it connects the investment rates of Table 1 and the output elasticities to
long-run outcomes. It is based on the steady-state growth model of Solow (1956), and is
composed of two parts: a steady-state equilibrium and a convergence path to that equilibrium. 17
17

This model, and its close cousin, the neoclassical optimal growth model, start by assuming that capital
in the production function exhibits diminishing marginal returns. This is the mechanism through which
the steady state is achieved. The “AK” model of endogenous growth offers a competing vision in which
the presence of externalities offsets the direct effects of diminishing marginal returns and convergence
23

In the first part, a steady-state value of output per person is derived from an aggregate CobbDouglas production function
(1’)

Qt = A(X) Kαt Rβt (eλtLt)γ .

The parameters α, β, and γ, are the Cobb-Douglas output elasticities (now constant), and they
indicate the percentage impact on output generated by an increase in the respective input. The
A(X) indicates the general level productive efficiency, as before, but now it is made an explicit
function of a set of externally determined “state” variables, X. These state variables are included
in the shift term A(X) under the hypothesis that environmental, institutional, and cultural
variables affect the efficiency of production. The X’s are treated as exogenously determined,
and are thus not choice variables under the control of the individual enterprises that underlie the
production function.18
The production function provides a snapshot of an economy’s output-generating capacity
at any point in time. Over time, output grows because of three factors in the model: (a) labor,
which grows at the rate η; (b) capital, which is formed at the gross rate sIt (adjusted for
depreciation at the rate δ); and (c) technical efficiency, which grows at the rate λ. These

does not occur. The endogenous growth model has the attractive feature that it provides one way to
incorporate R&D and human capital into the growth process, rather than treating innovation as a purely
exogenous process. However, this advantage is attenuated when intangibles are introduced into the
Solow and optimal growth models as both an output and an input. Moreover, while the divergence
feature of the endogenous growth model may help explain the growing gap between rich and poor
countries, it is not an attractive model to apply to the cases with a sudden acceleration in growth, followed,
in the case of Japan, by a subsequent slowdown.
18

The MRW production function includes human capital, but not intangibles. We do not have a good
measure of the stock of human capital, though Table 6 does show annual expenditures for schooling as a
fraction of GDP, and, since our focus is on business intangibles, we have omitted this variable for our
analysis. The state variables in the efficiency term are implicit in the MRW model.
24

variables are assumed to be fixed and exogenously determined, as are the saving rates, sIt and sNt.
Given these last assumptions, MRW show that the economy evolves toward a steady-state
growth path along which output per worker converges to a fixed value

(5)

 A( X ) ( s  )( s  )
I
N
(Q / L )*t = e t 
 
(n
+
)









(1 / 1   )

.

The long-run prosperity of a country is determined, in this formulation, by its frugality (as
reflected in the rates of saving), its innovativeness (as represented by the variable λ), its
population growth (the variable n), and the effectiveness of its institutions, as embodied in the
index A(X). A higher rate of investment in either type of capital increases the level of output per
worker, but higher population growth has the opposite effect. An increase in the rate of costless
technical change, on balance, increases output per worker.
Two of the logical properties of this formulation deserve special attention. A higher rate
of saving leads to a higher level of long-run output per worker, other things equal, but does not
affect the long-run rate of growth. In fact, the steady-state rate of growth of capital per worker is
zero in this model. The sources-of-growth results shown in Tables 3 and 4 should be viewed
with this in mind. Moreover, because the steady-state growth rate of the capital-labor is zero, a
steady-state version of the sources-of-growth decomposition (3) assigns no weight to capital
formation, leaving the exogenous rate of technical progress, λ, to explain all of the growth in
output per worker. In other words, it’s all about inspiration in the long-run. 19

19

The nature of the technical change variable, λ, also requires special mention. In Solow’s 1956 steadystate model of growth, the variable λ is the rate of labor-saving (Harrodian) change. In the Solow’s 1957
25

The second part of the MRW model involves the transition to the steady-state path
described by equation (5) above. At any point in time, the actual level of output per worker.
Qt/Lt, differs from the steady-state value (Q/L)* and is generally presumed to be below the latter).
In the MRW model, the gap between Qt/Lt and value (Q/L)* is assumed to be closing at a rate μ
[=(n+λ+δ)(1-α-β)] from a starting point

(6)

Q t L t

  [ln(Q / L) *  ln(Qt / Lt ) ].
Q t Lt

The growth rate of an economy depends, here, on the size of the gap between its current position
on the convergence path and its steady-state target, and thus differs from the formulation in the
growth accounting equation (3) (though the two are consistent). The larger the remaining gap to
close, the higher the rate of growth, explaining why economies in the early stages of
convergence have higher rates of growth, and why these rates gradually decline. One important
implication is that a larger contemporaneous growth rate in output per worker in one country
versus another does not imply that the former will necessarily end up on a higher steady-state
growth path with a higher level of prosperity. It may simply have started from a much lower
initial level of output per worker. It might be recalled, here, that the current gap between output
per worker in the U.S. and China is around six to one.
B. Reforms and Convergence
The structure of the Solow/MRW growth model is far too simple to capture the
complexity of the events that have taken place in China since 1978, and economic growth in the

sources-of-growth formulation, TFP refers to the Hicks’-neutral rate of technical change, i.e., the growth
rate of At. The two rates are connected by the formula λ = TFP/sL.
26

real world does not proceed automatically according to a prescribed formula (recent events are a
reminder that there is a demand side to the growth problem). Indeed, there is something otherworldly about any model in which the course of events unfolds smoothly and predictably into a
distant future. The steady-state framework is best regarded as a parable that illustrates certain
points, and the steady-state growth parable does capture some of the main economic mechanisms
of the post-1978 Chinese reforms. It also provides a useful way of organizing data and
interpreting data. For example, the move toward a more market-oriented economy open to
global trade can be thought of, in MRW terms, as influencing the state variables X in the
efficiency function A(X) in order to initiate convergence to a higher steady-state value of output
per worker.
The transformation of the Chinese economy to achieve a more efficient framework for
production is a key aspect of the reform process, and certainly one that will play a major role in
the long-run prosperity of the country. A reduction in the rate of population growth via the onechild policy is another factor in encouraging higher long-run labor productivity, albeit one with
other cultural and structural implications. Changes in the saving rate also boost the steady-state
level of output per worker in the MRW framework (but, again, not its long-run rate of growth).
The rate of costless technical change, λ, has offsetting effects on the steady-state solution in (5),
but, on balance, is a positive factor. It is treated as externally determined, an assumption with
greater credibility when intangible capital is added to the model.

27

VI. SAVING AND CONVERGENCE
A. Chinese Saving Rates
Table 6 shows the rates of saving/investment for various categories of tangible and
intangible capital, as well as the rate of expenditure on education, for the years 1995-2008. The
total rate for intangible investment, as measured by Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF), and
expressed as a fraction of expanded GDP, rose from 32 percent 1995 to 38 percent in 2008.
Moreover, this growth rate accelerated significantly in the second half of the period. GFCF
includes both business fixed investment and investment in residential real estate, which we
impute to be around half of the total in the period 2001-2008. The rate of intangible capital grew
rapidly over this period (6.6 percent per year), but the growth of the core intangibles rate
(without software and design), was significantly slower (3.7 percent). The table also shows that
the expenditure rates for ITC equipment and education have increased.
These rates are put into an international context in Figures 1, 2, and 3. Figure 1
compares the rates of intangible investment, sNt, across countries with labor productivity, Qt/Lt,
which is closely related to income per capita. The countries included in the comparison are
based on the larger economies studied by van Ark et. al. (2009). The results for the large
economies are generally consistent with Barro (1991), who shows that countries with larger rates
of tangible investment exhibit higher income per capita. China is possibly such an outlier, but
this is hard to tell because of the absence of low and middle income countries in the comparison.
Table 2 shows China has a relatively high rate of intangible investment, so its position in
Figure 1 is due in large part to its significantly lower labor productivity. One explanation for this
result is that China is in the earlier stages of the convergence process, so a higher reform-induced
28

intangible investment rate would be consistent with a relatively low labor-productivity ratio,
when compared to other economies further along in the convergence process. However, the
observed patterns in Figure 1 could also reflect convergence to different steady-states paths,
since other parameters besides the investment rates are important. A comparison of Japan and
the U.S. shows that mature economies can have roughly the same rates of intangible investment,
but different levels of labor productivity.
The picture changes somewhat when the core rate of intangible investment on the last
row of Table 2 is used in place of the gross investment rate. This comparison is shown in Figure
2, where the association between sNt and Qt/Lt, is seen to be stronger, with the U.S. the
unambiguous leader. While China is still an outlier, and continues to be roughly at the level of
Italy and Spain, it is now at distinctly below the level of the other countries. The U.S. lead also
widens.
The pictures changes quite a bit in Figure 3, where the rate of tangible investment is
compared to the output per worker across countries. Here the position of China is so different
that it is hard to explain solely in terms of the early stages of the convergence process, or even as
convergence to a higher growth path. There is, however, another possibility. China’s outlier
status here, and in the preceding figures, may be the result of investment rates that are inflated by
a policy designed to encourage or force rapid economic growth. This kind of policy may reflect
an initial “big push” to get the economy launched on the new reform-induced steady state path.
In this regard, Young (1995) observed that investment rates in Singapore and South Korea rose
to rates comparable to China’s (47 and 40 percent, respectively) during their “Asian Tiger”

29

growth period, while the Taiwanese rate rose to 27 percent. Hong Kong was the exception with
a constant rate.
B. The Composition of China’s Investment Rates
Another look at Table 6 reveals an important aspect of China’s investment patterns:
while China’s rate of intangible investment is comparatively high relative to the other countries
in the comparison, the ratio of intangible to tangible investment is relatively low. This last
finding is of interest because of its implications for the structural transformation of China from
manufacturing toward a more innovation-intensive economy. If the U.S. experience is any guide,
this involves a shift in emphasis from investment in tangible capital toward intangibles.20
Moreover, Figure 4 reveals a positive association between this ratio and labor productivity, with
the U.S., the U.K., and Finland showing intangible/tangible ratios above one. France is just
below this value, while Germany, with its greater orientation to manufacturing, is around 0.7.
China is again an outlier with respect to the other countries, but its intangible/tangible ratio of
around 0.3 is among the lowest in the countries shown in the figure. Despite substantial
investments in intangible capital, China still appears strongly oriented to its manufacturing base.

VII. CONCLUSION
Intangible capital in its various manifestations - human capital, technology,
organizational development, product design and marketing - is the foundation on which modern
economies are built. The architects of current Chinese economic policy, in government and in
20

The rate of tangible investment in the U.S. has been relatively constant over time (1950 to the present)
while the rate of intangible investment has increased significantly and now exceeds tangible investment
(Corrado and Hulten (2010)).
30

business, are well aware of this reality and have promoted a high rate of investment in intangible
capital. Its impact is apparent in the estimates of this study, which, despite all the problems and
ambiguities with the data, finds that intangibles have played a significant role in China’s recent
growth. This role is, however, not nearly as great as in the U.S. economy, and investment rates
in China appear to be dominated by a commitment to tangible capital, both residential and nonresidential. This, in turn, raises questions about the country’s progress along the global value
chain to greater affluence.
Given the current momentum, there is every reason to expect that intangible investment
will continue to play an important, and perhaps an increasingly important, role in the future,
given the recent trend in the country’s science and technology indicators. Though the
macroeconomic evidence is ambiguous and the perspiration-inspiration issue is left unresolved,
China appears to be moving to a higher long-run level of output per worker, regardless of which
of the saving rates or capital output elasticities reported in this study are assumed to prevail in
the long run. Indeed, the experience of Japan appears to be a reasonable model on which to base
guesses about the path ahead. However, this may be a long march, particularly if the objective is
to catch up to, or exceed, the U.S. The current income gap between the two countries is quite
large, with output per person in China only 16 percent of the U.S. number in 2007. A rough
“development accounting” calculation suggests that, even after controlling for intangible capital
formation, the differential in TFP was responsible for 40 to 53 percent of this gap, depending on
the assumption about the size of capital’s income share. Filling the gap may prove challenging,
particularly the TFP “inspiration” part of it, but is certainly not impossible.

31

REFERENCES
Aizenman, Joshua, and Nan Geng, 2009. Adjustment of state owned and foreign-funded enterprises in
China to economic reforms, 1980s-2007: a logistic smooth transition regression (LSTR) approach.
NBER Working Paper 15274 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bai, Chong-En, and Zhenjie Qian, 2010. “The Factor Income Distribution in China: 1978-2007,” China
Economic Review, 21, 650-670.
Bai, Chong-En, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Yingyi Qian, 2006. “The Return to Capital in China,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2006, 61-88.
Bai, Chong-En, Jiangyoung Lu, and Zhigang Tao, 2008. “How Does Privatization Work in China?”
Journal of Comparative Economics.
Barro, Robert J,, 1991. “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 106, May, 407-443.
Barboza, David, 2011. “Moving China Up the Value Chain”, Economix, NewYork Tines, August 4.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen, 2007. “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across
Firms and Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4), 1351-1408.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen, 2011, “Why Do Management Practices Across Firms and
Countries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24 (1), 2010, 203-224.
Bloom, Nicholas, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts, 2010. “Why Do Firms in
Developing Countries Have Low Productivity?” American Economic Review, 100, 2, May, 619-623.
Breznitz, Dan and Michael Murphree, 2011. Run of the Red Queen: Government, Innovation,
Globalization, and Economic Growth in China, Yale University Press, May 31.
Bosworth, Barry and Susan Collins, 2008. Accounting for growth: comparing China and India. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 22(1), 45-66.
Borensztein, Eduardo and Jonathan Ostry, 1996. Accounting for China’s growth performance, American
Economic Review, Vol. 86, 224-228.
Brandt, Loren and Xiaodong Zhu, 2010. Accounting for China’s growth. IZA Dicussion paper No. 4764.
Brynjolfsson, Erik., and Lorin M. Hitt, 2005. “Remarks,” In Measuring Capital in the New
Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 567-575.
China State Council, 2006. Medium-to-Long-Term Strategic Plan fore the Development of Science and
Technology (2006-2020).
Chow, Gregory C., 1993. Capital Formation and Economic Growth in China. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 108 (3), 809-842.
Chow, Gregory, and Kui-Wai Li, 2002. China’ economic growth: 1952-2010. Economic Development
and Cultural Change, Vol. 51, 247-256.
32

Corrado, Carol and Charles Hulten, 2010. “How do you measure a ‘technological revolution’?” American
Economic Review, May, 99-104.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, 2005. “Measuring Capital and Technology: An
Expanded Framework.” In Measuring Capital in the New Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D.
Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, pp.11-41.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, 2009. “Intangible Capital and U.S. Economic
Growth,” Review of Income and Wealth, 55, 3, September, 661-685.
Economist Magazine, 2010. “China's economy, Not Just Another Fake: The similarities between China
today and Japan in the 1980s may look ominous. But China’s boom is unlikely to give way to prolonged
slump,” The Economist, January 14.
Economist Magazine, 2011. Privatisation in China: Capitalism Confined, The Economist, September 3,
67-70.
Economist Magazine, 2012. Special Report: China’s Economy. May 26.
Dollar, David, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2007. Das (Wasted) Kapital: Firm Ownership and Investment
Efficiency in China, NBER Working Paper 13103, National Bureau of Economic Research, May.
Fukao, Kyoji, Tsutomu Miyagawa, Kentaro Mukai, Yukio Shinoda and Konomi Tonogi, 2009.
Intangible Investment in Japan: Measurement and Contribution to Economic Growth. The Review of
Income and Wealth, Vol. 55(3), September.
Gollin, Douglas, 2002. “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(2), 458-574
Hall, Robert E., "The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry," Journal of Political
Economy, 96, 1988, 921-947.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, 1999. “Productivity Growth and Factor Prices in East Asia,” American Economic
Review, 89, 2, June, 133-138.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, 2002. “What Explains the Industrial Revolution in East Asia? Evidence from the
Factor Markets, American Economic Review, 92, 3, June, 502-526.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, 2007. “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,” American
Economic Review, 97, 3, June, 562-585.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXXIV, 4, November, 1403-1448.
Hu, Jintao, 2010. Speech at the Second Meeting of the Communique of the Fifth Plenum of the 17th
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. October 18, 2010.
Hulten, Charles R., 2010. “Growth Accounting,” Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Chapter 23,
Bronwyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg (eds.), Elsevier-North Holland, 987-1031.

33

Hulten, Charles R., 2010. Decoding Microsoft: Intangible Capital as a Source of Company Growth,
NBER Working Paper 15799, National Bureau of Economic Research, March.
Hulten, Charles R., 2012. Intangible Capital, Product Innovation, and the Theory of the Firm Growth.
Unpublished.
Hulten, Charles and Xiaohui Hao, 2008. What is a company really worth? Intangible capital and the
“market to book value” puzzle. NBER Working Paper 14548, National Bureau of Economic Research,
December.
Hulten, Charles, Xiaohui Hao and Kirsten Jaeger, 2010. Macro versus Micro Comparisons of Intangible
Capital: The Case of Germany and the U.S., Research Paper of CoInvest Project, available at
http://www.coinvest.org.uk/bin/view/CoInvest/COINVESTHulteninterim
Hulten, Charles and Anders Isaksson, 2007. Why Development Levels Differ: The Sources of Differential
Economic Growth in a Panel of High and Low Income Countries, NBER Working Paper 13469, National
Bureau of Economic Research, March. October.
Jorgenson, Dale W., 1963. "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior," American Economic Review, 53,
2, May, 247-259.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Zvi Griliches, 1967. "The Explanation of Productivity Change," Review of
Economic Studies, 34, July, 349 83.
Koopman, Robert, William Powers, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei, Give Credit Where Credit is Due:
Tracing Value Added in Global Production Chains, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper 16426, September 2010.
Krugman, Paul, 1994. "The Myth of Asia's Miracle," Foreign Affairs, 73, 6, November/December, 62-77.
Lev, Baruch, 2001. Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting, Brookings
Institution Press, Washington D.C..
Linden, Greg , Jason Dedrick, and Kenneth L. Kraemer, 2009. Innovation and Job Creation in a Global
Economy: The Case of Apple’s iPod, Working Paper, Personal Computing Industry Center, UC Irvine,
January.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr, 1978. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” The Bell Journal of Economics,
9, 2 Autumn, 508-523.
Mandel, Michael, 2006. “Why the Economy is a Lot Stronger Than You Think,” Business Week,
February 13, 62-70.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil, 1992. “A Contribution to the Empirics of
Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 2, May, 407-437.
McGrattan, Ellen R., and Edward C. Prescott, 2010.“Technology Capital and the US Current Account,”
American Economic Review, 100, September, 1493-1522.
34

Nakamura, Leonard, 1999. “Intangibles: What Put the New in the New Economy?” Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia Business Review, July/August 1999, 3-16.
Nerlove, Marc, and Kenneth J. Arrow, "Optimal Advertising Policy Under Dynamic Conditions,”
Economica, New Series, vol. 29, 114, May 1962, 129-142.
Nishimizu , Mieko, and Charles R. Hulten, 1978. "The Sources of Japanese Economic Growth, 1955-71,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 60, No. 3, August, pp. 351-361.
OECD, 1998. Measuring intangible investment: national efforts to measure intangible investment.
Available at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/45/41/1943317.pdf
Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD), 2007. CHINA Synthesis Report,
OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy, OECD.
Prescott, Edward C., and Michael Visscher, 1980. “Organizational Capital,” Journal of Political Economy,
88, 3, 446-461.
Qian, Yingyi, 2000. The process of China’s market transition (1978-1998): the evolutionary, historical
and comparative perspectives. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 156 (1), 151-171.
Qian, Yingyi, 2003. How reform worked in China. In D. Rodik (Ed.) Search of prosperity: Analytic
narratives on economic growth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 297-333.
Romer, Paul M., "Endogenous Technical Change," Journal of Political Economy, 98, No. 5, October,
S71-S102.
Schaaper, Martin, 2009. Measuring China’s innovation system: national specificities and international
comparisons. OECD STI working paper 2009/1, Statistics Analysis of Science, Technology and Industry.
Solow, Robert M., 1956. "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 70, February, 65-94.
Solow, Robert M., 1957. "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function," Review of
Economics and Statistics, 39, August, pp. 312-320.
Summary of Five Year Plans, various years. http://www.gov.cn/2011lh/content_1825838_2.htm.
Timmer, Marcel, Abdul Azeez Erumban, Bart Los, Gaaitzen de Vries, and Robert Stehrer, Slicing Up
Global Value Chains: The Role of China, paper presented at the CRIW/Productivity Workshop at the
2011 NBER Summer Institute, July 19, 2011.
van Ark, Bart, Janet Hao, Carol Corrado and Charles Hulten, 2009. “Measuring Intangible Capital and its
Contribution to Economic Growth in Europe,” EIB Papers, European Investment Bank, volume 14 (1),
December 2009, 62-93.
Woo, Wing Thye, 1998. Chinese economic growth: sources and prospects, in M. Fouquin and F.
Lemoine (eds.) The Chinese Economy, Economica, London.
World Bank, The World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development, Washington DC,
2011.
35

World Bank and the Development Research Center of the State Council, the People’s Republic of China,
China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative High-Income Society, Conference Edition,
The World Bank, 2012.
Wu, Harry, 2011. Accounting for China’s growth in 1952-2008-China’s growth performance debate
revisited with a newly constructed data set, Institute for Economic Research, Hitosubashi University,
February.
Xing, Yuqing, and Neal Detert, 2010. How the iPhone Widens the United States Trade Deficit with the
People’s Republic of China, ADBI Working Paper Series No. 257, Asian Development Bank Institute
December.
Young, Alwyn, 1995. “Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East Asian
Growth Experience,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 641-680.
Young, Alwyn, 2003. From gold to base metals: productivity growth in the People’s Republic of China
during the reform era, Journal of Political Economy, 1120-1161.

DATA REFERENCES

China Input-output Tables, various years. National Bureau of Statistics of China, available at
http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/China Statistical Yearbook, various years. National Bureau of Statistics
of China, available at http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/
Communique on Land and Resources of China, various years. The Ministry of Land and Resources of
the People’s Republic of China, available at http://www.mlr.gov.cn/zwgk/tjxx/
Hu, Hongli, Zhangxi Lin and William Foster, 2002. China’s software industry-current status and
development strategies. Available at http://zlin.ba.ttu.edu/papers/Outgoing/GITM-ITC-3.pdf
National Annual Report of Firms of Engineering Inspection and Design, various years. The Ministry of
Housing and Urban-Rural Development of the People’s Republic of China.
National Report of Press and Publishing Industry, various years. Provided by the Newspaper of the China
News and Publishing Industry, available at http://www.chuban.cc/syzx/dlcbygk/ndzk/
OECD, 2010. Main Science And Technology Indicators: 2010/2 edition.
http://www.oecd.org/document/33/0,3343,en_2649_34451_1901082_1_1_1_37417,00.html
Statistical Report of the National Software Industry issued by the Ministry of Industry and Information
Technology for the years from 2006 to 2009, available at
http://www.miit.gov.cn/n11293472/n11293832/n11294132/n12858477/index.html
Total Economy Database, 2011. The Conference Board, available at http://www.conferenceboard.org/data/economydatabase/ .

36

Table 1
Intangible Investment in the whole economy of and in the market sector of China (percent of GDP)
China-all

China-all AAGR

China-all

China-market

1990

1990-06

2006

2006

1. Computerized information
2. Innovative property
a) R&D, including social sciences and humanities
b) Mineral exploration and evaluation
c) Copyright and license costs
d) Development costs in financial industry
e) New architectural and engineering designs
3. Economic competencies
a) Brand equity
Advertising expenditure
Market research
b) Firm-specific human capital
Continuing vocational training
Apprentice training
c) Organizational structure
Purchased
Own account

0.01
2.48
0.68
0.20
0.27
0.64
0.68
1.29
0.08
0.08

0.17
2.44
0.61
0.20
0.23
0.56
0.86
1.55
0.18
0.18

1.87
3.79
1.34
0.21
0.12
0.46
1.66
1.81
0.40
0.40

1.88
3.38
1.02
0.21
0.08
0.47
1.62
1.80
0.38
0.38

0.33
0.33

0.35
0.35

0.28
0.28

0.29
0.29

0.89

1.01

1.13

1.13

0.89

1.01

1.13

1.13

Total Investment

3.79

4.17

7.47

7.06

Note: GDP in this table is the sum of conventional GDP and new intangibles. When expressed as a fraction of conventional GDP, the 1990 and 2006
estimates are 3.93 and 7.90 percent (7.43 for the market economy). Sources: Most data are from the China Statistical Yearbooks provided by the
National Bureau of Statistics of China and from Annual Reports of various ministries. The data sources for each type of intangible investment are
described in an appendix available from the authors.

37

Table 2
Intangible Investment in the market sector of China and in the market sectors of other countries (percent of GDP)
Germany

France

Italy

Spain UK

US

Japan

Type of Investment
1. Computerized information
2. Innovative property
a) R&D, including social sciences and humanities
b) Mineral exploration and evaluation
c) Copyright and license costs
d) Development costs in financial industry
e) New architectural and engineering designs
3. Economic competencies
a) Brand equity
Advertising expenditure
Market research
b) Firm-specific human capital
Continuing vocational training
Apprentice training
c) Organizational structure
Purchased
Own account

2006
0.69
3.37
1.62
0.01
0.20
0.70
0.85
2.67
0.53
0.39
0.14
1.21
0.61
0.60
0.94
0.51
0.43

2006
1.33
2.99
1.22
0.04
0.29
0.56
0.87
3.10
0.93
0.69
0.24
1.42
1.17
0.24
0.76
0.30
0.46

2006
0.61
2.12
0.56
0.09
0.10
0.56
0.82
2.10
0.68
0.45
0.23
0.98
0.68
0.31
0.43
0.14
0.29

2006
0.75
2.66
0.60
0.04
0.17
0.50
1.35
1.82
0.40
0.18
0.22
0.77
0.68
0.10
0.65
0.26
0.39

2006
1.42
2.90
0.98
0.04
0.20
0.06
1.60
5.36
1.06
0.84
0.22
2.33
0.00
0.00
1.96
0.47
1.50

2006
1.24
4.07
1.69
0.78
0.55
0.55
0.50
5.04
1.35
1.24
0.11
1.05
0.00
0.00
2.64
0.00
0.00

2000-05
2.02
5.51
2.57
0.00
1.01
1.84
0.00
2.66
1.10
0.00
0.00
0.46
0.00
0.00
1.10
0.00
0.00

Chinamarket
2006
1.88
3.38
1.02
0.21
0.08
0.47
1.62
1.80
0.38
0.38
0.00
0.29
0.29
0.00
1.13
0.00
1.13

Total Investment

6.73

7.42

4.83

5.23

9.67

10.35

10.19

7.06

Investment excl. computerized info. and designs

5.20

5.21

3.39

3.13

6.65

8.61

6.78

3.56

Notes: (1) US 2006 uses a more aggregate US estimates (Corrado and Hulten, 2010) and the shares of detailed intangibles (1998-2000) from CHS
2005. (2) Japan R&D excludes social science, and social science R&D is in the 2.0 percent of the residual term of innovative property.
Sources: The data sources of the US are CHS (2005) and Corrado and Hulten (2010). The data source for Japan is Fukao et. al. (2009). The data
source for the UK, Germany, France, Italy and Spain is van Ark et. al. (2009). (3) GDP in this table is the sum of conventional GDP and new
intangibles, while GDP in the corresponding table of Fukao et. al. (2009) and van Ark et. al. (2009) is conventional GDP. We convert the percentages
of conventional GDP to percentages of GDP with new intangibles.

38

Table 3
China Growth Accounting
(average annual growth rates)
with intangibles

without intangibles

Time period

2000-08

2000-08

2000-08

2000-08

Type of input shares

EIB shares

China shares

EIB shares

China shares

Labor’s 2008 income share

61%

41%

70%

43%

Tangible capital 2008 share

26%

46%

30%

57%

Intangible capital 2008 share

12%

14%

0%

0%

Output per person (AAGRs)

9.72%

9.72%

9.65%

9.65%

Tangible capital per worker

3.12%

5.23%

3.54%

6.26%

Intangible capital per worker

1.58%

1.47%

TFP

5.03%

3.02%

6.11%

3.39%

Contributions

Note: EIB shares use the average input shares of the US, UK, Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Austria and Denmark.
Source: Data on GDP, employment, and gross capital formation are from the China Statistical Yearbooks. Data on initial capital stock (1980) are from
Chow (2002). We use a perpetual inventory method and a 5 percent depreciation rate to estimate the capital stock of years from 1981 to 2008. Sources of
EIB shares are unpublished data from van Ark et. al. (2009) and Corrado and Hulten (2010). The income share of labor is 0.44 on average from 2000 to
2008, that of tangible capital 0.44, and that of intangible capital 0.12.

39

Table 4
Comparison of the Sources of Growth Accounting-Across Countries (% AAGR)
Germany
2000-06

France
2000-06

Japan
2000-05

UK
2000-06

US
China-EIB
2000-06 2000-06

China-Chn.
2000-06

1.61

1.29

2.11

2.45

2.37

9.25

9.25

Tangible capital

0.57

0.39

0.83

0.34

0.62

3.04

5.20

Intangible capital

0.39

0.37

0.33

0.64

0.72

1.55

1.48

TFP

0.65

0.52

0.95

1.47

1.03

4.66

2.57

Output per person
Contributions:

Note: China-EIB uses the average input shares of US, UK, Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Austria and Denmark. We use official
data on China for this table.
Sources: The data source of Japan is Fukao et. al. (2009). We use the unpublished data of van Ark et. al. (2009), Mauro et. al.
(2009) and Corrado and Hulten (2010) to carry out growth accounting of Germany, France, the UK and the US.

40

Table 5:
China Growth Accounting Versus Japan in Its High Growth Era (% AAGR)
China
2000-2008

Japan
1955-1971

Type of input shares

EIB shares

China shares

Nishimizu-Hulten
Capital I

Nishimizu-Hulten
Capital II

Output per person

9.65

9.65

8.07

8.07

Tangible capital

3.54

6.26

5.19

4.41

TFP

6.11

3.39

2.88

3.66

Contributions:

Note: All estimates are without intangibles.
Sources: Japan data is from Nishimizu and Hulten (2010). Chinese data on GDP, employment, and gross capital formation are from the China Statistical
Yearbooks. Data on initial capital stock (1980) is from Chow (2002). We use a perpetual inventory method and a 5 percent depreciation rate to estimate the
capital stock of years from 1981 to 2008. Sources of EIB shares are unpublished data from van Ark et. al. (2009) and Corrado and Hulten (2010).

41

Table 6
Chinese Investment Rates for Different Types of Capital (% expanded GDP)

1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Avg 95-00
Avg 01-08
Avg* 95-00
Avg* 01-08

Total
Tangible

ITC

31.74
31.15
30.54
31.68
32.10
32.79
33.11
34.55
37.28
38.52
37.59
37.44
36.94
38.33
31.67
36.73
33.01
38.69

0.79
0.91
0.97
1.30
1.50
1.82
1.96
2.19
2.38
2.89
3.17
3.21
3.16
3.37
1.21
2.79
1.27
2.94

Total
Total ex.
Intangible Software
& design
4.17
3.01
4.23
3.04
4.30
3.13
4.46
3.17
4.69
3.33
4.93
3.48
5.11
3.53
5.46
3.66
6.06
3.71
6.43
3.54
6.93
3.63
7.22
3.69
7.38
3.80
7.80
3.90
4.46
3.19
6.55
3.68
4.84
3.52
7.13
4.11

Education
spending
2.85
2.93
2.98
3.27
3.52
3.73
4.07
4.34
4.33
4.28
4.26
4.18
4.32
4.34
3.21
4.26
3.35
4.49

Note: intangible investment includes investment in software and mineral exploration. The averages with the
asterisks shown in the last two rows report the shares of each type of investment in conventional GDP, rather than
the expanded GDP of the prior two rows.
Sources: The source of education spending and tangible investment (Gross Fixed Capital Formation) is the China
Statistical Yearbooks, provided by the National Bureau of Statistics.

42

Figure 1 Intangible Investment and Output per Person (2001-04)

intangible investment (% GDP)

12.00%

US

Japan

10.00%

UK
8.00%

Germany

6.00%

China

Italy

Spain

4.00%

France

2.00%
0.00%
0

20000

40000

60000

80000

100000

120000

Output per person (2010 EKS PPP$)

Source: Output per person is from Total Economy Database (September 2011) of The Conference Board.
For intangible investment, the data source is van Ark et al. (2009) for Germany, France, Italy, Spain,
Fukao et. al. (2009) for Japan, Corrado and Hulten (2010) for the US and COINVEST (2011) for the UK.
GDP is the sum of conventional GDP and new intangibles, while GDP in the corresponding table or
figure of Fukao et. al. (2009) and van Ark et. al. (2009) is conventional GDP. We convert the
percentages of conventional GDP to percentages of GDP with new intangibles.

Figure 2
Intangible Investment Rates ex Software and Architectural and Engineering Design
compared to Labor Productivity in Various Countries

intangibe investment
excl. software and design (% GDP)

9.00%

US

8.00%

Japan

7.00%

UK

6.00%

Germany

France

5.00%
4.00%

Italy

China

3.00%

Spain

2.00%
1.00%
0.00%
0

20000

40000

60000

80000

100000

120000

Output per person (2010 EKS PPP$)

Source: Output per person is the sum of the new intangibles per person estimated by us and the output
per person from the Total Economy Database (September 2011) of The Conference Board. For
intangible investment, the data source is van Ark et al. (2009) for Germany, France, Italy, Spain,
Fukao et. al. (2009) for Japan, Corrado and Hulten (2010) for the US and COINVEST (2011) for the
UK. GDP is the sum of conventional GDP and new intangibles.

43

Figure 3
Tangible Investment and Output per Person (2001-04)

tangible investment (% GDP)

40.00%

China

35.00%
30.00%
25.00%

Italy

20.00%

Japan

15.00%

Spain

10.00%

US

UK

Germany

5.00%

France

0.00%
0

20000

40000

60000

80000

100000

120000

Output per person (2010 EKS PPP$)

Source: Output per person is the sum of the new intangibles per person estimated by us and the output
per person from the Total Economy Database (September 2011) of The Conference Board. Tangible
investment is of the market sector. Data of the US is from Corrado and Hulten (2010), and that of
Germany, France, Italy, Spain and the UK is from EU KLEMS. GDP is the sum of conventional
GDP and new intangibles.

Figure 4
Intangible/tangible Investment and Output per Person (2001-04)

intangible/tangible investment

1.8
1.6

UK

1.4

US

1.2
1
0.8

Japan

0.6

Spain
Italy

0.4

China

0.2

France
Germany

0
0

20000

40000

60000

80000

100000

120000

Output per person (2010 EKS PPP$)

Sources: See notes to preceding figures.

44

