NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPIRICAL MODELS OF
ARBITRATOR BEHAVIOR UNDER
CONVENTIONAL ARBITRATION

David E. Bloom

Working Paper No. 1841

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 1986

The author is grateful to Orley Ashenfelter, Leslie Boden,
Christopher Cavanagh, and Henry Farber for helpful discussions, to
three anonymous referees for written comments, and to Jonathan
Backman and Vijaya Ramachandran for helpful research assistance.
This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant
SES-83O9148. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1841
February 1986

&irica1 MDdels of Arbitrator Behavior

Under Conventional Arbitration

ABSTRPC

•

This study analyzes a new set of data on the decisions of conventional
arbitrators. The main goal is to draw inferences about the extent to which
conventional arbitration decisions are fashioned as mechanical compromises of
the parties' final offers, without reference to the exogenous facts involved, in
different disputes. The results of the analysis are remarkably clear:
conventional arbitrators tend to split-the-difference between the parties' final
offers with virtually no evidence of systematic reference to the facts of the
cases. However, since there is a substantial amount of unexplained variance in
the arbitration decisions, this evidence of mechanical compromise behavior
should be viewed as characterizing the overall operation of conventional
arbitration mechanisms and not the behavior of individual arbitrators in any
particular case. Indeed, the results are consistent with the view that
individual arbitrators pay close attention to the facts of the cases, but that
there is considerable variation in the structure of different arbitrators'
preference functions.

David

E. Bloom
of Economics

Bepartrrent

Harvard University
Cantridge, M 02138

I.

Introduction

Arbitration is a rapidly-growing method for resolving disputes. It is used
widely in the U.S. and other countries to resolve private disputes arising under
commercial contracts and collective bargaining agreements, to resolve civil

disputes congesting court systems, and to set wages and other terms of new

contracts. Despite the wide range of settings in which it is applied, the
central feature of virtually all arbitration mechanisms is that they involve a.

third party, i.e., an arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators, hearing and deciding
how a dispute is to be resolved. Arbitration awards are generally binding,
either by law or by ex ante agreement of the disputants.

One of the most important characteristics of arbitration mechanisms is that
they may be designed in different ways. For example, under conventional
arbitration, an arbitrator is simply asked to render a decision which represents

his or her best judgment of a fair settlement. The settlement may, but does not
have to be, a compromise between the parties' final offers. In contrast, under
final-offer arbitration, each party is required to submit to the arbitrator a
single final-offer and the arbitrator is constrained to render a decision which
consists of one or the other of those final offers, without compromise.

Clearly, final-offer arbitration is intended to induce concessionary behavior on
the part of risk-averse bargainers, each of whom perceives a tradeoff between
the probability of "winning" the arbitration and the size of the payoff they
•

receive -if

they

win.

Conventional arbitration mechanisms have been objected to on a variety of

grounds, the most serious of which is that they "chill" the negotiation process

which precedes arbitration. This argument is rooted in the belief that
conventional arbitration awards systematically tend to be compromises between
the parties' final positions, thereby providing an incentive for the parties to

-2—

avoid pre-arbitration concessions. This is a difficult assertion to evaluate.
On the one hand, it might be the case that arbitrators often make decisions by
reaching a mechanical compromise between the parties' final offers, without

paying much attention to the merits of the case. This might be an optimal
strategy for arbitrators who want to project an image of fairness so they are

hired again by the parties. In addition, since it is easier and less timeconsuming than weighing the facts in a dispute, mechanical compromise is also

one way in which arbitrators can engage in shirking. Finally, mechanical
compromise might be an optimal decision-making rule for arbitrators if the final
offers themselves convey useful information about the nature of efficient

settlements. Indeed, if final offers do contain useful information which
arbitrators are particularly skilled at extracting, mechanical compromise
behavior is not a legitimate complaint against conventional arbitration.

Nonetheless, it seems unlikely in practice that an arbitrator could determine
whether a pair of final offers contained useful information without at least

some reference to exogenous data on the facts of a case. In this situation,
arbitration decisions will not be simple mechanical compromises of the parties'
final offers, but rather, they will be functions of both the offers and the facts.

On the other hand, it is also possible that the parties' final bargaining

positions are determined by their expectations about an arbitration award. In
other words, if bargainers A and B expect an arbitrator to render a settlement
that is relatively favorable to bargainer A, their negotiations will almost

certainly take place over settlements that tend to be favorable to A, provided
that arbitration is compulsory if they fail to resolve their dispute

voluntarily. Thus, arbitration decisions may appear to be mechanical
compromises of the parties' final positions, but only because the parties

-3—

aligned themselves around the arbitrator's preferred settlement point.

The purpose of this study is to analyze arbitrator decision-making under

conventional arbitration. The main goal is to try to draw inferences about the
extent to which conventional arbitration decisions are mechanical compromises of

the parties' final offers. This will be done mainly by comparing estimates of
alternative models of arbitrator behavior that have proven useful in recent

empirical studies. These models will be fit to a new set of data on actual
arbitrator's decisions in a series of hypothetical arbitration cases.
The following section will set out, the empirical models of arbitrator beha-

vior that have formed the basis for empirical work in this area. Section III
will discuss the conclusions that can be drawn from previous attempts to imple-

ment these models. Section IV will describe the experimental design used to
generate a new data set on the behavior of conventional arbitrators. Section V
will present and discuss the results of fitting alternative empirical models to

these new data. Section VI will discuss the main conclusions of the paper.

II. Empirical Models of Arbitrator Behavior
The purpose of this section is to outline two alternative models of

arbitrator behavior in the resolution of wage disputes. The main difference
between these models lies in the information that arbitrators use to make their

decisions. In the first model the arbitrator's preferred settlement (i.e., the
percent wage increase Wa) is determined solely by reference to the facts of the

case (X). Empirically, we specify the following:

(la)

where

a =

+ c

is a vector of weights and c is a random error which captures the effect

of unobserved variations in economic environments and differences in

—4-

arbitrators' assessments of those circumstances. Like previous studies, this
study will assume
deviation a.

to be normally distributed with zero mean and standard

In the second model the arbitrator's preferred settlement (a)

depends on both the facts of the case and the employer and union final

positions (We and U)
—a
w
=

(ib)

yw

=

where 0

a

e u

+ (1—y){(w +w )/2]

e u

+ (1—y)[(w +w )/2] +

7 < 1.

Although these two models are conceptually quite simple, attempts to

distinguish between them empirically are not equally straightforward. In
particular, if arbitrator decisions just depend in the facts of the cases, then
equation (].a) can be estimated directly by ordinary least squares. On the other
hand, if arbitrator decisions depend on both the facts and the final offers, it
would seem natural to estimate equation (ib) directly, also using ordinary least

squares. However, that regression ignores the potential simultaneity of the
average final offer and the arbitrator's expected decision. In addition, it is
usually not possible to fit that regression since

and w are generally not

explicit in conventional arbitration decisions. Thus, the term (l_Y) [(We +

wt)/2 will become part of the error structure in the second model.

Unfortunately, since e and wU are probably correlated with X, their omission
from an ordinary least squares regression will bias the estimates of
wage decisions are generated by equation (ib).

if the

—5—

III. Previous Literature
A.

Review

To date, two.alternative approaches have been adopted to circumvent the
inherent problems involved in analyzing the behavior of conventional

arbitrators. The first approach, due to Ashenfelter and Bloom (1984), takes
advantage of a novel feature of the arbitration system operating in New Jersey.

Under that system, unresolved pay disputes between (unions of) municipal police
0

cer

nu
.J

LIIC ii

.I_L..

.....I....1....

uC
i u.. iiui tvyi IlISL I..

I.....

ai

...f..

....I.
Lra.L
on. LInowcve

the form of arbitration is only conventional if both parties agree to it. In
the absence of such an agreement, the dispute is settled by final-offer

arbitration. For these final offer disputes, Ashenfelter and Bloom derive two
empirical models of arbitrator behavior, one which corresponds to equation (la)

and one to (ib). They show that these two models are observationally equivalent
and that the parameters

and a are identified frou data on the parties' final

offers and the arbitrators' decisions. Thus, by testing for the commonality of
parameters in the behavior of conventional and final offer arbitrators,
Ashenfelter and Bloom are able to make inferences as to whether arbitrators
give weight to the parties' final offers under conventional arbitration.

The second approach to analyzing the behavior of conventional arbitrators
involves an ingenious attempt to overcome the potential simultaneity of

arbitration decisions and final offers by exogenously fixing those offers. This
approach, due to Bazerman and Farber (1985) and Farber and Bazerman (1986), was
implemented by asking members of the National Academy of Arbitrators to render

arbitration decisions in 25 different bargaining scenarios, each with its own
set of facts and final offers. By their very construction, data generateçi in
this manner do not suffer from the simultaneity or observability problems

-6-

described above. Thus, a simple regression of the conventional arbitration
decisions on the facts and final offers should, in principle, provide unbiased
estimates of the parameters of the model of arbitrator behavior.

B.

Critique
As approaches to testing the relevance of the parties' final offers to

conventional arbitration decisions, both the efforts of Ashenfelter and Bloom
and of Bazerman and Farber have their weaknesses.
First, as noted in their article, the Ashenfelter—Bloom test will fail if
equation (ib) is the true model for the preferred settlements of conventional
arbitrators but estimation of (la) biases the estimates of

and

in such a way

that they support the hypothesis of common parameters. Although this
possibility seems unlikely, it probably is true that at least

is biased in a

direction which favors acceptance of the constraints (if equation (ib) actually

holds) since X is presumably positively correlated with u and e. Another
weakness of this test is that it fails to account explicitly for simultaneity
bias involving the final offers under conventional arbitration that could also
lead to acceptance of the constraints.

The second set of potentially confounding problems with the Ashenfelter-

Bloom model involves the specification of the X vector. For example,
arbitrators often report that they are influenced by subjective factors such as
the quality of advocacy or the intensity of a particular bargainer's feelings.
The omission of these or other factors from the Ashenfelter-Bloom model could

bias the estimates they compute and therefore reduce the power of their test for
mechanical compromise behavior.

Overall, the Ashenfelter-Bloom model does not provide a strong test of the

—7—

mechanical compromise hypothesis. Nor does it provide unambiguous results on
this issue. For example, the hypothesis is not rejected in the simple
specifications reported, but it is rejected in the richer specifications.
However, the great strength of this model is that it tests the mechanical

compromise hypothesis using data derived from an operating arbitration system.
The Bazerman-Farber approach to testing f or mechanical compromise behavior

under conventional arbitration also has several problems. First, the

hypothetical arbitration scenarios were designed so that the final offers were

orthogonal to the "facts" of the cases. This feature of the scenarios has no
analog in actual arbitration where final offers are endowed with information

content via their link to the facts of a case. This is unfortuhate since it is
the information content of the final offers which makes it potentially sensible

for the arbitrators to give them weight. The failure to provide arbitrators
with -any decision-making criteria is also unfortunate.

Second, according to Bazerman and Farber, the conventional arbitration
decision was equal to one or the other of the parties' final offers in 386 of
their 1522 cases (25.4 percent). In addition, the decision was either greater
than the union's final offer or less than the employer's final offer in 196

cases (12.9 percent). These stylized facts stand in strong contrast to actual
arbitration systems in which arbitration awards infrequently lie on the bounds

of the parties' final positions and rarely lie outside those bounds. This
boundary problem undoubtedly resulted from arbitrator confusion as to what to do
in cases in which the facts suggested a settlement which lay far away from the
offers (which happened because of the "pathological" relationship between

the facts and the final offers). Bazerman and Farber try to overcome this
problem by estimating a model that treats as censored all observations that lie

-8-

on or outside of the bounds of the final offers. In other words, all of the
Bazerman-Farber results about mechanical compromise behavior are based only on
the 61.6 percent of the non-outlying observations -in which arbitrators were

apparently not strongly influenced by the parties' final offers.
Overall, and in contrast to the conclusions the authors themselves reach,
the Bazerinan—Farber results offer prima facie evidence that arbitrators do pay

considerable attention to the parties' final offers, even when they contain

literally no information. This finding could be explained in the following
ways. First, arbitrators may not be particularly skilled at identifying cases
in which final offers have no information content. Second, arbitrators may
engage in mechanical compromise behavior in order to appear fair, but they
failed to realize that they had no such incentives in the Bazerman-Farber

simulations. Third, the arbitrators who participated -in Bazerman and Farberts
study were simply lazy and failed to reveal information about their likely
behavior -in actual arbitration cases. However, because the final offers are

exogenously fixed, one conclusion of the Bazerman-Farber study is clear: the
evidence of mechanical compromise behavior is not generated by bargainers
positioning themselves around the expected arbitration award.

IV. Experimental Design
Although the Bazerman and Farber analysis of mechanical compromise behavior
has serious problems, their basic approach is quite clever and fundamentally
sound. Thus, -it seems reasonable to repeat the experiment they conducted in

a way that overcomes as many of the problems they faced as possible. This
task was done in early 1984 by sending a new set of hypothetical arbitration
cases to roughly the same population of arbitrators.

-9—

Four cases were prepared for this experiment. These cases were all based
on the records of actual bargaining disputes which were arbitrated under the New

Jersey Arbitration Law during the years 1980 to 1983. Police officer wages were
either the sole or overriding issue in dispute in all of these cases. All of
the arbitrators in the sample were provided with the following information:

(1)

general background information on the public employer and the public employee
union; (2) information on the bargaining history which led to the arbitration;
(3) the final positions of each party and a description of the arguments
advanced in support of those positions (or against the other side's position);.
and (4) statistical exhibits supporting the positions of one or both parties.

Arbitrators were asked to examine the information describing the bargaining
dispute, to consider that information in light of New Jersey's Arbitration Law,
and to render a conventional arbitration award ordering the implementation of

whatever salary (or salary increase) they thought to be most reasonable.
Arbitrators were also provided with a two-page description of the New Jersey
Arbitration Law which included a list of the substantive items they were
supposed to weigh in their deliberations (e.g., comparability, ability-to—pay,

etc.). Data on police officer salaries in 6 New Jersey communities and 4
non-New Jersey communities from 1979 to 1983 were provided as background
-information. Finally, arbitrators were provided with a decision form asking

them to record and outline the basis for their decision. This form also
requested information about the professional background and experience of each
arbitrator and asked for an evaluation of the arbitration exercise.
In the process of preparing the four abridged arbitration cases, a curious

feature of the link between facts and final offers was discovered. In
particular, it was observed in the actual arbitration cases that the arguments

-10•-

used to advance a particular position were never so narrowly specified so as to

imply a unique final position. In other words, it seemed clear that the
arguments could be used to support a range of final positions in the vicinity of

the final position actually advanced. This observation was exploited in the
experimental design by sending different arbitrators cases which were identical
in all respects except -for the final positions of the parties. Since knowing
which of the four cases an arbitrator was being asked to decide completely

summarizes the facts of the case, any variations in the conventional arbitration
decisions which are positively correlated with variations in the final offers
may be interpreted as evidence of mechanical compromise behavior.
Unlike the Bazerman-Farber study -in which arbitrators were each asked to

decide 25 hypothetical cases, the present design asked each arbitrator to
consider just -one conventional-arbitration case. Of the 527 arbitration

exercises mailed out, responses were received to 186. Of these, 121 responses
did not include arbitration decisions, either because they indicated (1) that
the arbitrator was deceased, (2) that the arbitrator did not have the time to
participate in the study, (3) that the arbitrator would not participate in the
study without pay, (4) that the arbitrator did not feel competent to resolve

wage disputes because of lack of experience with them, or (5) that for a variety
of reasons, the arbitrator did not think the study could reveal useful
information about arbitrator behavior. Overall, -the 55 arbitrators who did
respond tend to be statistically similar to those who participated in the

Bazerman and Farber study: they are generally above the average of all National
Academy members in terms of both overall arbitration experience and wage
arbitration experience (e.g., the respondents have an average of 22 years of

arbitration experience and roughly 6 percent of their cases have involved wage

—11'-

disputes). Since wage arbitration presently accounts for only 5 percent of all
arbitration cases (only 2 percent before the early 1970's), it is not surprising
that many arbitrators chose not to respond to the exercise for lack of
expertise.

It is difficult to determine what potential biases are introduced into this

study by the self-selection of arbitrators. Also difficult to evaluate, but
probably worth reporting, are the arbitrator's evaluations of the exercises.

In answer to the question: "To what extent do you feel that these exercises
capture the key features of actual arbitration cases?" the distribution of

arbitrator responses was as follows: "Not at all," 6.0 percent; "To Some
Extent," 16.4 percent; "Reasonably Well," 58.6 percent; "Very Well," 13.8
percent; and "Almost Entirely," 5.2 percent. Neither this distribution nor the
response rate varied much across the four city scenarios.

V.

Estimation Results

The purpose of this section is to determine whether the arbitrator
responses to the arbitration cases described in the previous section permit us
to make inferences about whether equation (la) or equation (ib) is more likely
to be the true model generating conventional arbitration decisions.

Table 1 reports the average percent wage increases awarded by arbitrators in
each of the 12 sets of semi-distinct cases (i.e., for each of the 3 pairs of

final offers associated with the bargaining disputes in the 4 cities). The
striking feature of this table is that the average arbitration award increases
when the average of the employer and union final offers increases, in each of

the four cities. Although few of the differences are statistically
significant, mainly because of small cell sizes, this pattern of results does

—12—

suggest the main result which the regression estimates below will confirm: that
the decisions of arbitrators are influenced by the parties' final offers.

Table 2 reports least squares estimates of the parameters of the two models
of conventional arbitrator behavior set out -in Section II. The first model
corresponds to equation (la) and represents a regression of conventional

arbitration decisions on the facts of the case (i.e., on a vector of city dummy

variables). The second models correspond to equation (Ib) and represent
regressions of conventional arbitration decisions on both the facts and the
final offers i.n each case. The first of the estimated forms of equation (lb) is
simply a reduced-form regression in which the facts and final offers are entered

as right-hand side variables. The next two columns report estimates of the
structural parameters of equation (ib) (i.e., , 1-'y, and 01.
Table 2 indicates that the average arbitration award in the 55 cases being

analyzed was 6.72 percent with a standard deviation of 1.82 percent. When the
arbitration awards are regressed on a vector of city dummy variables, the
standard deviation of the residuals drops to 1.52 percent. In addition, the
coefficient estimates for the city dummy variables indicate significant
differences among arbitration decisions in the different cities (F[5,51] =

8.88,

compared to a critical value of 2.41 at the 5 percent level). Since there were
literally no differences in the facts presented for individual cities, these

dummy variables may be viewed as completely characterizing those facts. Thus,
under the maintained hypothesis that conventional arbitrators' render decisions

without reference to the parties' final offers, the estimates of equation (1)
suggest that arbitrators are able to discern differences between the cases
which they reflect in their decisions.
It is, of course, possible that the significance attributed to the facts

—13—

results from omission of the final offers from the regression. In other words,
since the offers are correlated with the underlying facts of the case by design,
misspecifying the regression by omitting the offers might result in the

coefficients of the city dummies picking up their own effect plus some of the

effect of the offers. The first column of estimates of equation (lb), which
simply adds in the average of the partiesT final offers. as a regressor, is
informative about this possibility.

Indeed, there are three noteworthy

features of these estimates. First, the city dummies are no longer significant
in this equation, either singly or jointly. in addition, the coefficients of
the city dummies all become quite small in magnitude when the average final

offer enters the equation. Second, the average final offer explains
significantly more of the total variation in the arbitration decisions than do
the facts of the cases (e.g., the

from a regression which just includes the

average of the final offers is .447). Third, the coefficient on the mean of the
final offers (i.e., .880) is significantly greater than zero, but not

significantly different from one. Thus, a clear winner seems to emerge when the
facts and the final offers are permitted to "fight it out" in the regression.
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that there is still a considerable amount of
random variation in the decisions of the arbitrators even after the inclusion of

both the facts and the final offers (e.g., the standard error of the regression
is 1.4 percent).

The first column of structural coefficients reports parameter estimates

that are not scaled by y. Note that the point estimates of the structural
constant and the city coefficients are reasonably large in magnitude, although

none are significantly different from zero. Thus, the data seem to contain
little information about the arbitrators' underlying preferences viz—a—viz the

-14-

facts of the cases.. Alternatively, the data may be indicating that there is

considerable variation in the structure of different arbitrators' preference
functions. In addition, since the estimate of (1-y) (the weight on the final
offers) is not significantly different from one, it appears that the
relationship between the arbitration decisions and the average of the final

offers is well-described by a 45 degree line that goes through the origin. In
other words, it appears that arbitrators tend to engage in mechanical compromise
behavior that can literally be described as "splitting-the—difference."

The final column of estimates in Table 2 does not constrain the weights

attached to employer final offers and union final offers to be equal. As with
the previous model, none of the coefficients of the facts are significantly
different from zero.

In addition, it is most remarkable that the estimated

weights associated with the union and employer final offers are extremely close

in magnitude and estimated with almost identical precision. Thus, the simpler
model in which arbitrators weigh the final offers symmetrically appears to
provide a very satisfactory fit to the data.

VI. Discussion ard Conclusion
The growing reliance on conventional arbitration mechanisms for resolving
pay disputes arising in labor-management relations has been accompanied by

numerous debates over the nature and operation of such mechanisms. A basic
point in contention is whether or not conventional arbitrators make decisions by

mechanically compromising between the disputants' final offers. If this is
indeed the way arbitrators tend to make decisions, then conventional arbitration

may provide disincentives for bargainers to engage in concessionary behavior in

the negotiation process which precedes arbitration and thereby increase the

—15—

fraction of disputes which are settled by a third-party. This contradicts a
fundamental tenet of the American system of industrial relations ——

principle of voluntarism --

the

according to which it is desirable for bargaining

outcomes to be determined by the individual parties to the greatest extent

possible. It seems especially worthwhile to research the extent of mechanical
compromise behavior in view of (1) the popular perception of labor relations
practitioners that conventional arbitrators often do "split-the-difference;" and
(2) the growing use of final-offer arbitration, which creates a whole new set of
theoretical and practical difficulties just to prevent arbitrators from
compromising between the parties' final positions.

Unlike previous studies which apply sophisticated econometric techniques to
relatively weak data (and report finding little evidence of compromise

behavior), this study seeks to generate somewhat richer data and apply a simple

econometric technique. Ultimately, it is impossible to determine the extent to
which conclusions drawn from these data generalize to behavior in an actual

arbitration system. Nonetheless, the fact is that all of the arbitrators who
provided decisions for this study are members of the National Academy of
Arbitrators, an organization of the most experienced arbitrators in North

America. In addition, over 75 percent of the participating arbitrators
indicated that the arbitration exercises captured the main features of interest

arbitration "reasonably well" or better. Finally, since all of the arbitration
awards analyzed were accompanied by a one paragraph arbitration decision in
which arbitrators almost always justified their decision in terms of the facts
of the case, it is hard to argue that arbitrators decided these cases in a
substantially different manner than they would decide an actual case.

Taken at face value, the results of this study are remarkably clear:

—16-

conventional arbitrators tend to split-the-difference between the parties' final

offers with little systematic reference to the facts of the cases. However,
because of the substantial amount of unexplained variance in arbitration awards,
this characterization of arbitrator behavior should not be regarded as applying

to any particular case. Rather, it reflects a systematic tendency of
arbitrators across some population of cases. Indeed, of the 55 decisions
analyzed in this study, only 8 were exactly equal to the average of the parties'
final offers.

The results of. this study do not necessarily imply that arbitrators ignore

the facts in the cases they hear. Indeed, the nature of the written arbitration
decisions analyzed in this study support the view that arbitrators do pay

attention to the facts. Thus, the statistical results seem to be indicating
that arbitrators do not share a common preference function. In other words,
arbitrators do give weight to the facts, but different arbitrators do -it so

differently that the weight tends to show up as random noise. This conclusion
is supported by estimates of significant inter-arbitrator differences in

behavior presented in Ashenfelter and Bloom (1984) and Bazerman (1985), and in

research on Iowa's system of tn-offer arbitration discussed in Ashenfelter (1985).
The estimates presented in this study suggest that the standard deviation
of the underlying distribution of arbitral preferences, controlling for the

facts of a case, is 11.75 percent. Put another way, if arbitrators were asked
to decide the cases in this study without having any knowledge of the parties'

final offers, roughly two—thirds of the awards would be in the range -8.5
percent to 15.0 percent, and one-third of the awards would lie outside that

range. Perhaps arbitration systems provide arbitrators with knowledge of the
parties' final positions to lower this grossly high variance. Alternatively, it

—17—

might be that arbitrators would be able to lower the variance themselves by
studying the facts of the cases more closely in situations in which final offers

were not available. One might even conjecture that final-offer arbitration is
just the type of mechanism which can induce arbitrators to extract relatively
more information from the exogenous facts of a case.
The results of this study are consistent with the view that conventional
arbitrators use the parties' final offers to provide information on the range of

settlements that bargainers are likely to view as acceptable. Since this task
could probably be accomplished more inexpensively by averaging the parties final

offers and adding on some noise using a computer's random number generator, the
findings of this study raise an important question about arbitration's raison

d'etre. Undoubtedly, the answer to this question has something to do with the
superior ability of a human arbitrator to fine tune arbitration decisions, to
endow them with legitimacy in the eyes of disputants, and to induce bargainers

to reveal true reflections of their underlying preferences. But this is surely
an incomplete answer to a question which seems most worthy of deeper
consideration.

Table 1

Pairs of Employer and Union Final Offers
and Average Arbitration Awards, by City

City
Camden

e u N

e

N

8.0 3

7.4

9.8 4

Pair 1
(Avg. Award)

6.0

Pair 2
(Avg. Award)

4.0

Pair 3

2,0

N =

union's

8.4 5

6.0

(7.18)

N e u N
0.0 14.0 3
(6.97)

(8.93)

6.0 10.0 6

3,5 9.0 5
(5.70)

(7.50)

7.0

9.0
(7.60)

final offer in percent

final offer in percent

number of observations with each pair of final offers
(total number of observations equals 55)

North Bergen

8.0 10.0 3

(7.60)

(4.93)

= employer's
=

10.0 3

9.2 5

6.8

(6.00)

(Avg. Award)

e wu

(7.73)

(6.33)

8.0 4

Mahwah

Mount Olive

7

0.0

9.0 6
(4.30)

Table 2

Ordinary Least Squares Estimates of Equation (la) and
Alternative Specifications of Equation (lb)*

(ib)

Parameter!
RHS Variable

Constant

Descriptive
Statistics

(la)

6.724

5.371
(.406)

J)

Camden Dummy**

.408

/

Mt. Olive Dummy**

2.082

Mahwah Dummy**

Reduced-Form
Coefficients

Structural
Coefficients

.387
(1.645)

3.225
(11.401)

2.823
(15.782)

-.154

-1.283

-1.092

IA

3.O3O)

I

I.Sfl
M..tJO)
1.358

I

(.564)

.163
(.808)

(5.920)

1.681
(7.668)

2.441
(.556)

.216
(.880)

1.800
(5.981)

2.109
(7.431)

.880

(We+Wu),2

.880
(.283)

(.283)

U

.435
(.173)

e
a
R2

.446
(.174)

1.822

1.519

1.404

.343

.450

11.74

11.92

*Estimated standard errors are reported in parentheses below coefficient
estimates. The standard errors of the structural estimates of the constant and
the coefficients of the city dummies in equations (lb) were computed from the
asymptotic distribution of the ratio of two coefficients (e.g., the regression
constant ') and the estimate of y implied by the regression -coefficient on
(We+Wu)/2)

**North

Bergen is the reference category for the city dummies.

18—

Ref erences

Ashenfelter, Orley. 1985. "Evidence on U.S. Experience with Dispute
Resolution Systems." Princeton University Industrial Relations Section
Working Paper No. 185.
__________ and David E. Bloom. 1984. "Models of Arbitrator Behavior: Theory
and Evidence." American Economic Review: 74:111-124.
1985. "Norms of Distributive Justice in Interest
Arbitration." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 38:558—570.

Bazerinan, Max H.

__________ and Henry S. Farber. 1985. "Arbitrator Decision Making: When are
Final Offers Important?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39:76-89.

1981. "Splitting the Difference in Interest Arbitration."
Farber, Henry S.
Industrial and Labor Relations Review: 35:70-77.
__________ and Max H. Bazerman. 1986. "The General Basis of
Arbitrator Behavior: An Empirical Analysis of Conventional and FinalOffer Arbitration." Econometrica, forthcoming.

Gunderson, Morley. 1983. Economic Aspects of Interest Arbitration. Ontario:
Ontario Economic Council Paper Series.

