NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHERRIES FOR SALE:
EXPORT NETWORKS AND THE INCIDENCE OF CROSS-BORDER M&A
Bruce A. Blonigen
Lionel Fontagné
Nicholas Sly
Farid Toubal
Working Paper 18414
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18414
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

The authors owe many thanks to seminar participants at the NBER ITI Spring Meeting 2012, Gep-ifo
conference on International Trade, Productivity and Factor Movements at CESifo, University of British
Columbia, Brown University and the Banque de France. Farid Toubal would like to thank the CEPR
project "Globalization Investment and Services Trade" funded by the European Commission under
FP7-PEOPLE-ITN-2008-21. Lionel Fontagné thanks the Bank of France for making individual firm
data available. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Bank of France or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Bruce A. Blonigen, Lionel Fontagné, Nicholas Sly, and Farid Toubal. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cherries for Sale: Export Networks and the Incidence of Cross-Border M&A
Bruce A. Blonigen, Lionel Fontagné, Nicholas Sly, and Farid Toubal
NBER Working Paper No. 18414
September 2012
JEL No. F12,F23,G34
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a dynamic model of cross-border M&A activity. We show that foreign firms will
be relatively more attracted to targets in the domestic country that had high productivity levels several
years prior to acquisition, but then suffered a negative productivity shock (i.e., cherries for sale). With
high ex ante productivity levels, target firms are able to invest in large export networks that are valuable
to foreign multinationals because of locational differences and trade costs. Subsequently, domestic
firms that experience reductions in productivity no longer find their established network as valuable
to serve independently, increasing the surplus generated by a foreign acquisition. From the theory
we derive a dynamic panel binary choice empirical model that uses predetermined export activity and
the evolution of target firm productivity over time to predict cross-border M&A activity. Administrative
data from French firms across 1999-2006 provide strong evidence that both the established export
networks and productivity losses among target firms promote takeover by foreign multinationals.
Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu
Lionel Fontagné
Paris School of Economics
European University Institute
Maison des Sciences Economiques
106-112 Boulevard de l'Hôpital
75647 Paris Cedex 13
FRANCE
and Banque de France
lionel.fontagne@univ-paris1.fr

Nicholas Sly
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
sly@uoregon.edu
Farid Toubal
Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan,
Paris School of Economics, and CEPII
Bureau 503, Bat Cournot
61, avenue du Président Wilson
94235 Cachan Cedex, FRANCE
Farid.Toubal@univ-paris1.fr

1

Introduction

A significant majority of foreign direct investment (FDI), especially between developed
countries, is in the form of cross-border merger and acquisition (M&A) activity. This mode
of international investment clearly has large policy ramifications as one nation’s assets come
under the control of an entity from another country. Policymakers may be concerned that
foreign firms are acquiring a nation’s most productive assets through such acquisitions. On
the other hand, foreign control of assets may bring important beneficial spillovers to host
countries, through higher wages, access to better technologies, and higher productivity.
Recent academic literature has only begun to examine cross-border M&A activity and
its subsequent economic effects. There are a number of recent studies that describe quite
different theoretical motives for cross-border M&A activity; these include the acquisition
of productive capabilities, market-specific expertise held by target firms, strategic motives
held by multinational firms under oligopoly, and the ability of some multinationals to better
control/manage assets in particular countries.1 Generally these motives are specific to either
the target or acquiring firm’s local market. Each of these motives fail to address the fact that
a substantial volume of target firm sales are not to local markets, but instead are exported
to multiple proximate markets.
Another difficult issue that arises from the literature on M&A activity is the seemingly
opposite predictions about which types of domestic firms are targeted by foreign multinationals; particularly, whether high-performing firms (“cherries”) or low-performing firms
(“lemons”) are the targets. The classic notion in the finance literature is that M&A activity
is one of natural selection, as well-performing firms take over the assets of poorly-performing
firms (e.g., Manne (1965)). Consistent with this view, Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987) find
evidence that lemons are the primary targets in U.S. acquisitions in manufacturing. The
cross-border M&A models mentioned above also often predict that lemons will be targets,
including Nocke and Yeaple’s (2007) M-industry model and Neary (2007). However, recent empirical evidence suggests that acquiring firms, especially foreign firms, are acquiring
cherries. This has been found using data for Chile (Ramondo (2009)), Indonesia (Arnold
and Javorcik (2009)), the U.S. (Criscuolo and Martin (2009)), and Spain (Guadalupe et al.
(forthcoming)). In many ways, a cherries story is more difficult to explain than a lemons
story. Why would the assets of a high-performing firm be more valuable under the man1 These different motives for cross-border M&A are examined in Nocke and Yeaple (2007; 2008), Neary
(2007), and Head and Ries (2008). Interestingly, there seems to be no established theoretical model of
M&A activity (whether cross-border or not) in the finance or industrial organization literature. Alongside
the theoretical progress made toward understanding the motivation for cross-border M&A activity, several
empirical studies have examined the effects of acquisitions by multinationals, in particular with regard
to local labor market outcomes. For example, see Huttunen (2007), Heyman et al. (2007), Bandick and
Gorg (2010), and Hakkala et al. (2011) for studies examining the effect of cross-border M&A on wages and
employment in target firms. The effects on productivity and R&D is a lengthier literature, with recent
examples including Arnold and Javorcik (2009), Criscuolo and Martin (2009), Ramondo (2009), Bandick et
al. (2010), and Guadalupe et al. (forthcoming).

2

agement of another firm? To our knowledge, Guadalupe et al. (forthcoming) is the only
paper to date that has provided a possible rationale - foreign firms purchase cherries in the
host country because they can earn a greater ex post return from investing in productivity
improvements within a target firm that has a higher initial productivity. While this provides
a plausible explanation for why we observe cherry-picking, there are a number of remaining
questions. First, how do we reconcile the evidence of cherry-picking with the evidence in
support of lemon-picking, and with the several sources of theoretical motivation for acquirers to purchase underperforming targets? Second, as firm productivities continue to change
over time, when is cross-border acquisition of target firms most likely to take place?
In this paper, we introduce a new motivation for cross-border acquisitions, as well as a
resolution to the cherry and lemon stories. First, we argue that firms with larger export
networks are attractive to foreign acquirers as export platforms to proximate markets. Export networks established by domestic targets are likely to differ from those established by
foreign acquirers due to locational differences, and are, therefore, of high value to a foreign
firm.2 This is a new dimension in which a target firm can be a “cherry” in the eyes of a
foreign acquirer. Importantly, domestic firms are less likely to view targets with large export
networks as cherries, because they will independently establish similar export networks due
to their identical location. Redundancy makes the target firm’s export networks relatively
less valuable to domestic acquirers as it is to foreign firms. Thus, we are able to predict
which targets are more likely candidates for cross-border M&A, as opposed to domestic
acquisition. We note that this export-network motive for cross-border M&A is consistent
with prior evidence that a significant share of worldwide FDI activity is for export-platform
motives (Blonigen et al. (2007) and Ekholm et al. (2007)), and the evidence that affiliates
export a significant portion of total sales to nearby countries (Hanson et al. (2001)).
We also provide a resolution to the cherry and lemon stories. We consider a dynamic
environment where firms face possible productivity shocks that are persistent, and show that
firms with export networks are more likely to be targets of cross-border M&A when they
experience a negative productivity shock. A firm that realizes a negative productivity shock
will earn less revenue from each market within its previously established export network.
However, the productivity shock will have little to no impact on the breadth of markets
it serves, because the costs of establishing export networks are sunk investments made in
previous periods. The realization of a negative productivity shock preserves a target firm’s
assets - represented by its established export network - but makes that asset of less internal
value to the firm vis-à-vis the external value of the export network to potential acquirers.
As a result, the target firm is more likely to accept takeover bids when it realizes a persistent
shock to its productivity.
Acquisition of “underperforming” firms that have recently experienced negative produc2 An equivalent interpretation is that established export networks are endogenously determined sources
of (trade) cost synergies between firms in different locations

3

tivity shocks may appear to be lemon picking if one ignores previous investments in valuable
assets. However, target firms that experience negative productivity shocks are not necessarily low-productivity firms, which we would term “lemons.” Instead, they are firms that
may be still high-performing firms, who now have a lower opportunity cost of accepting a
takeover bid for its assets. This point is particularly salient in the context of investments
in export networks, given the robust stylized fact that high-productivity firms are more
likely to export; see Bernard and Jensen (1999) and Bernard et al. (2003). Recognizing
that both the initial investments by target firms, and the evolution of their productivity
over time, influence the likelihood of takeover, we characterize M&A activity as acquirers
seeking “cherries for sale.” The dynamic aspect of our analysis allows us to predict not only
which firms are targeted by multinationals, but also when cross-border acquisition of targets is more likely to take place. To our knowledge, this the first micro-level analysis that
considers M&A activity in a dynamic context and has implications for the entire literature
on M&A activity, not just cross-border activity.
In addition to highlighting the role of export networks and time-varying firm productivity
in promoting cross-border M&A activity, this paper also makes an important methodological
contribution. We use the theoretical model of endogenous export behavior and cross-border
M&A to derive a dynamic panel binary choice model that predicts which targets are acquired by multinationals across time. An important feature of our empirical model is that
it circumvents the initial conditions problem associated with estimating the likelihood of
acquisition when firm-specific sunk costs to enter foreign markets are unobserved, and the
target firm’s initial level of productivity corresponds to a time period that may predate the
sample period. Each target firm chooses where to export conditional on its own costs to
enter foreign markets and productivity, in anticipation of the likelihood of being acquired
by a foreign firms. We derive an empirical specification that incorporates a measure of previously observed export activity, which is conditional on the unobserved firm-specific sunk
costs to export and previous levels of firm productivity. As a result, we provide an empirical
strategy that avoids the biases associated with estimating the likelihood of acquisition where
previous levels of firm productivity are observed, but perhaps not the initial level of firm
productivity, when there are correlated unobserved effects.3
In the next section, we provide some basic descriptive statistics and figures of crossborder M&A activity using detailed firm-level data from France over the 1999-2006 period.
Even these simple graphs demonstrate strong evidence that multinationals seek targets
that are “cherries for sale.” In sections 3, 4, and 5, we provide theory to explain these
patterns more formally. We construct a sequential model of exporting behavior that builds
3 See Arellano and Carrasco (2003), Wooldridge (2005), and Honore and Tamer (2006) for detailed discussions about the initial conditions problem associated with estimating non-linear dynamic panel data models
with unobserved effects. Our derived estimation strategy is closely related to those studied in Honore and
Lewbel (2002).

4

on Helpman et al. (2008) with endogenous export decisions, and then integrate varying
firm productivities over time, and an M&A market within each country. In the first stage,
firms receive random draws of productivity and costs to set up export networks. Firms
then select the foreign markets, if any, to which they will export. Importantly, these export
relationships require substantial sunk (or beachhead) costs to establish. In stage 2, firms
realize persistent productivity shocks, and these productivity changes provide incentives for
new M&A activity between firms. In the final stage, firms participate in the M&A market,
where domestic targets are acquired based on both their current productivity level, and
the export networks they established with their initial productivity level. We show that
greater export networks and negative productivity shocks each work toward increasing the
likelihood of a cross-border takeover. We also show that the export network effect is larger
when foreign firms differ more in their locational costs from the target, as there will then be
less overlap in the networks independently established by the acquirer and target, making
the export network of the target more valuable to the acquirer. In section 6 we derive an
empirical framework from the theory to predict the likelihood of foreign acquisition. Section
7 describes our sample compiled from several sources of administrative data on French firms.
The results of our empirical analysis are in Section 8, followed by concluding remarks

2

A First Look at the Patterns in the Data

In this section, we provide descriptive statistics on the level, and evolution, of productivity
and export networks of French firms that are acquired by foreign multinationals. The sample
for our analysis is built from several micro-datasets that are provided by different French
administrations and covers the period from 1999-2006. These data are matched using the
firm tax-register number which identifies each unique firm located in France.
We identify firms involved in a merger or acquisition using the ‘extended’ LIFI (LIaison
FInancière) data, a dataset that has information on the ownership and nationality of the
parent company of firms located in France. 4 We use LIFI to identify the year of a takeover
and the foreign status of the acquiring firm. We define a firm as having undergone a foreign
M&A if the owner in time t is foreign, while the owner in t − 1 is French. Similarly, a firm
undergoes a domestic M&A if it changes ownership but the owner remains French.
To calculate firm-level TFP, we first merge the LIFI data to the EAE (Enquete Annuelle
d’Entreprise) annual business survey dataset, which contains information from firms’ income
statements and balance sheets. It also reports the location of firms in France and their 4digit sector of principal activity. The survey has information on firms with more than 25
4 A firm classified as French independent is a resident in France and is not owned by a group. A French
affiliate is resident in France and owned by a French parent. A foreign affiliate is a firm that is located in
France but owned by a foreign group. An affiliate is foreign owned if the foreign firm controls more than
50% of its shares or voting rights. The results are insensitive to the specified cutoff for an acquisition to
take place, as the median share of voting shares owned by a group is 99%.

5

1

−.03

−.02

Detrended avg. level of TFP
−.01
0
.01

.02

Export networks (Weighted by industry average)
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2

.03

2.2

Figure 1: Target Productivity and Export Networks Margins Across Time

−3

−2

−1
0
1
Year of F−acquisition

2

3

−3

−2

−1
0
1
Year of F−acquisition

2

3

Source: Authors calculations based on “LIFI” and “EAE” data.

employees. Importantly, the EAE dataset is exhaustive above this reporting threshold. In
order to compute total factor productivity (TFP), we restrict the data to the manufacturing
sectors. We compute firm-level TFP using the procedure described by Olley and Pakes
(1996), controlling for the simultaneity bias that arises from the endogeneity of a firm’s
input selection. We then calculate a firm’s detrended TFP relative to its sectoral average.
The left panel of Figure 1 plots normalized detrended TFP for the French firms acquired
by foreign owners from three years prior to the acquisition through three years after the
acquisition. The middle line shows the relative detrended TFP for the average French firm
acquired by a foreign owner, whereas the lines above and below show the relative detrended
TFP for the 95th and 5th percentile, respectively. The pattern is striking and consistent
with a “for sale” effect. Relative detrended TFP is falling significantly in the three years
prior to acquisition for French firms who are acquired by foreign firms. The average acquired
firm falls from being 1.5% above the mean of all firms in its sector to being just an average
firm in its sector at the time of acquisition. Compared to the sample average annual change
in TFP of 0.03, this is a pretty significant negative shock to TFP for the typical acquisition
target.
The other important feature of the data is that the acquired French firms (from as low
as the 5th percentile) all have an above-average relative detrended TFP in the third year
before the acquisition. The right panel of Figure 1 shows the export networks of the French
target firms acquired by a foreign multinational, relative to the average number of markets
6

served in each sector (normalized to be 1 in the graph). In other words, these acquired firms
are “cherries,” in the initial TFP dimension. In our model below, and consistent with wellknown stylized facts, higher TFP allows a firm to profitably export to many destinations.
The right panel of Figure 1 illustrates the corresponding export networks established by
firms acquired during the sample period. Information about firm-level trading behavior,
which we use to construct our variable related to export networks, is taken from the French
customs (Douanes). We observe the yearly value of exports of each firm at the product-level,
in each destination market.5 A target firm’s export network is defined as the number of
unique countries served.
The pattern of the export networks established by French firms who are acquired by foreign firms further reinforces the evidence that acquired targets are cherries in the dimension
of export networks, as the average firm has an export network that is 40-50% larger than
its sector’s average in the years leading up to the foreign acquisition. Again, the lines above
and below report the statistic for the 95th and 5th percentile of the sample, respectively.
As one can see, even the 5th percentile target in the sample has an export network that is
well above its own sector’s average. While we have only used the number of country links
as our measure of export networks, qualitatively identical patterns are in the data when
we measure exports by number of exported products or exported country-product combinations. However, in the statistical analysis below, we will show that country links are the
main driver in our export network effects.
While this paper’s focus is on who gets acquired and when, there are interesting patterns of TFP and export networks after foreign acquisition in our sample. Firm-level TFP
continues to fall for a couple years after the acquisition before rebounding, whereas export
networks begin to increase for the target firm immediately after the acquisition. This may
reflect a longer delay in improving TFP in a plant versus having it begin shipping to new
export destinations that (perhaps) are already established by the parent firm. The fall in
firm TFP immediately after acquisition, and growth in export capacity after acquisition, are
each consistent with the evidence in Guadalupe et al. (forthcoming), where acquiring firms
make costly ex post investments in the target’s production technology and export capacity.
Our goal in the remainder of the paper is to develop a model of exporting and M&A
behavior that is consistent with the patterns in Figure 1, and to derive an empirical strategy
that demonstrates that acquisition activity is motivated by export networks and productivity
changes, as opposed to other confounding features of target firms.
5 We use the 8-digit Combined Nomenclature, a European extension of the 6-digit Harmonized System.
We have approximately 200 possible destinations and 8,000 different product categories.

7

3

Model

We build a model of a multi-country world with differentiated producers from each country
operating in a single sector. The timing of the model occurs in three stages. In stage one,
firms are born with a specific productivity, and then choose whether or not to make investments that allow them to export to foreign markets. The multi-country trading environment
builds from Helpman et al. (2008), with firm-specific sunk costs to enter foreign markets.
In stage 2, domestic firms realize a permanent shock to their productivity. We then focus
on a single country, and examine M&A activity. In stage 3, target firms are bought and
sold in the domestic M&A market, including the possibility that foreign multinationals acquire domestic firms. Our goal is to demonstrate how the export networks established in
stage 1, and the realization of productivity shocks among firms in stage 2, each influence
cross-border M&A activity in stage 3.

Basics: Consumption & Production
The world is comprised of a mass of countries indexed by j ∈ [1, J]. There is a continuum
of products in each country, and the representative consumer in each country j has the
following utility function:

 −1


Z


xj (l)(−1)/ dl


U = ln 

,  > 1,

(1)

l∈Bj

where xj (l) is the consumption of product l, Bj is the set of products available for consumption in country j, and  is the elasticity of substitution across varieties, which is common
across countries. Letting Ej denote the expenditure (or income) level of country j, its
demand for product l is derived as
xj (l) =

pj (l)− Ej
,
Pj1−

(2)

where pj (l) is the price of product l in country j, and Pj is the country’s ideal price index,
defined as
1/(1−)


Z

Pj = 


pj (l)1− dl

.

(3)

l∈Bj

Each country has a mass Mj of risk-neutral firms, each producing a unique variety in
a monopolistically-competitive sector. The cost of producing a unit of output for a firm in
country j is cj a, where a is a firm-specific measure of the number of bundles of the country’s

8

inputs required during production, and cj is a country-specific measure of the cost of this
bundle. The inverse of a represents the firm’s productivity level. Each country has an
identical cumulative distribution function Ga (a), with support [aL , aH ], that describes the
distribution of productivity across firms.

3.1

Stage 1: Export networks

In order for a firm in country j to sell its product in country i 6= j, it must incur both a
one-time sunk cost, fij , and a transport cost, τij , that are specific to the ij country pair.
For convenience, we normalize fjj = 0 for each country j. Within each country, firms differ
in their ability to establish export networks; the sunk costs are given in terms of the amount
of domestic factors that must be hired at costs cj , where bfij is the total number of domestic
factors that must be hired by a firm with parameter b in country j in order to serve country
i. Let Gb (b), be the distribution of the firm-specific parameter that determines the cost
to set up export networks, having support [bL , bH ].6 Roberts and Tybout (1997) provide
evidence that plant-level export behavior over time is consistent with the presence of sunk
costs to enter foreign markets, and that there is substantial heterogeneity in these sunk costs
across establishments.
We assume that transport costs are of the iceberg variety, where τij units of a product
must be shipped from country j in order for one unit of the product to arrive in country i,
and τij > 1 for i 6= j and τjj = 1 for each country j. For each country j, we order the set
−1
of potential export destinations in terms of their relative trade costs, cj fij τij
, and denote
this set as Dj ⊂ [1, J]. We note for the reader that we are departing from Helpman et al.
(2008) in specifying the costs to gain access to market i as a one-time sunk cost, rather than
a recurring per-period fixed cost. Define Nj (a, b) ⊂ Dj as the endogenously determined set
of destinations that a firm with characteristics (a, b) in country j chooses to serve, which we
call its export network.
Given a continuum of monopolistically-competitive firms, each producing a distinct variety, we derive the standard price mark-up for a firm producing in country j with productivity
cj a
parameter a and selling in country i so that the price of variety l is given by pj (l) = τij −1
.
From this, we can write the operating profit a firm in country j receives from its sales of
variety l to consumers in country i conditional on its productivity parameter a as
l
πij
(a) =

Yi




τij cj a
Pi

1−
.

(4)

6 Generally we are agnostic about whether firm productivity parameters, a, and the firm-specific parameter affecting the costs to export, b, are drawn independently. All our theoretical results are maintained
regardless of the joint distribution of firm productivity and export costs parameters. Moreover, we will show
that our empirical strategy generates consistent estimates of the model even if there is correlation between
the initial draws of productivity and export costs among firms.

9

3.2

Stage 2: Shocks in firm productivity

After firms have incurred the sunk costs to establish their trade networks they are all
subject to persistent productivity shocks, 1/ψ, which are infinitesimal and independent of
their initial productivity level. Equivalently, a firm with initial productivity parameter a
continues to operate with productivity parameter aψ, once its shock is realized. We assume
that (log) firm productivities evolve according to a random walk such that the productivity
shocks ln(1/ψ) are distributed log-normal, with drift ω and variance σ. Upon realizing a
productivity shock, firms maintain their export network established in stage 1, Nj (a, b).
The profits a firm earns by operating independently across its entire export network once
its productivity shock is realized is
Z
Vj (aψ) =

l
πij
(aψ)d(i).

(5)

i∈Nj (a,b)

Put another way, equation (5) represents the outside option of a target firm on the M&A
market. For any acquisition price offered, a target maintains the option of serving markets
i ∈ Nj (a, b) with its realized productivity parameter aψ.7

3.3

Stage 3: Merger & Acquisition

Domestic firms can sell their assets, including access to foreign consumers via their established trade networks, to both foreign and domestic acquirers. Upon acquisition of a firm,
the acquirer can substitute its own productivity, a0 , for the realized productivity of the target
firm, aψ.8 In addition to integrating technologies, once a merger is completed the acquiring
firm can select the location of production. In particular, the acquiring firm chooses the
source country for exports that minimizes variable trade costs. Denote sjh
i as the source of
production that minimizes the transportation cost of serving market i ∈ Nj (a, b)∩Nh (a0 , b0 ).
The integration of the acquiring firm’s technology, and the relocation of production within
the merged firm, require fixed costs given by I.9 The probability of meeting a potential
7 We have assumed that there are no per period fixed costs to export to any market, which implies that
firms maintain their export networks even if they realize negative productivity shocks. While we make
the assumption of no fixed costs for convenience, the sunk nature of the costs to enter foreign markets is
consistent with the dynamic decision to export studied by Roberts and Tybout (1997). All of our results
hold if there are also fixed costs to enter markets.
8 Without loss of generality, we assume that the productivity of the acquiring firm dominates that of the
target firm: a0 > a. This assumption is primarily for notational convenience but it is consistent with the
evidence in Nocke and Yeaple (2008) that it is relatively high productivity and high revenue firms that select
into cross-border acquisition activity.
9 For now we specify the integration cost I as being independent of target firm characteristics. Guadalupe
et al. (forthcoming) show that the investments acquirers make to update the target firm’s production technology and export capacity following acquisition are complementary to its current productivity level. Also,
Heyman et al. (2007) argue that integration of the acquiring firm technology is a skill-bias activity. We will
account for these facts in the empirical analysis below.

10

acquirer during any particular time period is given by the parameter µ.10
Upon acquisition, the merged firm produces two unique varieties that can be sold on the
export networks established by the acquirer and target. For any potential target with initial
productivity a, and trade network Nj (a, b), an acquisition by a firm having productivity
a0 from county h with export network Nh (a0 , b0 ) will create a conglomerate earning total
operating profits
Zjh (a0 , b0 , a, b) =

Z

l
0
m
0
[πis
jh (a ) + π jh (a )]d(i)
is
i

Nj (a,b)∪Nh

(6)

i

(a0 ,b0 )

There are two potential sources of surplus generated by a merger present in Zjh (a0 , b0 , a, b).
The first is the profit earned by continuing to sell the acquiring and target firms’ varieties
on their existing networks, but from the least costly source of production, sjh
i . If either
variety can be relocated to a less costly production origin, then a merger generates a surplus
through variable trade cost savings. The second potential source of surplus is the additional
profits that can be earned by selling the target (acquiring) firm’s product on the export
network of the acquiring (target) firm that was otherwise not profitable to serve from their
respective locations because of differences in fixed exporting costs. The gains from accessing
new markets via cross-border M&A are present for any pair of firms such that Nj (a, b) 6≡
Nh (a0 , b0 ).11

4

Equilibrium

In this section we derive conditions that characterize a Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium, such
that firms in each country establish export networks in stage one, facing uncertainty about
productivity shocks in stage two, and the potential for cross-border M&A activity in stage
three. We proceed using backwards induction.

4.1

Equilibrium Acquisition Activity

In stage three, firms engage in M&A activity with the possibility that domestic targets are
acquired by foreign multinationals. Let Qjh (a0 , b0 , a, b, ψ) be the strike price a firm with
10 For simplicity we model the arrival rate of potential acquires to be constant over time. Harford (2005)
provides evidence that the timing of M&A activity occurs in waves. We will account for the potential for
the arrival rate of acquirers to be non-homogeneous in the empirical analysis below.
11 Our primary goal is to highlight how export networks established by firms, and changes in their productivity, influence the likelihood of them being acquired by foreign firms. In doing so we have abstracted from
strategic incentives to acquire competitors within imperfectly competitive markets. The combined profits
earned by a merged firm over its different products may not be simply the sum of operating profits as in
equation (6). An analysis of strategic motivations for cross-border M&A is provided by Neary (2007). While
strategic incentives for mergers in an oligopolistic sector are outside the scope of this paper, we note that
a merger is likely to consolidate market power, in addition to creating (trade) costs synergies. Thus we are
likely to underestimate the probability of acquisition, rather than overstate the motives.

11

productivity given by a0 in country h pays to acquire a target firm with initial parameter a
and realized shock ψ in country j, given their specific costs to establish export networks b0
and b. The price of an acquisition is determined non-cooperatively and divides the surplus
created by a merger, with a fraction β retained by the acquirer and a fraction 1 − β gained
by the target firm. The probability that any acquisition takes place is then given by the likelihood that the value of the merged firm in (6), net the acquisition price, Qjh (a0 , b0 , a, b, ψ),
is greater than the outside option of the target firm in (5). As our interest is in cross-border
M&A, we define the probability that a domestic firm with initial productivity a, and network cost parameter b, in country j is acquired by a foreign firm from country h at time t
as Yjht (a, b), such that
h
Yjht (a, b) = P r Zjh (a0 , b0 , a, b) − Qjh (a0 , b0 , a, b, ψ) − I − Vh (a0 ) >
i
Qjh (a0 , b0 , a, b, ψ) − Vj (aψ) | Mh , µ , (7)
where Mh is the mass of firms in country h, and µ is the probability that the target encounters a potential acquirer during time t.
Note that the surplus generated by a merger is strictly increasing in the productivity
of the acquiring firm and strictly decreasing in the ability of the acquirer to establish its
own export networks. Define Ajh (b0 , a, b) as the productivity parameter of a firm in country
h that it is indifferent between acquiring and not acquiring a target with any realized
productivity parameter a, specific export network costs b, in country j, given its own network
costs b0 . That is, suppressing its arguments for simplicity, Ajh satisfies
Z

m
l
[πis
jh (Ajh ) + π jh (Ajh )]d(i)
is
i

i

Nj (a,b)∪Nh (Ajh ,b0 )

Z

l
πij
(a)d(i) +

≡
i∈Nj (a,b)

Z
i∈Nh (Ajh

m
πij
(Ajh )d(i) + I

(8)

,b0 )

We can now derive the likelihood of acquisition for any target firm. Let MW be the mass
of firms worldwide, so that the probability that the acquirer that meets a domestic target
Mh
is from country h is given by M
. The proportion of firms in country h with productivity
W
such that there is a non-negative surplus is generated by acquisition of firm (a, b) in country
j, given their own network costs, b0 is given by Ga (Ajh (b0 , a, b)). Finally, aggregating across
the distribution of export network parameters of acquiring firms, the probability a target
firm with realized productivity a is acquired by a firm from country h is
Mh
Yjht (a, b) = µ
MW

ZbH

Ga (Ajh (b0 , a, b)) dGb (b0 ).

bL

12

(9)

Our analysis of cross-border M&A activity will focus on the properties of equation (9),
but we will first complete the characterization of equilibrium.12

4.2

Equilibrium Target Firm Valuation with Productivity Shocks

In the second stage, target firms face productivity shocks that affect the value of operating
independently, and thereby the likelihood of accepting an offer to be acquired by another
firm. Let Sjh (a0 , b0 , a, b, ψ) be the surplus retained by a target (a, b), which receives a shock
ψ, in country j, upon acquisition by a firm (a0 , b0 ) from country h;
Sjh (a0 , b0 , a, bψ) = [Zjh (a0 , b0 , a, b) − I − Vj (aψ) − Vh (a0 )] (1 − β) .
The value of a firm that continues to operate independently is given in equation (5). Then
any target firm, (a, b), facing the realization of future productivity shocks, and the probability µ of meeting a potential acquirer, exhibits a flow value of
Z (
Tj (a, b) =
Ψ

" ZbH
#
J
µX
0
0
Ga (Ajh ) Sjh (Ajh , b , aψ, b)dGb (b )
J
h=1

bL

"
+ (1 − µ) + 1 −

bH

J Z
Y
h=1b

#
0

)

Ga (Ajh ) dGb (b ) V (aψ, b) dF (ψ)

(10)

L

The first term inside the braces is the value retained upon the incidence of a merger for
the average potential acquirer, weighted by the likelihood of acquisition, while the second
term is the value of continuing to operate independently, weighted by the likelihood of not
being acquired, each evaluated for the realization of ψ. These values are then aggregated
across the potential realizations of ψ ∈ Ψ from the distribution F (ψ).13

4.3

Equilibrium Export Behavior

In stage one, firms select which markets to serve in anticipation of shocks to their productivity, and the likelihood of acquisition. With our assumption that fjj = 0, firms will always
operate domestically. However, since fij > 0, firms may not serve all potential destinations,
i ∈ [1, J]. A firm from country j with initial productivity parameter a, will choose to serve
country i if, given future productivity shocks and the likelihood of acquisition, the net benefits of exporting are non-negative. Note that for the ordered set of export destinations
Dj , if a firm in country j chooses to serve market k, then it also will export to all markets
this point forward we suppress the arguments of Ajh (b0 , a, b) for notational convenience.
that the productivity shocks, ln(1/ψ) are log-normally distributed, the distribution function F (ψ)
can readily be obtained using method of transformations.
12 From

13 Given

13

−1
−1
i ∈ Dj such that cj fij τij
≤ cj fkj τkj
. Thus, the export network of a firm Nj (a, b) is fully
characterized by the export destination that is the most costly for it to enter, which we
denote kj (a, b) = sup Nj (a, b). Optimal export decisions satisfy the following condition:

dTj (a, b)
= bcj fkj (a,b)j ,
dkj (a, b)

(11)

such that increasing the mass of export destinations of firm a to include destination kj (a)
equates the additional value earned by the target firm in (10) to the costs of entry into that
market.
One of our key goals is to highlight the role of target firm exporting behavior in promoting
cross-border M&A activity. Equation (11) is useful in that it illustrates the relationship
between target firm characteristics and their endogenous choice to establish export networks,
which affects their value on M&A markets. Firms with greater productivity earn higher
profits in each market that they serve. Thus, the first implication of the condition in (11) is
that firms with higher initial productivity within each country will export to more markets.
The greater propensity of high productivity firms to export is now widely recognized; see
for example Bernard and Jensen (1999). A key difference here is that firm may choose to
export to particular markets even if future productivity shocks would make them potentially
unprofitable to serve, given they they retain the option of selling their export networks to
high productivity acquirers.
Second, firms with lower export network costs, b, set up larger export networks. While
the role of firm-specific costs to set up networks is straightforward, it is important to note
here because it will be useful in identifying the impact of export networks on cross-border
M&A activity as target firm productivities change over time. Furthermore, Bernard et al.
(2003) provide evidence that, even after controlling for productivity, there is substantial
heterogeneity in export activity among plants. The heterogeneity in firm-specific costs to
access foreign markets is consistent with the observed differences export activity between
firms with similar productivity.
A third implication of equation (11) is that firms with the same level of productivity and
network setup costs, but from different countries, will establish different export networks
because they face a different set of fixed costs, factor costs, and transport costs from their
particular location. Thus, the location of country j can independently grant an advantage
in exporting to particular markets. For example, because of France’s proximity to other
European markets, French firms are likely to have an advantage relative to the U.S. in
exporting to, say, Germany. The advantage that firms within some countries possess in
establishing particular trade networks can make them attractive targets for cross-border
M&A, independent of firm-specific characteristics.

14

5

Analysis of Cross-Border M&A activity

Purchasing a firm with a large export network, due to either greater initial productivity,
lower setup costs, or locational advantages, allows a foreign acquirer to use the target’s
network as an export platform to countries that are otherwise unprofitable to serve. Several
studies have suggested that global patterns of FDI are consistent with multinationals locating in countries that serve as effective export platforms to proximate markets, but ignored
the role of cross-border M&A, and the endogenous creation of export networks by target
firms.14 Similarly, previous studies of cross-border M&A activity have ignored export platforms as a potential motive. The following proposition demonstrates that target firms may
appear to be “cherries” sought by multinationals on M&A markets specifically because of
their endogenous export behavior.
Proposition 1 Domestic firms that set up relatively large export networks are more likely
to be acquired by a foreign multinational firm.
Proof. Note that firms endowed with greater values of b set up smaller export networks,
all else equal. Then, the result is evident from the following:
dYjht (a, b)
Mh
=µ
db
MW

ZbH

ga (Ajh (a, b, b0 )) dGb (b0 )

dAjh (a, b, b0 )
<0
db

bL
dA

(a,b,b0 )

jh
where
< 0 is the reduction in the mass of potential acquirers that generate a
db
non-negative surplus by acquiring firms with higher network set up costs. A analagous result
is obtained by considering export behavior that is due to differences in the initial levels of
firm productivity.
The propensity of multinationals to acquire targets with highly valued export networks appears to contradict the conventional wisdom that acquirers seek under-performing
“lemons” as potential targets. Here we argue that the seemingly opposing incentives to
acquire high performing versus low performing targets are in reality differences in the effect
of productivity across the life cycles of firms. In our dynamic framework we can investigate
the impact of firm productivity changes, conditional on the initial investments in export
networks, on the likelihood of acquisition.

Proposition 2 Firms that realize a persistent negative shock to their productivity level,
after their export networks have been established, are more likely to be acquired relative to
other targets.
14 Examples of studies of export platform FDI and spatial FDI flows are Hanson et al. (2001), Yeaple
(2003), Lai and Zhu (2006), Blonigen et al. (2007) and Ekholm et al. (2007).

15

Proof. Recall that an increase in the productivity parameter a corresponds to a reduction
dY
(a,b)
> 0, where Nj (a, b) is the export
in firm productivity. The result states that jht
da
Nj (a,b)

network established conditional on its initial productivity, which we hold fixed. Calculating
from equation (9) directly we obtain
dYjht (a, b)
da

where

dAjh (a,b,b0 )
da

Nj (a,b)

Mh
=µ
MW

ZbH

ga (Ajh (a, b, b0 )) dGb (b0 )

dAjh (a, b, b0 )
da

>0
Nj (a,b)

bL

> 0 is the increase in the mass of potential acquirers that generate
Nj (a,b)

a non-negative surplus by acquiring firms that suffer negative productivity shocks, holding
their initial investments in export networks fixed.
Propositions 1 and 2 indicate which types of firms are the preferred targets for multinational firms engaging in cross-border M&A. Moreover, they predict when acquisitions
are relatively more likely to take place during the life cycles of target firms. We refer to
the behavior of acquirers seeking valuable assets, like export networks, and subsequently
choosing to engage in M&A activity after targets realize negative productivity shocks as
multinationals acquiring “cherries for sale.”
It is important to note that the incentives to acquire firms with large export networks
after they suffer negative productivity shocks does not imply that firms with large export
networks are relatively more likely to be acquired upon a loss in productivity; that is, a
negative productivity shock does not magnify the propensity to acquire firms that export
to many destinations. In the appendix we show that the joint effects of export activity and
d2 Yjht (a,b)
holding initial
productivity changes on the likelihood of acquisition activity, i.e.,
dadb
investments in export activity constant, can generally be positive or negative. Although
firms with both a large export network and negative productivity shock look relatively
more desirable, there may also be relatively fewer potential acquirers who are profitable
enough to make a success takeover bid of a firms that had high enough productivity to set
up large export networks in the first place.15
Thus far we have emphasized the endogenous export behavior of heterogeneous firms
in motivating cross-border M&A. The value of targets’ export networks can also vary as
exogenous geographical differences give rise to variation in trade costs across countries. The
ability to serve markets from locations that result in lower trade costs also provides a motive
for multinationals to engage in cross-border M&A, and use the target firm’s network as an
15 In fact, we show in the appendix that if the distribution of firm productivities is Pareto (which has been
shown to be a good fit of firm size/productivity distributions in many countries), and the match probability
between acquirers and targets is low such that there is a relatively low volume of M&A activity in any time
d2 Y

(a,b)

jht
period (which we also observe in the data), then the sign of
is more likely to be positive, holding
dadb
initial investments in export activity constant. The appendix also shows additional specifications from the
empirical analysis that confirm the positive cross-partial effect.

16

export platform to proximate markets.
Proposition 3 Domestic targets are relatively more likely to be acquired by foreign multinationals from locations that exhibit higher variable trade costs across destinations, in terms
of stochastic dominance, than the domestic country.
Proof. See Appendix
All together, these results suggest distinct empirical strategies that examine target firm
characteristics across time, and across the locations of potential acquirers, to identify the
roles of export networks and productivity shocks in promoting cross-border M&A activity.

6

Empirical Strategy

In this section we use the theory above to derive our empirical strategy for detecting the
impacts of export networks and productivity shocks on the likelihood of foreign acquisition
of domestic firms. The outcome variable of interest is the probability that a domestic firm
d in sector s is acquired by a foreign firm from location h at time t, conditional on its
initial productivity ad,t−2 , current productivity, ad,t−1 , and its specific costs to setup export
networks, bd , which we write Ydsht ≡ P r(Acquisitiondt |ad,t−1 , ad,t−2 , bd ). Note that, given
the annual frequency of observation, we indicate current firm-level characteristics as those
observed in time period t − 1, for a firm observed to be under new foreign ownership during
time period t.16 We specify the conditional probability as having a logistical distribution
Ydsht = Λ(zdsht ) + ξdsht ≡

exp(zdsht )
+ ξdsht
1 − exp(zdsht )

(12)

where we index the response probability to firm characteristics (ad,t−2 , ad,t−1 , bd ), and other
control variables Xdsht , as
zdsht = β0 − β1 ln(ad,t−2 ) − β2 ln(ad,t−1 ) + β3 bd + Xdsht β .
Noting that − ln(ad,t ) is simply the observed ln T F Pd,t for firm d at time t, given its productivity parameter a, we can rewrite the index function above as
zdsht = β0 + β1 ln T F Pd,t−2 + β2 ln T F Pd,t−1 + β3 bd + Xdsht β .

(13)

The firm-specific costs to enter foreign markets, bd , are not observed. It may also be that
the case that the initial level of productivity for firm d corresponds to a time period before
the sample period begins. If the initial draws of productivity and export setup costs for each
16 Specifying the timing in this way avoids erroneously attributing firm characteristics that belong to an
acquirer to be those of the target firm at any given time.

17

firm are not independent, then obtaining unbiased estimates of the impact of prior levels of
firm-level productivity in the model described by equations (12) and (13) is difficult, due
to the well-known initial conditions problem. Arellano and Carrasco (2003), Wooldridge
(2005), and Honore and Tamer (2006) discuss specifically the initial conditions problem in
non-linear unobserved effects models, such as the logit specification in (12).17 The concern
over the role of unobserved firm-specific costs to enter foreign markets is exacerbated by the
evidence in Roberts and Tybout (1997) that there is significant variation in these sunk costs
across plants, and that sunk costs explain a large amount of variation in observed export
activity.
Even though the firm-specific parameters, bd , are not observed, the theory above predicts that initial firm-level productivity and the firm-specific costs to enter markets impact
the likelihood of acquisition through a target firm’s choice to establish export networks.
Specifically, the (log) number of export destinations, ln ExpN etdt−2 , established previously
by targets can be written in reduced form as
ln ExpN etdt−2 = γ0 + γ1 ln T F Pdt−2 + γ2 bd

(14)

with γ1 > 0, as more productive firms export to a greater number of destinations, and
γ2 < 0, as large setup costs deter target firms from exporting to foreign markets.18 From
an empirical point of view equation (14) is useful in that is provides an observable firm
characteristic, export networks, that explicitly accounts for the conditional distribution of
initial productivity and unobserved costs to enter each market for each firm. Then, solving
(14) for bd , and substituting into the index function in (13), we obtain

zdsht =


 

β3 γ0
β3 γ1
+ β1 −
ln T F Pd,t−2 + β2 ln T F Pd,t−1
β0 −
γ2
γ2
β3
ln ExpN etdt−2 + Xdsht β .
+
γ2

(15)

It is also useful to note that firm-level productivities (in logs) evolve through time as a
17 Note that we have no reason to expect that the initial draws of firm attributes are mutually dependent.
If they are independent, then a fixed effects logit specification can be used to obtain consistent parameter
estimates. Our goal here is to show that we can obtain consistent estimated assuming less restrictive moment
conditions.
18 Consistent with the predictions of the model, there is robust evidence that high productivity firms are
more engaged in export activity and that sunk costs are significant in explaining variation in export activity
across firms and time; See Bernard and Jensen (1999), Bernard et al. (2003) and Roberts and Tybout (1997).
Equation (14) can generally be specified dynamically, so that it includes measures of previous levels of firm
productivity. We will report the results of specifications that account for this possibility, and show that our
results remain robust.

18

random walk.19 Thus we can write
ln T F Pdt−1 = ln T F Pdt−2 + ln(1/ψ)dt−1

(16)

where ∆ ln T F Pd,t−1 ≡ ln(1/ψ)dt−1 is the firm-level shock to a target’s productivity level,
after it has invested in creating valuable assets such as export networks. Finally, we can
substitute the relationship in equation (16), into the response probability in (15), and simplifying notation for parameters (β and γ) we obtain
zdsht = θ0 + θ1 ExpN etd,t−2 + θ2 ∆ ln T F Pd,t−1 + θ3 ln T F Pd,t−1 + Xsdht Θ .

(17)

Together the logit model in (12), and the derived index function in (17), characterize our
empirical strategy. The theory above predicts that previous investments in export networks,
measured as ExpN etd,t−2 , promote cross-border M&A activity. Thus the predicted sign of
θ1 is positive. Proposition 3 makes further predictions about the effect of export networks
across sub-samples of acquiring countries. While locational differences and trade costs make
export networks of domestic targets valuable to foreign acquirers, potential acquirers from
the domestic country will already export to a similar set of markets. Redundancy in the
export networks of domestic targets should make them relatively less valuable to domestic
acquirers. To evaluate this prediction we estimate a multinomial logit model for the likelihood of foreign versus domestic acquisition, relative to the excluded group of firms that are
not acquired. Proposition 3 predicts that in the multinomial logit regression, θ1 is positive
for foreign acquirers and equal to zero for domestic acquirer. To further evaluate the role
of export networks across the locations of acquirers, we estimate the logit model separately
for the sub-sample of acquisition from nearby countries (European nations) and the subsample of acquisitions from far-away countries (Non-European nations). The prediction is
that non-European countries will value the export networks established by French targets
more that acquirers from nearby countries; i.e., the prediction is θ1EU R > θ1N on−EU R .
Investments in export networks cause domestic firms to appear as high value cherries
to foreign acquirers, making them more likely targets for takeover. Our model also makes
predictions as to when target firms that invest in export capacity are more likely to be
acquired. Proposition 2 predicts that reductions in firm-level productivity after investments
in establishing export networks, ∆ ln T F Pd,t−1 , increase the likelihood of acquisition. A
negative sign for θ2 indicates propensity to seek targets who are currently “for sale” on
domestic M&A markets. The dynamic specification of our empirical model, derived from
the theory above, allows us to simultaneously estimate the impact of previous investments
19 Our sample confirms that firm productivity evolves according to a random walk. The coefficient of a
regression of the contemporaneous TFP on lagged TFP is 1.01. In accordance with the assumptions of the
model we also find that log TFP evolves according to a random walk, with a coefficient of 0.98 when we
regress lnTFP on it lagged value.

19

in valuable assets such as export networks and the impact of reductions in firm productivity
over time. Estimates such that θ1 > 0 and θ2 < 0 indicate that cross-border M&A activity
is characterized by multinationals seeking “cherries for sale.”
Our theory makes no prediction about how the current level of TFP of a target firm impacts the likelihood of acquisition, after we condition on previous productivity shocks and
established export networks of a target firm; with productivities evolving according to a random walk, the shock to firm productivity, ∆ ln T F Pd,t−1 , is sufficient to characterize how
the outside option of producing independently with its own productivity level, ln T F Pd,t−1 ,
has changed for each target firm. Yet, our model only considers the ex ante role of firm
productivity in promoting investments in assets such as export networks. Guadalupe et
al. (forthcoming) show that the current TFP level of a domestic target firm is positively
associated with the likelihood of foreign acquisition, because of ex post investments in technologies made by the acquirer. They argue that these investments are complementary to
the current productivity of a target firm. In line with their findings we expect to find that
θ3 > 0.
The vector Xdsht contains several additional control variables that might promote crossborder M&A activity independently. Heyman et al. (2007) show that foreign acquirers seek
targets with relatively high skill workers, suggesting that integration of the acquiring firm
technology may be a skill-bias activity. We include controls for the skill intensity of the
workforce of target firms, and accordingly expect that a more skill intensive workforce will
increase the likelihood of foreign takeover. Firms may possess other intangible assets that
make them attractive as targets as well. For example, Blonigen and Taylor (2000) argue that
firms can use M&A to substitute for costly research and development. Lee (2011) argues that
cross-border M&A is motivated by firms seeking specific technologies, and Nocke and Yeaple
(2008) highlight the incentives for takeover of firms which possess strong market potential.
We include a set of intangible assets, such as R&D expenditure and goodwill, to account for
these distinct motivations for foreign acquisition. Finally, Desai et al. (2004) demonstrate
that multinational firms have access to internal credit markets across countries that may
alleviate financial conditions among affiliate firms. This presence of credit constraints among
target firms which could independently motivate acquisition by a multinational firm. We
include a measure of credit constraints faced by French firms, Payment Incidents, to account
for this alternative incentive to engage in cross-border M&A.
We also include a time specific effects, τt , which capture aggregate macroeconomic conditions of the economy that may affect M&A activity. For example, the timing of acquisitions
typically ebbs and flows in merger waves, even if motivated by economic fundamentals; see
Harford (2005). We also include sector-specific effects for each 4-digit sector level. A sector
fixed effects strategy accounts for fixed differences in cross-border M&A activity, as well as
fixed differences in export activity within the host country across sectors.

20

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Obs.

Mean

Std.Dev.

Whole Sample
Foreign Affiliate [1/0]
ln(Export Network)t−2
∆ ln(TFP)t−1
∆ ln(TFP)t−2
ln(TFP)t−1
Share of Intangiblet−1
Skill Intensityt−1
Payment Incidentst−1
Ile de France

32883
32883
32883
25363
32883
32883
32883
32883
32883

0.092
1.798
0.030
0.037
3.940
0.109
0.306
0.029
0.196

0.289
1.224
0.231
0.230
1.042
0.160
0.190
1.073
0.394

Obs.

Mean

Std.Dev.

Acquired Foreign Affiliates
2728
2728
2728
2213
2728
2632
2679
2728
2728

0.470
2.338
0.040
0.049
4.508
0.136
0.369
0.245
0.250

0.499
1.117
0.236
0.246
1.099
0.193
0.207
3.182
0.433

Although the lagged values of export networks will account for firm specific costs to
enter foreign markets, including firm-specific effects still may be useful. We have specified
the evolution of firm-level productivity as a random walk, where each firm realizes shocks
drawn from the same distribution. In practice, firms may draw productivity shocks from
distributions with different amounts of drift, leading to differences in the propensity of firms
to accept similar takeover bids, independent of their specific attributes a and b. Thus we
will also report estimates from specifications that include firm-fixed effects.20

7

Data

While section 2 above described some of the primary data we have and how we construct
our measures of TFP and export networks, we next describe the additional data that we
employ in our econometric analysis. These additional data provide the important control
variables (mentioned above) that may also affect cross-border M&A activity and which we
want to include in order to avoid spurious inferences.
Data regarding workers and occupations come from the “DADS Panel”–Declaration Annuelle de Données Sociales, an employer-employee dataset collected by the INSEE (Institut
National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques).21 The DADS report mandatory information on all declared employees including the number of yearly hours worked, wages and
20 Note that when firm-level fixed are included the sector-specific fixed effect is dropped due to the low
number of acquisitions in each of the highly disaggregated sectors included in the sample. Without firmlevel fixed effects, the appropriate counter-factual is the observed export networks and changes in TFP for
acquired firms, relative to non-acquired firms. In specifications that include firm fixed effects we exclude
non-acquired firms and examine differences target firm characteristics before and after the time of acquisition.
21 This data is a yearly notification of social data filled by any firm with employees. Information on age,
gender, experience, occupation, sector, region, firm identifier, plant size, compensation.

21

occupation. The French classification of occupations identifies skilled and unskilled workers. Skill groups correspond to the 2-digit French Classification of Occupations and Social
Categories. We divide these categories into two groups: skilled non-production workers (executives, technicians, administrative occupations, clerks) and production workers. We compute the skill intensity at firm-level as the share of hours worked by skilled non-production
workers in the total number of hours worked. Information on the value of intangible and
tangible assets are taken from the BRN (Bénéfice Réel Normal - ordinary actual profit), a
mandatory tax form for any firm with revenue larger than 763,000 euros in manufacturing.
The share of intangible assets is simply the ratio of intangible assets to total assets.
We identify financially constrained firms by exploiting a database derived from regulatory
constraints in the French banking system. Since 1992, banks are legally obligated to report
any incident of a firm failing to pay its creditors within four business days. These defaults
on credits are called Payment Incidents. Banks use this information to adapt their supply
of credit to firms, so that observed payment incidents inform about the potential credit
constraints faced by French target firms.22 The Banque de France collects this information
and makes 12-month histories available freely to all commercial banks and other credit
institutions. We make use of the historical series, and compute the total value of incidents,
within a year, for each firm since 2000. The matching with our data is permitted by the use of
a common administrative ID for the firm. A full description of the sample construction from
the various sources of data is provided in the Appendix. Table 1 provides simple summary
statistics for each variable used in estimation for the sample of all foreign affiliates, as well
as the sample of targets which we observed being newly acquired by foreign multinationals.
Table 1 provides summary statistics for our variables in the econometric analysis. We
will employ two samples. The first is a sample that is composed of domestic firms that
have become foreign owned during the sample period, as well as French firms that did not
change their ownership over 1999-2006. We accordingly drop all observations for (i) firms
acquired by French firms after becoming foreign owned, (ii) independent firms acquired by
French groups, (iii) firms that have always been foreign owned from 1999-2006, and (iv)
French groups acquired by French groups. The corresponding sample is composed of 32,883
observations. Descriptive statistics for our variables with this sample are in the left columns
of Table 1. When we introduce fixed effects in a logit estimation, we are then down to a
sample of only those French firms that were acquired by a foreign firms at some point in
our sample. This reduces our sample size to 2,728 observations and descriptive statistics for
this sample are reported in the right columns of Table 1.23
22 There are several reasons we would observe payment incidents, ranging from a material error to an
actual default of payment. We select cases corresponding to insufficient liquidity of the debtor and drop
cases related to material error or contested claims. These data have been used in several previous studies
to identify financial constraints among firms. See for example Aghion et al. (forthcoming) and Bricongne et
al. (forthcoming).
23 In the appendix, we show comparisons of TFP levels, employment and trade volumes between foreign-

22

Table 2: Results: Logistic Estimation with Sector Fixed Effects
(1)
ln(ExportNetwork)t−2
∆ ln(TFP)t−1
ln(TFP)t−1

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.018***
(0.005)
0.039***
(0.003)

0.011***
(0.002)
-0.014***
(0.005)
0.032***
(0.003)

0.008***
(0.002)
-0.014***
(0.005)
0.033***
(0.003)
0.025*
(0.013)
0.107***
(0.015)
0.003*
(0.002)
-0.017***
(0.006)

0.008***
(0.003)
-0.013*
(0.007)
0.037***
(0.003)
0.032*
(0.016)
0.118***
(0.018)
0.006
(0.005)
-0.017**
(0.008)
-0.004
(0.006)
yes
yes
25,063
0.175

0.028***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.005)

Share of Intangiblet−1
Share of Skillt−1
Payment Incidentst−1
Ile de France
∆ ln(TFP)t−2
Sector FE
yes
yes
yes
yes
Year Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
Observations
32,883
32,883
32,883
32,883
Pseudo R2
0.133
0.104
0.158
0.162
Robust standard errors clustered at firm-level in parentheses.
***, **, * significantly different from 0 at 1%, 5% and 10% level.

8

yes
yes
32,883
0.175

Results

The section is divided into five parts corresponding to our different empirical strategies: (i)
we focus on the export networks and productivity changes at acquired targets relative to
firms that are never acquired; (ii) we incorporate firm-level fixed effects into the empirical
model and compare the export networks and productivity shocks before and after acquisition
among the set of target firms; (ii) we reconsider alternative specifications of export networks
that also account for the number of products exported by each target; (iv) we compare firm
characteristics across those that are targets for domestic versus multinational acquirers; and
(v) we provide evidence that the role of export networks varies across the acquiring firm’s
country of origin, as predicted by the model.

8.1

Evidence comparing Targets to Non-Acquired Firms

The estimation results from the sector fixed effects logistic regression are given in Table
3. The reported values correspond to the marginal effects evaluated at sample means. All
owned and domestic firms. In line with previous studies foreign-owned firms (unconditionally) exhibit higher
productivity, employ more workers, pay higher wages, and trade more than their domestic counterparts.

23

Table 3: Results: Logistic Estimation with Sector Fixed Effects
(1)
ln(ExportNetwork)t−2
∆ ln(TFP)t−1
ln(TFP)t−1

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.018***
(0.005)
0.039***
(0.003)

0.011***
(0.002)
-0.014***
(0.005)
0.032***
(0.003)

0.008***
(0.002)
-0.014***
(0.005)
0.033***
(0.003)
0.025*
(0.013)
0.107***
(0.015)
0.003*
(0.002)
-0.017***
(0.006)

0.008***
(0.003)
-0.013*
(0.007)
0.037***
(0.003)
0.032*
(0.016)
0.118***
(0.018)
0.006
(0.005)
-0.017**
(0.008)
-0.004
(0.006)
yes
yes
25,063
0.175

0.028***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.005)

Share of Intangiblet−1
Share of Skillt−1
Payment Incidentst−1
Ile de France
∆ ln(TFP)t−2
Sector FE
yes
yes
yes
yes
Year Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
Observations
32,883
32,883
32,883
32,883
Pseudo R2
0.133
0.104
0.158
0.162
Robust standard errors clustered at firm-level in parentheses.
***, **, * significantly different from 0 at 1%, 5% and 10% level.

yes
yes
32,883
0.175

specifications include 4-digit sector fixed effects and year effects.
Looking across each specification in Table 4 we find strong evidence that previously
established export networks provide significant motivation for cross-border M&A activity.
In column (1) we include only the export characteristics of a firm, defined as the number
of countries to which a firm exports. In columns (4)-(6), we introduce other firm level
characteristics that may independently motivate foreign acquisition. Even after controlling
for these other firm-level characteristics the established trade networks have a significant
impact on the likelihood of acquisition.
The effect of the export characteristics of target firms is quantitatively significant as well.
Based on the preferred estimates from columns (5) and (6) that include full sets of controls,
a standard deviation increase in a firm’s export network (about a 66% increase) raises its
likelihood of being acquired by 0.54 percentage points. With an average probability of foreign
acquisition of 1.5% in each year, an export network that is a standard deviation above the
mean implies approximately a roughly a 33% greater likelihood in the probability of foreign
acquisition. In other words, the pseudo-elasticity between changes in export networks and
the likelihood of acquisition is near 0.5. Another way to consider the quantitative impact

24

of export networks is to note that the average number of markets served among French
firms is approximately 12. Thus, exporting to even a single additional market is roughly
equivalent to a 10% larger export network, corresponding to a 5% increase in the likelihood
of acquisition.
It is worth noting that the positive effect of export networks is maintained even when
we introduce measures of firm TFP levels. The well-known stylized fact is that highproductivity firms invest in exporting capacity more than those with lower productivity,
as they are better able to cover fixed exporting costs.24 However, the fact that we find a
positive and robust impact of previous exporting behavior after controlling for TFP levels
is consistent with our assertion in the theory above that investments in export capacity
are, at least in part, sunk costs. Targets are more attractive for having established export
networks, even after controlling for differences in their ability to do so in the future.
The second hypothesis from the model is that negative productivity shocks increase
the surplus generated by a merger, further motivating cross-border M&A. In column (2)
we include only the measured change in productivity experienced in the previous year. As
expected, without controlling for potentially valuable assets held by the target, productivity
shocks have no estimated impact on the likelihood of foreign acquisition. Proposition 2 states
that negative shocks promote cross-border M&A when other firm characteristics are held
fixed. Once we account for other firm-level characteristics we obtain a strong and robust
negative impact of productivity shocks on the probability of being acquired by a foreign
multinational.
The negative coefficient on the lagged changes in productivity in columns (4)-(6) suggest
that a productivity shock that is 10% above average corresponds to 0.13 percentage point
increase, or equivalently about a 8.6% increase, in the probability of foreign acquisition.
We observe large differences in productivity shocks across firms in our sample; See Table
(1). Thus, the estimated pseudo-elasticity of 0.86 suggests substantial differences in the
likelihood of foreign acquisition for firms that receive various shocks to their productivity
in each year.
One may be concerned that additional lags in productivity, or more specifically previous
shocks to firm-level TFP, may also promote takeover in the current period. Our empirical
model described in equations (12) and (17) can easily be generalized to accommodate further lags in firm characteristics. With productivity evolving according to a random walk,
this is equivalent to including additional lagged values of TFP shocks. In column (6) we
introduce an additional measure of previous shocks, ∆ ln T F Pt−2 , and find that it has no
effect. Predetermined export activity and the latest shock to target-firm productivity appear to be sufficient in describing the dynamics of target firms that promote cross-border
M&A activity.25
24 See
25 In

for example Bernard and Jensen (1999).
the theory we have assumed that all shocks to firm productivity are persistent. Indeed our sample

25

All of the estimated effects of other firm-level characteristics are in line with previous
findings. Firms with a relatively more skill-intensive workforce are more likely to be acquired, as are those with a substantial share of intangible assets. The positive coefficient
on TFP levels is consistent with the previous evidence from many other countries, including Chile, Indonesia, the U.S., and Spain. The regression results which account other firm
characteristics confirm the patterns illustrated in Figure 1. None of the regression results
in Table 3, or in subsequent specifications, are affected by the inclusion of additional firmlevel controls. For the sake of brevity we suppress the coefficient estimates on the firm-level
control variables from this point forward. Full tables are available in the Appendix.

8.2

Evidence looking within Acquired Targets

In this section, we incorporate firm-level fixed effects to estimate the impact of target firm
characteristics on the probability of switching from French to foreign ownership status.
There are two reasons that we wish to estimate (12) with firm-level fixed effects. First, one
may be concerned that the positive effect reported in the previous section for established
export networks is actually due to the formation of other unobserved assets that are correlated with investments in export activity. Incorporating firm fixed effects accounts for
any independent, but unobserved, M&A determinants that are specific to the firm and time
invariant. Second, looking within acquired firms we are able to identify the distinct effects of
export networks and productivity shocks, consistent with acquisition activity where multinationals seek cherries for sale. It is possible that the previous results from the sector-fixed
effects specification are due to two distinct groups of acquired firms: those with negative
productivity shocks and those with large export networks.26 The sample reduces to 512 acquired targets and 2,728 observations over the sample period. Again, the treatment group
in the sample is the set of firms acquired by foreign multinationals, but the control group
for this empirical strategy is composed of French firms before the year of acquisition.
Table 4 provides additional support for the positive impact of previously established
export networks, and the effects of negative productivity shocks, in promoting cross-border
M&A activity. The inclusion of firm-level fixed effects precludes calculations of marginal
effects, but looking within acquired targets the coefficient on the number of previously
established export destinations continues to be positive an significant, consistent with the
positive marginal effect reported in Table 3.27 In Table 4 we also continue to find that
of French firms provides strong evidence that productivity evolves according to a random walk. However,
it may be possible that some shocks are only temporary. We have estimated each specification in Table 2,
where shocks that are relatively small (less than a half of a standard deviation) are normalized to zero, as
these small shock may be more likely to be viewed as temporary by potential acquirers. We find identical
quantitative results when only large shocks are considered.
26 Of course Figure 1 allays such concerns, since the entire distribution of acquired targets, from the 5th95th percentile in productivity, suffer losses prior to acquisition, in addition to having a larger than average
export network.
27 In Table 4 we continue to report estimates from specifications that use export networks observed two

26

Table 4: Results: Logistic Estimation with Firm Fixed Effects
(1)
ln(Export Network)it−2
∆ ln(TFP)it−1

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.581***
(0.193)

1.080***
(0.193)
-0.526***
(0.195)

0.936***
(0.230)
-2.145***
(0.328)

0.732***
(0.267)
-3.488***
(0.684)
-2.288***
(0.503)
yes
yes
yes
1,587
0.201
352

1.097***
(0.193)

∆ ln(TFP)it−2

Firm Controls
no
no
no
yes
Firm FE
yes
yes
yes
yes
Year Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
Observations
2,728
2,728
2,728
2,601
Pseudo R2
0.029
0.006
0.033
0.218
No. of Switchers
512
512
512
498
Robust standard errors clustered at firm-level in parentheses.
***, **, * significantly different from 0 at 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.

negative productivity shocks encourage takeover. Now that we examine productivity changes
within individual acquired firms, we find that that further lags in changes to TFP may also
contribute to the probability of acquisition by foreign firms (see column (6)), however with
firm-level fixed effects we cannot discern whether the additional lag a significant marginal
impact on the likelihood of acquisition.28

8.3

Alternative Specifications of Export Networks

Table 5 provides evidence that export networks, defined as product-destination pairs, promote foreign acquisition. Columns (1)-(2) report estimated marginal effects from specifications that include 4-digit sector fixed effects. Columns (3)-(4) report the coefficient estimates
from specifications that include firm-level fixed effects. In columns (5)-(6) we decompose
the product-destination pairs and include the number of countries that a target exports to,
and the number of products exported, independently. The estimates in columns (1)-(4),
which define export network as the number of country-product pairs, are consistent with
the predicted cherry effects of export behavior on the likelihood of foreign acquisition: larger
export networks promote foreign acquisition. However, in columns (5) and (6) we find that
the number of countries to which a target exports is the key feature of its export behavior
years prior to acquisition, as in Table 3. However we find nearly identical results if we use earlier observations
(t − 3 or t − 4) from each acquired target. Recall that Figure 1 shows that the export networks among target
firms grow following acquisition, and Guadalupe et al. (forthcoming) find that foreign multinationals make
significant investments in export capacity following takeover of Spanish firms. Note that this formation of
new nodes on the export network of acquired firms only works against finding a positive effect of previous
export behavior on the likelihood of foreign acquisition.
28 In column (6) the number of observations drops due to the introduction of additional lagged variables.

27

Table 5: Results from Alternative Specifications of Export Networks
(5)

(6)

ln(Export
Network)C
it−2

0.011***
(0.004)

0.834***
(0.292)

ln(Export
Network)P
it−2

-0.004
(0.004)

-0.225
(0.209)

-0.014**
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.006)

-3.501***
(0.683)
-2.321***
(0.502)

ln(Export
Network)CP
it−2

∆ ln(TFP)it−1
∆ ln(TFP)it−2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.004**
(0.002)

0.004*
(0.002)

0.619***
(0.166)

0.362*
(0.198)

-0.014***
(0.005)

-0.014**
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.006)

-2.154***
(0.326)

-3.545***
(0.675)
-2.336***
(0.493)

Firm Controls
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Sector FE
yes
yes
no
no
yes
Firm FE
no
no
yes
yes
no
Year Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Observations
32,883
25,063
2,601
1,587
25,063
Pseudo R2
0.174
0.174
0.213
0.194
0.175
No. of Switchers
.
.
498
352
.
Robust standard errors clustered at firm-level in parentheses.
***, **, * significantly different from 0 at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.

28

yes
no
yes
yes
1,587
0.200
352

that attracts foreign acquirers. After controlling for the number destination markets, the
number of products exported by a target has no significant impact on the likelihood of acquisition. Consistent with the model above, investments made in the ability to serve foreign
markets attracts multinational acquirers.
The regression models estimated in Table 5 generate similar goodness-of-fit regardless of
how the export networks are specified; note that the pseudo-R2 is nearly the same across
definitions of export networks in Tables 3 and 4. As a basis of comparison note that the
specification in column (2) of Table 5 is equivalent to the specification in column (6) of Table
3 for the corresponding definitions of export networks. The marginal effect of a larger export
network defined as product-destination pair is nearly half the estimated effect of an increase
in the number of foreign markets served; i.e., the elasticity with respect to the the number
of product-destination pairs is approximately 0.4 versus an elasticity of the probability of
foreign acquisition with respect to the number of export destinations estimated to be 0.8.
The fact that both the statistical and economic impacts of the number of products exported
are small further confirms that the number of countries to which a firm exports is the key
aspect of its export behavior on the M&A market. From this point forward we will continue
to define a target’s export network according the number of export destinations.
So far we have presented evidence that the number of countries to which a target firm
exports will positively affect its likelihood of acquisition by a foreign multinational. Bernard
et al. (2011) argue that firms may make different export decisions for different products in
their portfolio if there are product specific costs to establish export networks. The theory
above also predicts that the additional of product line manufactured by target firms may
contribute to the surplus generated by a merger, and hence alter the likelihood of foreign
acquisition. In this section we examine the cherry effect of established export networks on
cross-border M&A activity, looking across the number of export destinations, number of
products exported, and number of product-destination pairs.

8.4

Export Networks and Geographical Differences

In the previous two sections considered how the export behavior of target firms, and changes
to their productivity, influence cross-border M&A behavior. Thus far we have not distinguished the export decisions that are due to endogenous investments by heterogeneous firms
from the export decisions that are due to exogenous geographical advantages. Proposition
3 suggests that the proximity of domestic targets to nearby markets motivates cross-border
M&A from countries that face different trade costs. In this section we take two different
approaches to investigate how the cherry effect of export networks varies across geographical
locations. First, all domestic firms face the same costs associated with serving any foreign
market. Thus, the export behavior of any target firm should not attract domestic acquirers,
whose similar investments in export capacity make the target’s network redundant. Second,

29

Table 6: Foreign versus Domestic Acquisition: Multinomial Logit Results

ln(Export Network)it−2
∆ ln(TFP)it−1
ln(TFP)it−1
Share of Intangibleit−1
Share of Skillit−1
Payment Incidentsit−1
Ile de France

Domestic

Foreign

0.003
(1.269)
-0.016*
(-1.907)
0.026***
(8.850)
0.070***
(4.861)
0.064***
(4.426)
0.001***
(4.100)
-0.024***
(-3.972)
yes
yes

0.004***
(4.483)
-0.009**
(-2.225)
0.012***
(12.064)
0.007
(1.265)
0.044***
(8.128)
-0.000
(-1.554)
-0.007***
(-2.769)
yes
yes

Sector FE
Year Effects
Observations
36,962
Pseudo R2
0.038
Excluded group includes firms that are never acquired.
Robust standard errors clustered at firm-level in parentheses.
***, **, * significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.

countries that are far away from the domestic country are likely to face higher trade costs
associated with serving markets proximate to the domestic country. Therefore, investments
in export networks by domestic (French) targets should be more attractive to acquirers that
are far away (non-European) from the domestic country.

8.5

Domestic versus Foreign Acquisitions

In Table 6 we use a multinomial logit regression to estimate the role of trade networks in
promoting foreign versus domestic acquisition, relative to the likelihood of not being acquired
(i.e., the excluded group). We include a full set of firm-level controls with sector and year
effects.29 The results indicate that foreign multinationals acquire domestic targets that
have large export networks and suffered recent negative productivity shocks. As we found
earlier in Tables 2 and 3, the acquisition behavior of foreign multinationals multinationals
is consistent with them looking for cherries on sale.
In contrast to foreign acquirers, domestic acquirers do not seek targets with large export
networks. Instead of export networks, domestic acquirers seek targets with large intangible
29 Within each year and 4-digit sector there is a small number of acquisitions observed, and even fewer observations of either domestic or foreign acquisitions. Given the small number of observations we incorporate
2-digit sector fixed effects, rather that 4-digit, when estimating the multinomial logit regression in Table 6.

30

assets, such as R&D expenditure, goodwill in the market place, or targets facing tough
financial conditions, as indicated by the positive coefficient on the payment incidents variable for domestic acquisitions in Table 6. We also find that negative productivity shocks
increase the likelihood of takeover by both foreign and domestic acquirers, when we control
for assets other than export networks. The propensity of domestic acquirers to acquire
financially troubled and underperforming ‘lemons’ also matches previous evidence from US
manufacturing in Lichtenberg and Siegel (1987). Note further that intangible assets have no
impact on the likelihood of foreign acquisition; the point estimate is an order of magnitude
smaller for foreign firms as well as being indistinguishable from zero. Multinationals seek
export capacity in the targets they acquire, consistent with notion that their locations put
them at a disadvantage relative to domestic firms in serving proximate foreign markets.30
8.5.1

Differences across Acquirer Origins

The model above makes predictions about cross-border M&A activity in a multi-country
world. Given the differences in the costs of creating export networks across locations, the
surplus generated from acquisition by a foreign multinational is much larger when it faces
substantially different trade costs. Multinationals that originate in countries far from the
domestic market should value locally established export networks relatively more. In this
section, we investigate whether the impact of established export networks is smaller for
multinationals that originate from (near) European countries than for those that originate
from (far away) non-European countries.31 Table 7 reports estimates obtained from sector
fixed-effect logit regressions with the sample split by countries of origin.32 In each specification we include the full set of firm-level controls.
The pattern of cross-border M&A activity originating from European nations appears
much different than activity originating in non-European nations. Consistent with nearby
countries facing similar costs to set up preferred export networks as French firms, we only
weak evidence that export networks motivate cross-border M&A activity among European
acquirers. The marginal effect is estimated with a low degree of precision. On the other
hand, we find significant evidence that export networks motivate cross-border M&A activity from non-European countries. See column (2). The evidence in Table 7 is consistent
with prediction in Proposition 3, suggesting that there are significant differences in role of
30 Nocke and Yeaple (2008) argue that the market potential of a target firm is an asset particular to
its domestic market. While here we find that the locational advantage of domestic targets is tied to the
potential to serve other foreign markets.
31 There are 16 European members in the sample to which we add Liechtenstein, Monaco and the Netherlands and United Kingdom Possessions. (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom).
The group of non-European members is composed by Australia Canada, India, Israel, Japan, Lebanon,
Singapore, South Korea, Switzerland, Taiwan, Tunisia, USA, and Venezuela.
32 Note that it is not possible to make comparisons across samples using firm-level fixed effects because
comparable marginal effects cannot be calculated.

31

Table 7: European versus Non-European Acquiring firms
(1)
European

(2)
Non-European

ln(Export Network)it−2

0.003*
(0.002)

0.004***
(0.001)

∆ ln(TFP)it−1

-0.008**
(0.004)

-0.005*
(0.003)

Firm Controls
yes
yes
Sector FE
yes
yes
Year Effects
yes
yes
Observations
30,870
24,779
Pseudo R2
0.165
0.201
Robust standard errors clustered at firm-level in parentheses.
***, **, * significantly different from 0 at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.

exporting behavior by target firms in motivating cross-border M&A across the location of
acquiring firms.

9

Conclusion

Cross-border mergers and acquisition constitute the primary mode of foreign direct investment. Understanding the motives to acquire affiliates in foreign countries, and understanding the effects of this substantial global economic activity, requires knowing what types of
domestic targets multinationals seek to acquire. Here we have argued for two seemingly
opposing incentives simultaneously motivate global M&A activity.
In a multi-country world with differences in trade costs across locations, the formation
of export networks endogenously creates (trade) cost synergies between firms from different
locations. Firms with high initial levels of productivity are better able to establish costly
export networks, generating larger surpluses from acquiring a target that was initially more
productive. In other words, there are strong incentives for multinational firms to seek out
targets that appear to be cherries in the domestic market. The incentives are even stronger
for potential acquirers originating from locations far from the domestic market.
Firm productivities are constantly changing over time. When the performance of a
domestic firm suffers, there is a greater surplus to be had by transferring control its stock
of assets over to new management. Productivity losses among target firms provide an
opportunity for multinational acquirers to obtain desired assets at relatively lower costs.
Searching for such bargains lead multinational firms to seek out targets that appear to be
cherries on sale.
32

We first constructed a model with endogenous export behavior, dynamic productivity, and endogenous M&A activity that provided several predictions about the patterns of
cross-border acquisitions. We found strong evidence in from M&A activity in France that
foreign multinationals seek firms with strong prior export behavior and recent productivity
losses. We also provided further evidence on the importance of export networks by contrasting acquisition patterns by domestic firms versus foreign multinationals, comparing foreign
acquisitions across different countries of origin.

References
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Askenazy, Nicolas Berman, Gilbert Cette, and Laurent Eymard, “Credit constraints and the cyclicality of R&D investment: evidence from
France,” Journal of the European Economics Association, forthcoming.
Arellano, Manuel and Raquel Carrasco, “Binary choice panel data models with predetermined variables,” Journal of Econometrics, 2003, 115 (1), 125–157.
Arnold, Jens and Beata Javorcik, “Gifted kids or pushy parents? Foreign direct investment and pland productivity in Indonesia,” Journal of International Economics, 2009, 79
(1), 42–53.
Bandick, Roger and Holger Gorg, “Foreign Acquisition, Plant Survival, and Employment Growth,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 2010, 43, 547–73.
, , and Patrick Karpaty, “Foreign acquisitions, domestic multinationals and R&D,”
2010. Centre for Economic Policy Research discussion paper 8081.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, “Exceptional exporter performance:
cause, effect or both?,” Journal of International Economics, 1999, 47 (1), 1–25.
, Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, “Plants and Productivity in International Trade,” The American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (4), 1268–1290.
, Stephen Redding, and Peter Schott, “Multi-product firms and trade liberalization,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, forthcoming. Princeton University working
paper.
Blonigen, Bruce A. and Christopher T. Taylor, “R&D intensity and acquisitions in
high-technologies: evidence from the US electronic and electrical equipment industries,”
Journal of Industrial Economics, 2000, 48 (1), 47–70.
, Ronald B. Davies, Glen R. Waddell, and Helen Naughton, “FDI in Space:
Spatial Autoregressive Relationships in Foreign Direct Investment,” European Economic
Review, 2007, 51 (5), 1303–25.
Bricongne, Jean-Charles, Lionel Fontagné, Guillaume Gaulier, Daria Tablioni,
and Vincent vicard, “Firms and the global crisis: French exports in the turmoil,”
Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

33

Criscuolo, Chiara and Ralf Martin, “Multinationals and U.S. Productivity Leadership:
Evidence from Great Britain,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2009, 91 (2), 263–81.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., “A multinatinoal perspective on capital structure and internal capital markets,” The Journal of Finance, 2004, 59
(6), 2451–2487.
Ekholm, Karolina, Rikard Forslid, and James R. Markusen, “Export-platform foreign direct investment,” Journal of the European Economics Association, 2007, 5 (4),
776–95.
Guadalupe, Maria, Olga Kuzmina, and Catherine Thomas, “Innovation and foreign
ownership,” The American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Hakkala, Katrina, Fredrik Heyman, and Fredrik Sjoholm, “Acquisition, Multinationals, and Wage Dispersion,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 2011, 44 (2), 627–50.
Hanson, Gordon H., Raymond J. Mataloni, and Matthew J. Slaughter, “Expansion strategies of U.S. multinational firms,” in Dani Rodrik and Susan Collins, eds.,
Brookings Trade Forum 2001, Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 2001.
Harford, Jarrad, “What drives merger waves?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2005,
77 (3), 529–60.
Head, Keith and John Ries, “FDI as an outcome of the market for corporate control:
theory and evidence,” Journal of International Economics, 2008, 74 (1), 2–20.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, “Estimating Trade Flows:
Trading Partners and Trading Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123,
441–87.
Heyman, Fredrik, Fredrik Sjoholm, and Patrik Gustavsson Tinvall, “Is there really
a foreign ownership premium? Evidence from matched employer-employee data,” Journal
of International Economics, 2007, 73 (2).
Honore, Bo E. and Arthur Lewbel, “Semiparametric Binary Choice Panel Data Models
without strictly exogenous regressors,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (5), 2053–2063.
and Elie Tamer, “Bounds on parameters in panel dynamic discrete choice models,”
Econometrica, 2006, 74 (3), 611–629.
Huttunen, Kristiina, “The Effect of Foreign Acquisition on Employment and Wages:
Evidence from Finnish Establishment Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2007,
89 (3), 497–509.
Lai, Huiwen and Susan Chun Zhu, “U.S. export and multinational production,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 2006, 88 (3), 531–548.
Lee, Donghyun, “Cross-border mergers and acquisitions with heterogeneous firms: technology vs. market motives,” 2011. mimeo University of Oregon.
Lichtenberg, Frank R. and Donald Siegel, “Productivity and changes of ownership in
manufacturing plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1987, 1987 (3), 643–83.

34

Manne, Henry G., “Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control,” Journal of Political
Economy, 1965, 73 (110-20).
Neary, J. Peter, “Cross-Border Mergers as Instruments of Comparative Advantage,” Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (4), 1229–57.
Nocke, Volker and Stephen R. Yeaple, “Cross-border mergers and acquisitions versus
greenfield foreign direct investment: the role of firm heteroeneity,” Journal of International Economics, 2007, 72 (2), 336–365.
and , “An assignment theory of foreign direct investment,” Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (2), 529–557.
Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64, 1263–1298.
Ramondo, Natalia, “Foreign Plants and Industry Productivity: Evidence from Chile,”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2009, 111 (4), 789–809.
Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout, “The decision to export in Colombia: an
empirical model of entry with sunk costs,” The American Economic Review, 1997, 87 (4),
545–564.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., “Simple solutions to the initial conditions problem in dynamic,
non-linear panel data models with unobserved heterogeneity,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2005, 20, 39–54.
Yeaple, Stephen R., “The complex integration strategies of multinationals and crosscountry dependencies in the structure of foreign direct investment,” Journal of International Economics, 2003, 60 (2), 293–314.

35

10

Appendix

Details of the Proof of Proposition 1
Totally differentiating yields

dYjht (a,b)
db

Mh
= µM
W

bRH

ga (Ajh (a, b, b0 )) dGb (b0 )

bL

dAjh (a,b,b0 )
db

< 0.
dAjh
db ,

Then applying the implicit function theorem to the identity in (8) we can calculate
and substituting we obtain
Mh
dYjht (a, b)
= −µ
db
MW

ZbH

ga (Ajh (a, b, b0 )) dGb (b0 )



χjh (a, b)
Ωjh (a, b)


,

(A.1)

bL

where

∂kj (a, b)  l
m
l
πki (a)sij (Ajh ) + πki (a)sij (Ajh ) − πki (a)j (a) ≤ 0
χjh (a, b) =
∂b


is the profit surplus lost by the merged firm on any reduction
export

 networks established
∂kj (a,b)
by targets with higher costs to set up export networks
≤
0
, and
∂b
Ωjh (a, b) =
+

i
∂kh (Ajh , b0 ) h l
πkh (Ajh ,b0 )sij (Ajh ) + πkmh (Ajh ,b0 )sij (Ajh ) − πkmh (Ajh ,b0 )h (Ajh )
∂Ajh
" l
#
Z
Z
m
m
(Ajh )
∂πisij (Ajh ) ∂πis
∂πij
(Ajh )
ij
+
d(i) −
d(i) < 0
∂Ajh
∂Ajh
∂Ajh

i∈Nj (a,b)∪Nh (Ajh ,b0 )

i∈Nj (a,b)

is the corresponding change in the mass of viable foreign acquirers that weights the total
effect in (A.2).


∂k (a,b)
is zero if a change in
The weak inequality in (A.2) is due to the fact that − j∂b
cost to establish export networks for the target firm leads to a change in the export network
that is redundant for the merged firm; i.e., if kj (a, b) ∈ Nh (Ajh (a, b)) and relative trade
costs are such that cj fkj (a,b)j τk−1
= ch fkj (a,b)h τk−1
then χjh (a, b) = 0.
j (a,b)j
j (a,b)h

Details of the Proof of Proposition 2
Here we derive

dYjht (a,b)
da

, or equivalently we derive
Nj (a,b)

dYjht (a,b)
da

subject to

∂kj (a,b)
∂a

= 0,

since we are interested in productivity changes holding export networks fixed. Recall that
an increase in a is equivalent to a reduction in firm productivity. Totally differentiating
yields
dYjht (a, b)
Mh
= −µ
da
MW

ZbH


Λj (a, b)
ga (Ajh (a, b, b )) dGb (b )
>0,
Ωjh (a, b)
0

bL

36

0



(A.2)

where




l
∂πij
(a)

Z

Λj (a, b) = − 

∂a


d(i) > 0

(A.2)

i∈Nj (a)

is (minus) the change profit of a target firm that realizes a negative productivity shock.

Proof of Proposition 3
Let dτ h ij be a shift in trade costs across all destinations i such that the distribution of
trade costs from country h stochastically dominates the distribution of costs from country
j. (Thus, dτij corresponds to a Radon-Nikodym derivative in the distribution of trade costs
between countries.) Note that from the criterion in (11), lower variable trade costs from
country j across all markets will lead to an increase in the number of markets to which
dkj (a,b)
any firm will export; i.e., dτ
< 0 for all a and b. The final step is to examine how
h
ij
subsequent differences in the mass of chosen export destinations, indexed by kj (a, b), affect
the likelihood of acquisition. Calculating directly we obtain
Mh
dYjht (a, b)
= −µ
dkj (a, b)
MW

ZbH

ga (Ajh (a, b, b0 )) dGb (b0 )

∆j (a, b)
>0
Ωj (a, b)

(A.3)

bL

where
∆j (a, b) = πkl j (a,b)sij (Ajh ) + πkmj (a,b)sij (Ajh ) − πkl j (a,b)j (a) > 0 .

Sample Construction
The full sample is composed by 31,611 firms and 168,548 observations over the period
1999-2006. Due to the construction of the M&A information, we lose information on 1999.
The sample reduces to 20,476 firms and 90,967 observations because there are also missing
information on TFP, export network and other covariates. The introduction of the lag
change in TFP and the second lag of the export network and export intensity variables,
reduces the sample further to 18,114 firms and 71,830 observations over 2001 to 2006.
In order to build the control group in the estimation of section 8.1, we eliminate all
observations for i) firms acquired by French firms after having been foreign owned, ii) firms
that have always been foreign owned from 1999-2006, iii) independent firms acquired by
French groups; and iv) French groups acquired by French groups. The corresponding sample
reduces to 8,759 firms and 32,883 observations. Table 8 reports the number of foreign
affiliates and French firms in the control group over the estimation period.

Descriptive Statistics
Figures 2a and 2b show the geographical origins of foreign multinationals acquiring firms
in France in 2006. In Figure 2a, we report the share of the number of targets from each

37

Table 8: Description of the Sample
Year
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Total

Number of Foreign Affiliates
268
383
457
517
643
760
3028

Number of French Firms
5410
5205
4998
4892
4805
4545
29855

Figure 2: Geographical Origin of Foreign Groups, 2006 (% total)
(a) Number of Foreign M&A

Number of Foreign Affiliates (% of total)

USA
Germany
Belgium
United Kingdom
Netherland
Italy
Switzerland
Luxembourg
Sweden
Spain
Japan
Canada
Denmark
Austria
Norway
Ireland
Finland
Portugal
Mexico
NL Possessions
Singapor
Israel
Australia
Monaco

0

5

10

15

20

(b) Employment in Foreign M&A

®

USA
United Kingdom
Germany
Spain
Netherland
Belgium
Sweden
Japan
Mexico
Italy
Ireland
Finland
Portugal
China
Austria
Switzerland
Denmark
NL Possessions
Luxembourg
Israel

0

5

10

15

Source: LIFI, authors’ own computation

38

20

Table 9: Percent premium for group membership compared to independent firm
Foreign
French
(%)
(%)
TFP
3.83
1.76
Export Network
11.58
7.57
Export Value
24.56
11.93
Import Network
14.51
7.15
Import Value
25.83
12.68
Value Added
6.01
2.74
Employment
5.32
2.56
Wages
6.32
2.10
Source: Customs, EAE, LIFI, authors’ calculation

Difference
(p.p.)
2.07
4.00
12.63
7.36
13.15
3.27
2.78
4.23

Table 10: Export networks by Ownership Status
Year
Always Foreign
FM&A
1999
4.41
4.11
2000
4.46
4.11
2001
4.46
4.09
2002
4.48
4.09
2003
4.45
4.07
2004
4.45
4.14
2005
4.44
4.15
2006
4.48
4.25
Source: EAE, LIFI, authors’ calculation.
Values indicate log of number of product-destinations.

Always French
3.34
3.38
3.36
3.35
3.31
3.39
3.37
3.48

countries to the total number of acquired firms. Most of the acquiring firms are located in
the European Union with the notable exception of U.S firms. Considering only those firms
that have been acquired during the sample period, we show that about one fifth of M&A
involves a US parent. The second origin of the acquiring group is Germany (one sixth),
followed by Belgium and the UK. In Figure 2b, we use employment to characterize the
distribution of operations and report the share of employment by origin country in acquired
firms’ total employment. The pattern of employment across geographical origins is similar
to the simple counts of foreign acquisitions, suggesting that cross-borders M&A are tied real
economic activities in the global economy.
Table 10 reports the size of firm export networks across ownership classifications. The
group of firms that are always French has an average export network of 28 to 32 pairs of
product-destinations. This is far below the average export networks of firms belonging to
the group of “Foreign M&A” (58 to 70 pairs). We find that affiliates that have always been
39

0

.2

Density

.4

.6

Figure 3: Productivity distributions of Firms by Ownership Classification: 1999-2006

0

5

10
productivity, OP

Always French
Always Foreign

Foreign M&A

Source: Authors’ calculations based on “LIFI” and “EAE” data.
®

40

owned by foreign groups have on average the largest export network (82 to 88 productdestinations). In Figure 3 we plot the distribution of firm productivities and it is clear that
sample of acquired firms dominate non-acquired firms in terms of productivity.

Estimation Results: Full Tables
Table 11: Full Results - Logistic Estimation with Firm Fixed Effects
(1)
ln(ExportNetwork)t−2
∆ ln(TFP)t−1

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.581***
(0.193)

1.080***
(0.193)
-0.526***
(0.195)

0.936***
(0.230)
-2.145***
(0.328)
3.916***
(0.595)
4.764***
(1.537)
13.247***
(1.967)
-0.019
(0.020)
-2.735***
(0.929)

0.732***
(0.267)
-3.488***
(0.684)
5.560***
(1.015)
5.882**
(2.348)
10.377***
(2.358)
-0.026
(0.054)
-15.184***
(0.732)
-2.288***
(0.503)
yes
yes
1,587
0.201
352

1.097***
(0.193)

ln(TFP)t−1
Share of Intangiblet−1
Share of Skillt−1
Payment Incidentst−1
Ile de France
∆ ln(TFP)t−2

Firm FE
yes
yes
yes
yes
Year Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
Observations
2,728
2,728
2,728
2,601
Pseudo R2
0.029
0.006
0.033
0.218
No. of Switchers
512
512
512
498
Robust standard errors clustered at firm-level in parentheses.
***, **, * significantly different from 0 at 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.

41

Table 12: Full Results - Alternative Specifications of Export Networks

ln(Export
Network)CP
it−2
ln(Export
Network)C
it−2
ln(Export
Network)P
it−2
∆ ln(TFP)it−1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.004**
(0.002)

0.004*
(0.002)

0.619***
(0.166)

0.362*
(0.198)

-0.014***
(0.005)

-2.154***
(0.326)

0.034***
(0.003)
0.026**

-0.014**
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.006)
0.038***
(0.004)
0.033**

3.966***
(0.591)
4.907***

-3.545***
(0.675)
-2.336***
(0.493)
5.657***
(0.995)
6.015**

(0.013)
0.110***
(0.015)
0.003*

(0.016)
0.120***
(0.018)
0.007

(1.524)
13.186***
(1.945)
-0.021

(2.362)
10.276***
(2.299)
-0.027

(0.002)
-0.017**

(0.005)
-0.017**

(0.020)
-2.799***

∆ ln(TFP)it−2
ln(TFP)t−1
Share
Intangiblet−1

of

Share of Skillt−1
Payment
Incidentst−1

(5)

(6)

0.011***
(0.004)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.014**
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.006)
0.038***
(0.004)
0.032**

0.834***
(0.292)
-0.225
(0.209)
-3.501***
(0.683)
-2.321***
(0.502)
5.589***
(1.009)
5.963**

(0.016)
0.119***
(0.018)
0.007

(2.363)
10.272***
(2.316)
-0.024

(0.052)
(0.005)
-0.017**
14.026***
(0.006)
(0.008)
(0.927)
(0.706)
(0.008)
Sector FE
yes
yes
no
no
yes
Firm FE
no
no
yes
yes
no
Year Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Observations
32,883
25,063
2,601
1,587
25,063
Pseudo R2
0.174
0.174
0.213
0.194
0.175
No. of Switchers
.
.
498
352
.
Robust standard errors clustered at firm-level in parentheses.
***, **, * significantly different from 0 at 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
Ile de France

42

(0.050)
15.246***
(0.707)
no
yes
yes
1,587
0.200
352

Table 13: Full Results - European versus Non-European Acquiring firms
(1)
European
ln(ExportNetwork)t−2

(2)
Non-European

0.003*
0.004***
(0.002)
(0.001)
∆ ln(TFP)t−1
-0.008**
-0.005*
(0.004)
(0.003)
ln(TFP)t−1
0.023***
0.010***
(0.002)
(0.002)
Share of Intangiblet−1
0.016
0.011
(0.011)
(0.007)
Share of Skillt−1
0.077***
0.032***
(0.012)
(0.008)
Payment Incidentst−1
0.002**
0.001*
(0.001)
(0.000)
Ile de France
-0.020***
0.000
(0.006)
(0.003)
Sector FE
yes
yes
Year Effects
yes
yes
Observations
30,870
24,779
Pseudo R2
0.165
0.201
Robust standard errors clustered at firm-level in parentheses.
***, **, * significantly different from 0 at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.

43

