                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DOES AGRICULTURE GENERATE LOCAL ECONOMIC SPILLOVERS? SHORT-RUN
         AND LONG-RUN EVIDENCE FROM THE OGALLALA AQUIFER

                                          Richard Hornbeck
                                            Pinar Keskin

                                        Working Paper 18416
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18416


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




For comments and suggestions, we thank seminar participants at Harvard, UC-Davis, and those that
provided feedback on our related paper: "The Evolving Impact of the Ogallala Aquifer: Agricultural
Adaptation to Groundwater and Climate.'' For financial support, we thank the Harvard University
Center for the Environment and the Harvard Sustainability Science Program. Melissa Eccleston, James
Feigenbaum, Jan Kozak, Jamie Lee, and Joseph Root provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Richard Hornbeck and Pinar Keskin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Does Agriculture Generate Local Economic Spillovers? Short-run and Long-run Evidence
from the Ogallala Aquifer
Richard Hornbeck and Pinar Keskin
NBER Working Paper No. 18416
September 2012
JEL No. N32,N52,O10,Q10,R10

                                             ABSTRACT

Agricultural development may support broader economic development, though agricultural expansion
may also crowd-out local non-agricultural activity. On the United States Plains, areas over the Ogallala
aquifer experienced windfall agricultural gains when post-WWII technologies increased farmers' access
to groundwater. Comparing counties over the Ogallala with nearby similar counties, local non-agricultural
sectors experienced only short-run benefits. Despite substantial persistent agricultural gains, there
was no long-run expansion of local non-agricultural sectors and there are some indications of crowd-out.
With the benefit of long-run historical perspective, supporting local agricultural production does not
appear to generate local economic spillovers that might justify its distortionary impacts.


Richard Hornbeck
Department of Economics
Harvard University
232 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
hornbeck@fas.harvard.edu

Pinar Keskin
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
pkeskin@wellesley.edu
    Many governments subsidize agriculture and, particularly in arid environments, these
subsidies often include artificially-low costs of water for agricultural production. Devel-
opment of the agricultural sector may support broad economic development (Vogel 1994;
Johnson 2000; Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson 2002; Nunn and Qian 2011), though expansion
of the agricultural sector may also crowd-out non-agricultural production (Foster and Rosen-
zweig 2004). This issue is central to economic policy (World Bank 2008; USDA 2012) and,
while agricultural development often coincides with broader economic development, there are
few empirical settings to examine in detail how exogenous gains for the agricultural sector
affect the broader economy over time.
    This paper estimates short-run and long-run economic impacts from a windfall gain to
the agricultural sector, exploiting local variation in United States Plains counties’ access to
the Ogallala aquifer. The Ogallala was formed by ancient runoff from the Rocky Mountains,
trapped below the modern Great Plains, and it maintains distinct irregular boundaries that
cut across modern soil groups. The Ogallala was first discovered in the 1890s, but it remained
mainly inaccessible. Following World War II, improved pumps and center pivot irrigation
technology made Ogallala groundwater available for large-scale irrigated agriculture. Access
to Ogallala groundwater greatly increased counties’ agricultural land values and revenues
(Hornbeck and Keskin 2011).
    Expansion of the agricultural sector could benefit the local non-agricultural economy,
though there are two competing channels through which other economic activity may be
restricted. First, increased agricultural land values may increase non-agricultural sectors’
costs for land and labor. Second, some agricultural practices may create disamenities for the
local population and increase labor costs in non-agricultural sectors. For the agricultural
sector to benefit local non-agricultural sectors, these negative impacts must be outweighed by
productivity spillovers, shared infrastructure, or increased demand for non-tradable goods.
These competing effects are reflected in a simple Roback-style general equilibrium model.
    The empirical specifications compare changes in counties over the Ogallala with changes
in nearby counties in the same state and soil group, controlling for longitude, latitude, average
precipitation, and average temperature (Hornbeck and Keskin 2011). Historical county-level
data are merged with a United States Geological Survey map of the Ogallala’s boundary.
Ogallala counties and non-Ogallala counties were similar prior to improved groundwater
availability, lending support to the identification assumption that Ogallala counties would
otherwise have changed similarly to non-Ogallala counties.
    Increased access to Ogallala groundwater generated substantial gains within the agricul-
tural sector, but the empirical estimates do not indicate positive impacts on the long-run
development of the local non-agricultural economy. Rural farm population increased rel-


                                               1
atively in counties over the Ogallala, but urban population declined and contributed to
statistically insignificant relative declines in total population. Counties over the Ogallala ex-
perienced no long-run relative change in manufacturing, wholesale, retail, or service sectors.
Ogallala counties had some short-run increases in non-agricultural sales, concurrent with the
increase in agricultural land values, but these sectoral spillover impacts were short-lived.
    In understanding the mechanisms through which the agricultural sector affects non-
agricultural sectors, there are only limited indications of temporarily higher housing costs
and wages. Despite substantially higher agricultural land values, housing costs may be
kept from rising due to increased consumption disamenities associated with agricultural pro-
duction, such as estimated increases in commercial fertilizers, agricultural chemicals, and
noxious swine farms. There is only limited evidence of displacement of non-farm population
to nearby non-Ogallala counties, and otherwise there are few detectable geographic spillover
effects on nearby counties.
    Overall, with the benefit of long-run historical perspective, a large windfall gain in the
agricultural sector does not appear to have encouraged broader economic development of the
local non-agricultural economy. There are indications of short-lived gains in non-agricultural
sectors, however, that might give the impression of broader economic spillovers if only short-
run data were available. If the agricultural sector might support broader economic devel-
opment in small open economies, these impacts should be expected following the Ogallala’s
substantial benefits for agriculture in these rural Plains counties.1 The absence of positive
spillover impacts is particularly striking, as the empirical research design would overstate
positive spillovers if Ogallala groundwater had direct benefits for non-agricultural sectors.
    Thus, even from a local perspective, public support of the agricultural sector does not
appear to generate positive economic spillovers that might justify its distortionary impacts.
Expansion of the agricultural sector is estimated to have less local benefit than the limited
gains from expansion of the mining sector (Black, McKinnish, and Sanders 2005), and cer-
tainly less local benefit than large manufacturing plant openings (Greenstone, Hornbeck,
and Moretti 2010). Reducing agricultural subsidies, particularly by allowing higher agricul-
tural water costs, may increase economic efficiency without discouraging non-agricultural
economic activity.2
   1
      In closed economies, or at the aggregate level of the world economy, agricultural development should still
promote non-agricultural development. Agricultural subsidies, however, may simply encourage agricultural
development in one area at the expense of another.
    2
      For the case of water subsidies, allowing farmers to sell water rights might increase water-use efficiency
and compensate farmers (Rosegrant and Binswanger 1994; Thobani 1997; Easter, Rosegrant, and Dinar
1998). One policy concern, consistent with estimates from calibrated input-output models (Howe, Lazo, and
Weber 1990; Howe and Goemans 2003), has been that allowing farmers to sell water rights and decrease
irrigated acreages would depress the local non-agricultural economy.



                                                       2
I       Background on the Ogallala Aquifer and its Impacts on Agriculture
The Ogallala aquifer lies under 174,000 square miles of the Great Plains, making it one of
the world’s largest underground freshwater sources.3 The Ogallala was formed by ancient
runoff from the Rocky Mountains. Its modern boundary is sharply defined by the location
of ancient valleys and hills, which have long since been covered and obscured on the surface.
     The Ogallala was first discovered by the United States Geological Survey in the 1890s,
but was initially considered of limited agricultural importance. Ogallala groundwater was
only available to farmers on a limited scale through the use of early pumps, windmills, and
irrigation techniques. Prior to the 1940’s, agricultural outcomes were similar in counties over
the Ogallala and nearby non-Ogallala counties (Hornbeck and Keskin 2011).
     After World War II, automobile engines were adapted to power improved pumps that
lifted groundwater cheaply and in larger volumes. Groundwater irrigation increased with
the subsequent introduction and adoption of center pivot technology. Agricultural land
values increased substantially in counties over the Ogallala; over time, land-use adjusted to-
ward water-intensive crops and agricultural revenues increased further (Hornbeck and Keskin
2011).4
     Agriculture accounts for the majority of Ogallala groundwater extraction, though Ogal-
lala groundwater may also be used for non-agricultural purposes. To the extent that Ogallala
groundwater directly benefits non-agricultural sectors, the empirical analysis will overstate
positive impacts of the agricultural sector on the local non-agricultural economy.
     Farmers in nearby counties do not access Ogallala groundwater using pipelines or any
system of exchange. Agriculture over the Ogallala may indirectly affect non-Ogallala counties
through other economic channels, but agricultural outcomes are estimated to change similarly
in nearby non-Ogallala counties and further non-Ogallala counties (Hornbeck and Keskin
2011).
     Appendix Figure 1 maps counties over the Ogallala and counties within 100km of the
Ogallala boundary, shaded to reflect the irrigated percent of county land (from Hornbeck
and Keskin 2011). In 1935, there was little irrigation in all sample counties, aside from a few
counties on major rivers (panel A). By 1974, irrigation increased substantially in counties
over the Ogallala, while counties within 100km were relatively unchanged (panel B).
     Appendix Figure 2 shows spatial patterns in agricultural land values that are consistent
with substantial economic gains in the agricultural sector from increased access to Ogallala
groundwater (from Hornbeck and Keskin 2011). There are strong regional determinants of
    3
   See Hornbeck and Keskin (2011) for more-detailed historical background and references.
    4
   Most areas retain sufficient groundwater to supply irrigation pumps; as water levels decline, however,
small sections of the Ogallala have become unavailable for large-scale irrigation.



                                                   3
land values; within local areas, however, Ogallala counties and non-Ogallala counties had
similar land values in 1920 (panel A). By 1964, land values are generally higher over the
Ogallala than in nearby counties not over the Ogallala (panel B).5
II       A Model of Cross-Sector Spillover Impacts
To explore the impacts on non-agricultural sectors from a windfall gain in the agricultural
sector, we outline a basic two-sector Roback-style model (Roback 1982).6 Sectors affect
each other through shared factor markets. We also allow for the agricultural sector to
create consumption disamenities for the local population (e.g., through increased use of
agricultural chemicals) or production amenities for the local non-agricultural sector (e.g.,
through customer-supplier relationships or shared infrastructure). Second, we consider the
within-county sectoral effects and cross-county geographic effects when goods are not traded
internationally and workers are able to commute.
II.A       Two-Sector Model with Internationally Traded Goods
We allow for two production sectors: agriculture and industry. In each sector, all firms use
labor L, capital K, and land T to produce an internationally traded good whose price is
fixed and is normalized to one. Firms in each county c and sector s maximize the following
expression:
                          max f s (Asc , L, K, T ) − wc L − rc K − qc T
                               L,K,T

where wc , rc , and qc are input prices and Asc is a sector-specific productivity shifter. In
particular, AAc is allowed to depend on whether county c can access groundwater from the
Ogallala aquifer.
    Let Ls∗ (w, r, q) be the optimal level of labor inputs in sector s, given the prevailing wage,
cost of capital, and cost of land. Similarly, let K s∗ (w, r, q) and T s∗ (w, r, q) be the optimal
level of capital and land, respectively. In equilibrium, the marginal product of each factor is
set equal to its price.
    The supply of land is fixed in each location. Capital is internationally traded, so its price
does not depend on local demand or supply conditions. Labor is supplied by the workers who
live in each location; for simplicity, we assume that all residents provide a fixed amount of
labor. Workers’ indirect utility depends on wages and the cost of housing, which is increasing
     5
     Counties are shaded in each year to reflect their quintile in the distribution of counties’ average value of
agricultural land per county acre.
   6
     This model is similar to the framework outlined by Foster and Rosenzweig (2004), though we allow for
perfect labor mobility in focusing on the United States rather than India. If labor mobility is restricted,
there are larger crowd-out effects of the agricultural sector on the non-agricultural sector through increased
local wages.




                                                       4
in the price of land. We assume that workers are fully mobile.7
    When counties over the Ogallala aquifer become able to access its groundwater, the de-
mand for farmland increases over the Ogallala. If the demand for industrial land is inelastic,
then the county-wide price of land can increase substantially with little increase in total
farmland. Due to an increase in the opportunity cost of land, the cost of housing increases
and workers are only willing to remain if wages increase. Industrial firms’ cost of labor and
land both increase, so industrial output and the industrial workforce decline.8
    The predicted change in total population depends on how much access to the Ogallala
increases demand for labor in the agricultural sector, compared to how much higher land
prices and wages decrease demand for labor in the industrial sector. The rural farm popula-
tion is predicted to increase, while the rural non-farm population and the urban population
are predicted to decline.9 In the absence of any consumption disamenities or production
amenities, the model predicts increases in land values, housing costs, and wages.
    Agricultural Disamenities for Local Population: Agricultural production may create con-
sumption disamenities for the local population. Consider the case in which a person’s indi-
rect utility is decreasing in total agricultural output; in practice, this may reflect particular
agricultural practices associated with groundwater access, such as increased exposure to
agricultural chemicals, fertilizers, and noxious swine farms.
    When counties now gain access to the Ogallala aquifer, there is still an increase in the
demand for farmland and the value of agricultural land. The cost of housing will increase by
less, or may even decline, yet workers must receive a wage premium to remain in Ogallala
counties. The industrial sector faces higher costs for land and labor, so there will be a decline
in industrial output and the industrial workforce.
    Agricultural Amenities for Local Industrial Firms: Agricultural production may also cre-
ate production amenities for the industrial sector. While recent estimates of agglomeration
and co-agglomeration spillovers have focused on relationships within the industrial sector
(Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr 2010; Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti 2010), agricultural
production may affect the industrial sector through similar channels. For example, local
customer-supplier relationships may increase productivity or lower transaction costs if some
outputs of the agricultural sector are intermediate inputs for the industrial sector and vice
versa.10 Expansion of the agricultural sector may also increase local infrastructure that is
   7
     If labor were imperfectly mobile, then expansion of the agricultural sector (and increased labor demand)
would increase labor costs further for the non-agricultural sector (Foster and Rosenzweig 2004).
   8
     Industrial land may be worth more than agricultural land on average, but these should be equalized on
the margin.
   9
     In principle, access to Ogallala groundwater may be labor-saving and the rural farm population could
also decline.
  10
     We continue to assume that final goods are traded internationally, though this assumption is relaxed in


                                                     5
productive for non-agricultural sectors.11 Rather than extend the model to include interme-
diate goods, productivity spillovers, or shared infrastructure, we simply allow for industrial
productivity to be increasing in total county agricultural output.12
    For interpreting any increases in the industrial sector as evidence for production ameni-
ties, a crucial assumption is that Ogallala groundwater is not a direct input for the industrial
sector. In practice, some industrial firms may use Ogallala groundwater as a direct input,
which would overstate the presence of production amenities from the agricultural sector.
Similarly, workers may directly consume Ogallala groundwater, which would lower local
wages and overstate the presence of production amenities.
    When counties gain access to the Ogallala aquifer, the primary impacts are an increase
in the demand for farmland and the value of agricultural land. Agricultural production
increases; if agriculture generates production amenities for industry that outweigh higher
costs for land and labor, then the industrial sector may also expand. Higher labor demand
(and higher wages) attract workers into the county until land prices (and housing costs)
increase sufficiently to establish equilibrium.
    Combined Comparative Statics: Combining the direct price effects, consumption dis-
amenities, and production amenities, the competing effects on the industrial sector can be
summarized by considering changes in the initial level of profits for incumbent industrial
firms. We consider the “short-run” change in industrial firms’ profits after a county gains
access to the Ogallala, the agricultural sector expands, and population adjusts, but before
changes in the size of the industrial sector. We write the “short-run” level of industrial firm
profits, Π∗ , as:

       Π∗ = f I AI (O), L∗ (w(O), r, q(O)) , K ∗ (w(O), r, q(O)) , T ∗ (w(O), r, q(O))
                                                                                      

             − w(O)L∗ (w(O), r, q(O)) − rK ∗ (w(O), r, q(O)) − q(O)T ∗ (w(O), r, q(O)) ,

where we now allow for productivity, wages, and land prices to depend on the agricultural
sector’s access to the Ogallala.
    Consider the total derivative of an industrial firm’s short-run profits with respect to a
the next section.
  11
     In this case, “infrastructure” may be public or private and could also reflect financial services or any
other local services with economies of scale.
  12
     Productivity spillovers between both the agricultural and industrial sectors could generate multiple
equilibria; for theoretical simplicity, we only allow for spillovers from the agricultural sector to the industrial
sector. In practice, the empirical results could capture changes from a lower-output equilibrium to a higher-
output equilibrium.




                                                        6
change in access to the Ogallala:

   dΠ∗
                     
             ∂f    ∂A
       =        ×                                                             (1)
   dO        ∂A ∂O
                ∗ 
                                        ∂K ∗ ∂f
                                                   ∗          
            ∂w   ∂L     ∂f        ∗                         ∂T  ∂f
          +                −w −L +               −r      +         −q
            ∂O    ∂w ∂L                  ∂w ∂K              ∂w ∂T
                ∗ 
                                    ∂K ∗ ∂f            ∂T ∗ ∂f
                                                                
            ∂q   ∂L     ∂f                                             ∗
          +                −w   +            −r    +           −q −T        .
            ∂O    ∂q ∂L              ∂q   ∂K            ∂q ∂T

If firms are price takers and all factors are paid their marginal product, equation (1) simplifies
to:
                             dΠ∗
                                                 
                                       ∂f     ∂A       ∂w ∗     ∂q ∗
                                   =       ×        −     L −      T .                        (2)
                             dO        ∂A ∂O           ∂O      ∂O
Equation (2) makes clear that industrial firms are affected through three channels. The first
term increases industrial firm profits and encourages expansion, if access to the Ogallala
causes the agricultural sector to create production amenities for the industrial sector. The
second term decreases industrial firm profits and encourages contraction, if access to the
Ogallala increases local wages through increased consumption disamenities or higher housing
costs for workers.13 The third term also decreases industrial firm profits and encourages
contraction, if access to the Ogallala increases local land prices through increased demand
for agricultural land.
    As access to Ogallala groundwater leads to expansion of the agricultural sector, the main
empirical predictions are:
    1) Non-agricultural sectors will contract, unless production amenities compensate for
higher costs of land and labor.
    2) Wages will increase, even if workers are fully mobile, due to consumption disamenities
from the agricultural sector or higher housing costs.
    3) Housing costs may decrease or increase, depending on the relative magnitude of con-
sumption disamenities and competition for land from the agricultural sector.
II.B    Extended Model with Locally Traded Goods and Commuting
The above model assumes that goods are traded internationally; as this assumption is re-
laxed, expansion of the agricultural sector has a more positive impact on the local industrial
sector. Ogallala counties may also generate spillover impacts on nearby non-Ogallala coun-
ties.
    If some portion of industrial goods are consumed locally, then expansion of the agri-
  13
    If workers are imperfectly mobile, then wages may also increase due to increased competition for labor
from the agricultural sector (Foster and Rosenzweig 2004).



                                                    7
cultural sector may increase demand for the local industrial sector. In particular, if the
agricultural sector uses inputs supplied by the local industrial sector, then increased demand
from the agricultural sector will encourage expansion of the industrial sector (aside from any
associated productivity spillovers).14 This increase in local demand can be represented, in
a reduced-form way, by a greater impact of the agricultural sector on (revenue) production
amenities in the industrial sector.
    If some portion of agricultural goods are consumed locally, then agricultural prices will
fall in Ogallala counties. First, if the industrial sector uses inputs supplied by the local
agricultural sector, then lower input prices would encourage industrial expansion. Second,
if workers directly consume local agricultural products, then workers would be willing to
accept lower wages and industrial firms would benefit from lower labor costs.15
    If agricultural markets are local, then agricultural land values would also decline in
nearby non-Ogallala counties. Lower land values in nearby areas would attract workers
and industrial firms to these areas.16 There would be particular displacement of workers
from Ogallala counties to nearby non-Ogallala counties if workers are able to commute and
if commuting avoids some portion of the agricultural sector’s consumption disamenities.
    The main additional empirical predictions are:
    1) Local markets for industrial goods are observationally similar to “production ameni-
ties,” encouraging expansion of the industrial sector and increased population.
    2) Local markets for agricultural goods are reflected in decreased agricultural land values
in nearby non-Ogallala counties; through a decrease in land values, this may encourage
expansion of the industrial sector and population in nearby non-Ogallala counties.
    3) If workers are able to commute, then geographic spillover effects will be more pro-
nounced, particularly if commuting workers are able to avoid consumption disamenities from
agriculture over the Ogallala.
III    Data Construction and County Differences by Ogallala Share
Historical county-level data are drawn from the US Censuses of Agriculture and Population
(Gutmann 2005; Haines 2005).17 The main variables of interest include: irrigated acres
and total acres of farmland; value of agricultural land and revenue; total population and
population by rural farm, rural non-farm, and urban; the number of establishments and
  14
     If local workers own land or if agricultural renters capture a substantial portion of increased returns
(Kirwan 2009), then higher agricultural land values will also increase local workers’ assets and their demand
for industrial goods.
  15
     Depending on changes in the industrial sector, local changes in industrial prices would also affect workers.
  16
     If the agricultural sector creates production amenities that increase industrial productivity in nearby
counties, then industrial firms will also be attracted to nearby non-Ogallala areas.
  17
     We thank Haines and collaborators for providing additional data.



                                                       8
total sales in the manufacturing, wholesale, retail, and service sectors; retail sales per capita;
manufacturing payroll per worker; median dwelling value; and median dwelling rent. The
empirical analysis focuses on a balanced panel of Plains counties, from 1920 to 2002, for
which data are available in every period of analysis. To account for occasional changes
in county borders, data are adjusted in later periods to maintain 1920 county definitions
(Hornbeck 2010).
    Figure 1 maps the Ogallala aquifer, overlaid with county borders in 1920. The shaded area
represents the United States Geological Survey’s estimated original boundary of the aquifer,
prior to intensive use for agriculture. The main sample is restricted to counties within 100
kilometers of the aquifer boundary. Changes in water levels are potentially endogenous to
agricultural activity, so the empirical analysis assigns groundwater availability using USGS
pre-development Ogallala boundaries.
    The empirical research design exploits spatial variation in access to Ogallala groundwater,
comparing counties over the Ogallala with nearby similar counties. To focus on comparisons
among “nearby similar counties,” as in Hornbeck and Keskin (2011), the empirical spec-
ifications control for average differences by state, soil group, longitude, latitude, average
precipitation, and average temperature.18
    Table 1 reports differences between Ogallala and non-Ogallala counties in 1940, prior
to the widespread availability of Ogallala groundwater for irrigation. For the outcome vari-
ables of interest, there are some unconditional differences between Ogallala and non-Ogallala
counties (column 2). For specifications that increasingly include the control variables, how-
ever, there are few substantial or statistically significant differences by county Ogallala share
(columns 3 – 5). When data are available for these outcome variables prior to 1940, sub-
sequent tables also report small differential pre-changes by county Ogallala share. These
estimates lend support to the identification assumption that Ogallala counties would have
changed similarly to non-Ogallala counties, if not for increased access to Ogallala ground-
water.
IV     Empirical Framework
In the initial empirical specifications, outcome Y in county c is regressed on the fraction of
county area over the Ogallala, state fixed effects αs , the fraction of county area in each soil
  18
     State fixed effects capture differences in region, state agricultural extension services, and other state-
level policies. Soil group fixed effects proxy for detailed regional determinants of agricultural production: for
example, “Alluvial Soils” occur along major rivers and predict higher irrigation in 1935 and “Sand and Silt”
in North-Central Nebraska is unproductive for agriculture. The Ogallala boundary cuts across major soil
groups; importantly, as the analysis effectively compares Ogallala and non-Ogallala counties within the same
soil group. Climate and geographic location may also influence agricultural production, even within-state
and within-soil group. Because non-Ogallala counties surround the Ogallala region, there is variation in
Ogallala access within similar climate, longitude, and latitude.


                                                       9
group γg , and linear functions of four county characteristics Xc (average rainfall, average
temperature, longitude, and latitude). These cross-sectional specifications are pooled across
all time periods, with each coefficient allowed to vary in each time period:

                           Yct = βt OgallalaSharec + αst + γgt + θt Xc + ct                                (3)

In each time period, the estimated β reports the average difference between counties entirely
over the Ogallala and counties never over the Ogallala.19
    The estimated β’s can be interpreted as the impact of the Ogallala in each year, under
the identification assumption that sample counties would have had the same average out-
comes in each year if not for the Ogallala. In practice, this identification assumption must
hold after controlling for other differences correlated with state, soil group, precipitation,
temperature, longitude, and latitude. In this way, the research design exploits the sharp
spatial discontinuity created by the Ogallala’s irregular boundary.
    Differences in the estimated β’s, from one year to another year, report the average change
for an Ogallala county relative to a non-Ogallala county over that time period. The change in
β’s can be interpreted as the changing impact of the Ogallala, under the weaker identification
assumption that sample counties would have had the same average changes if not for the
Ogallala. Differencing the estimated coefficients is numerically equivalent to estimating
equation (3) in differences or with county fixed effects.20
    Equation (3) is modified to report directly the estimated changes in county-level out-
comes, relative to 1940:

                     Yct − Yc1940 = βt OgallalaSharec + αst + γgt + θt Xc + ct                             (4)

The estimated coefficients report relative changes for counties over the Ogallala, compared
to any differences in 1940.
    The Ogallala’s impact may vary over the analyzed region. For example, the Ogallala
may have less impact in areas with unproductive soil and more impact in areas with water
deficiencies. For simplicity, the analysis reports the impact of the Ogallala on the average
  19
      Some counties are partly over the Ogallala, and this specification assumes that the effect of the Ogallala
is linear in the fraction of county area over the Ogallala. From graphing county residual changes in irrigated
farmland against county residual Ogallala shares, the effect of the Ogallala appears roughly linear in the
share of county area over the Ogallala.
   20
      Differencing and fixed effects are equivalent for two time periods; for this multi-period regression, the
specification is essentially separable for any two time periods. The explanatory variables are fully interacted
with time, such that the impact of each variable is allowed to vary in each year. The sample is also balanced
in each regression, such that every county has data in every analyzed period. Thus, the estimated coefficients
in any one year are not influenced by county outcomes in any other year.



                                                      10
acre of land over the Ogallala. For this purpose, the regressions are weighted by county size.
    For the statistical inference, standard errors are clustered at the county level to adjust
for heteroskedasticity and within-county correlation over time. When allowing for spatial
correlation among sample counties, the estimated standard errors increase by approximately
20%.21
V      Results
V.A      Estimated Impacts on the Agricultural Sector
Table 2 reports estimated direct impacts of the Ogallala on the agricultural sector (Hornbeck
and Keskin 2011). From estimating equation (3), columns 1 – 4 report year-specific cross-
sectional differences by Ogallala share in: acres of irrigated farmland per county acre, acres
of total farmland per county acre, the log value of agricultural land and buildings, and the
log value of agricultural revenue.
    In 1935, irrigation was a statistically insignificant 0.4 percentage points lower in Ogallala
counties than in non-Ogallala counties (Column 1). By 1950, irrigation was 1.3 percentage
points higher in Ogallala counties than in non-Ogallala counties. As groundwater irrigation
technology improved and agricultural production adjusted, this difference increased to 11.3
percentage points by 1978. Ogallala counties maintained substantially higher irrigation levels
through 1997.
    The fraction of county land in farms was similar in Ogallala and non-Ogallala counties
through the 1950’s, though higher in some periods (Column 2). Since the 1960’s, the fraction
of county land in farms has been consistently higher by 5 to 7 percentage points in Ogallala
counties. This small relative increase mainly reflects a slower absolute decline in farmland
than in non-Ogallala counties.
    In the 1950’s, after the introduction of improved pumping and irrigation technologies,
the value of agricultural land and buildings became consistently higher in counties over the
Ogallala (Column 3).22 The land value premium rose to 31% in 1950 (0.273 log points),
peaked at 51% in 1964 (0.415 log points), and has since declined to 19% in 2002 (0.178 log
points).
    Agricultural revenues have been higher over the Ogallala since the late 1940’s, but in-
creased substantially in the 1970’s as agriculture shifted toward greater corn acreages over
  21
      Spatial correlation among counties is assumed to be declining linearly up to a distance cutoff and zero
after that cutoff (Conley 1999). For a distance cutoff of 100 miles or 200 miles, the estimated Conley standard
errors are approximately 20% higher (on average) than the standard errors when clustering at the county
level, depending on the outcome variable.
   22
      Over this long time period, data are only available for the combined value of agricultural land and
buildings. From 1900 to 1940, when data are available separately for land and buildings, the value of land
is the much larger component.


                                                      11
the Ogallala. The impact on revenues has increased in recent periods, as land values have
declined, suggesting that the marginal return to water remains high and decreased land
values reflect market expectations of groundwater exhaustion.
    Subsequent specifications compare changes in counties’ non-agricultural outcomes relative
to 1940, as the Ogallala began to have a consistent direct impact on the agricultural sector
over the 1940’s.
V.B     Estimated Impacts on Population
Table 3 reports estimated impacts of the Ogallala on population, which provides a summary
proxy for aggregate economic activity. Relative to the omitted year of 1940, each column
compares changes in Ogallala counties and non-Ogallala counties from estimating equation
(4). As the Ogallala became available for widespread irrigation, and agricultural land values
increased substantially, total population was relatively unchanged in logs (column 1) and
levels (column 2). There was some long-run decline in total population, but this decline is
not statistically significant at the 5% level.
    Estimating the change in population by category, Ogallala counties experienced a mod-
erate increase in rural farm population (column 3). By contrast, there were some declines
in rural non-farm population (column 4) and urban population (column 5).
    Figure 2 summarizes the estimated trends in agriculture and population. Panel A graphs
the substantial increase in agricultural land values, panel B graphs the moderate increase
in rural farm population, and panel C graphs the decline in total population. These esti-
mates, along with the estimates below, are not driven by changes in very large or very small
counties.23
V.C     Estimated Impacts on Non-Agricultural Sectors
Table 4 reports estimated impacts of the Ogallala on four non-agricultural sectors: manu-
facturing, wholesale, retail, and services. We expect that these four sectors are ordered from
producing more internationally-traded goods to more locally-traded goods, so we expect the
impacts of local demand to be concentrated in the latter sectors. Any sector may experience
spillover impacts through shared infrastructure or productivity spillovers.
    After the Ogallala became available for agricultural production, counties over the Ogallala
experienced no long-run expansion of non-agricultural sectors.24 There were some substantial
short-run increases in non-agricultural sector sales (columns 2, 4, 6, 8), but little change in
the number of non-agricultural sector establishments (columns 1, 3, 5, 7). Figure 3 displays
  23
     The estimates are robust to restricting the sample to 333 counties with total population in 1940 within
the 5th and 95th percentiles.
  24
     The sample of counties varies across outcomes because data by sector are missing for some counties in
some years.


                                                    12
the estimated changes in non-agricultural sector sales.
   Estimated increases in sales coincide with the large increase in agricultural land values,
and were not sustained as agricultural production expanded into the 1970’s. There may be
positive spillover effects on particular non-agricultural firms that specialize in agricultural
machinery, sales, and services, but these detailed historical data are unavailable. Overall,
substantial and persistent gains in the agricultural sector were not associated with long-run
growth of the local non-agricultural economy.
V.D    Estimated Impacts on Housing Costs and Income Proxies
To help understand the mechanisms through which the agricultural sector affects non-
agricultural sectors, Table 5 reports estimated impacts of the Ogallala on the available
proxies for housing costs and income. As agricultural land values increased from 1940 to
1950, there was a moderate but statistically insignificant increase in median dwelling values
(column 1). As agricultural land values declined in more recent periods, median dwelling
values also declined. Historical data are unavailable to control for house characteristics, how-
ever, which limits the estimates’ statistical precision. Median dwelling rents show less of an
increase in housing costs, and decline while agricultural land values remained high (column
2).
    Despite higher agricultural land values, housing costs may have been kept from rising
by increased consumption disamenities associated with agricultural production. Appendix
Table 1 reports higher usage among Ogallala counties of commercial fertilizers, agricultural
chemicals, and noxious swine farms.
    Table 5, column 3, reports changes in retail sales per capita, which is an available histor-
ical proxy for average income (Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor 2005; Hornbeck 2012). This
proxy for income increased as the Ogallala became increasingly exploited, though it declined
in recent periods. Average manufacturing payroll per worker also increased, though the es-
timates are not statistically significant (column 4). These measures provide only a rough
proxy for local wages, and data are unavailable to control for worker characteristics.
    Overall, in understanding the mechanisms through which the agricultural sector affects
non-agricultural sectors, there are only limited indications that higher local input costs
discouraged non-agricultural activity. Increased real housing costs may be masked, however,
by increased consumption disamenities associated with agricultural production.
V.E    Estimated Geographical Spillover Impacts
The Ogallala may have spillover impacts on nearby non-Ogallala counties, such that esti-
mated impacts on local non-agricultural sectors understate aggregate impacts on the non-
agricultural economy. The existence of spatial spillover impacts are also of independent

                                              13
interest. There are minimal direct spillovers in access to water, as Ogallala water is not
directly transferred to non-Ogallala counties for agricultural use.
    The Ogallala should have limited indirect effects on agricultural prices because the Ogal-
lala region represents a small share of national and world agricultural production. However,
to the extent that some markets are more local, nearby non-Ogallala counties may be affected
by changes in factor availability and terms-of-trade.
    To explore local spillover effects, we compare counties near the Ogallala to counties further
from the Ogallala. Restricting the sample to counties with zero Ogallala share, equation (3)
is modified to estimate the impact in each year of distance to the Ogallala boundary. For ease
of interpretation, distance is measured in units of 100km and made negative. The estimated
coefficients are interpreted as the impact of the Ogallala on the nearest sample counties,
relative to the impact of the Ogallala on the furthest sample counties.
    Table 6 reports spatial spillover impacts on non-agricultural outcomes in counties near
the Ogallala, relative to counties further from the Ogallala. The estimates indicate little spa-
tial spillover impacts from the Ogallala. There is some indication of higher non-agricultural
population in nearby non-Ogallala counties, which may reflect displacement from Ogallala
counties, though these estimates are not generally statistically significant. From estimat-
ing the same specification, there is no substantial or statistically significant impact of the
Ogallala on agricultural outcomes in nearby non-Ogallala counties (Hornbeck and Keskin
2011). When expanding the sample to counties within 200km of the Ogallala boundary, for
increased statistical power, there remains little detectable geographic spillover impact.
    The absence of large spatial spillovers makes interpretation of the main estimates more
simple, which focus on a relative comparison between counties over the Ogallala and non-
Ogallala counties within 100km. In this case, the “control” counties do not appear to be
largely affected by agricultural expansion over the Ogallala. As a similar check on the results’
interpretation, the estimates are similar when excluding 71 non-Ogallala counties that are
within 50km of the Ogallala boundary.
VI   Interpretation and Conclusion
Areas over the Ogallala aquifer experienced windfall agricultural gains when post-WWII
technologies increased farmers’ access to groundwater. This historical episode provides a
unique opportunity to explore both short-run and long-run economic spillovers from agricul-
ture to the local non-agricultural economy, comparing counties over the Ogallala to nearby
similar counties.
    As agricultural land values increased over the Ogallala, non-agricultural sectors expe-
rienced substantial short-run increases in sales. There was little change, however, in non-


                                               14
agricultural sectors’ number of establishments. Rural farm populations increased, yet non-
farm populations were unchanged in the short-run.
    Despite substantial and persistent gains in the agricultural sector, there was no long-run
expansion in Ogallala counties’ non-agricultural economic activity. Short-run increases in
non-agricultural sector sales disappeared over time, and there remained little change in the
number of non-agricultural sector establishments. As a summary measure of local economic
activity, total population gradually declined despite increases in rural farm population. This
episode highlights the value of historical perspective in evaluating the local impact of sectoral
expansion on broader economic growth.
    Estimated impacts on the local non-agricultural economy reflect a net impact of potential
negative and positive spillovers. Negative spillovers through increased costs for land and la-
bor may be counterbalanced by positive spillovers through increased demand for local goods,
shared infrastructure, or direct productivity spillovers. There are only limited indications of
increased costs for land and labor, however, suggesting that any positive spillovers may also
be small.
    Identifying local economic spillovers requires that access to Ogallala groundwater did not
directly benefit non-agricultural sectors. Violation of this assumption, however, would cause
the empirical estimates to overstate positive local economic spillovers.
    Local economic benefits should be especially pronounced in this region and time period,
where the agricultural sector forms a substantial share of the local economy. In other contexts
where trade is more restricted and local demand more important, positive spillover impacts
may be greater. In other contexts where labor mobility is more restricted, however, there
may be stronger negative crowd-out effects through increased local wages.
    The Ogallala may have contributed to economic growth in non-Ogallala counties, yet
there is little evidence for spatial spillover impacts on agricultural or non-agricultural out-
comes in nearby non-Ogallala counties compared to further non-Ogallala counties. The
empirical results are also robust to excluding the closest non-Ogallala counties. The em-
pirical analysis is unable to identify spillover impacts at the aggregate level of the entire
economy, yet typical agricultural policies are designed to support agriculture in particular
areas with the hope of generating local economic spillovers.
    Overall, with the benefit of long-run historical perspective, supporting local agricultural
production does not appear to generate local economic spillovers that might justify its distor-
tionary impacts. Access to Ogallala groundwater generated substantial and persistent gains
in the agricultural sector, but had little detectable benefit for the long-run development of
the local non-agricultural economy.



                                               15
REFERENCES

Black, D., T. McKinnish, and S. Sanders. 2005. “The Economic Impact of the Coal Boom and
Bust.” Economic Journal, Vol. 115, No. 50, pp. 449-476.

Conley, T. 1999. “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence.” Journal of
Econometrics, Vol. 92, No. 1, pp. 1-45.

Easter, K., M. Rosegrant, and A. Dinar, eds. 1998. Markets for Water: Potential and
Performance. Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Ellison, G., E. Glaeser, and W. Kerr. 2010. “What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence
from Coagglomeration Patterns.” American Economic Review, Vol. 100, No. 3, pp. 1195-1213.

Fishback, P., W. Horrace, and S. Kantor. 2005. “Did New Deal Grant Programs Stimulate
Local Economies? A Study of Federal Grants and Retail Sales During the Great Depression.”
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 65, No. 1, pp. 36-71.

Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig. 2004. “Agricultural Productivity Growth, Rural Economic
Diversity, and Economic Reforms: India, 1970 – 2000.” Economic Development and Cultural
Change, Vol. 52, No. 3, pp. 509-542.

Gollin, D., S. Parente, and R. Rogerson. 2002. “The Role of Agriculture in Development.”
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 92, No. 2, pp. 160-164.

Greenstone, M., R. Hornbeck, and E. Moretti. 2010. “Identifying Agglomeration Spillovers:
Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings.” Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 118, No. 3, pp. 536-598.

Gutmann, M. 2005. Great Plains Population and Environment Data: Agricultural Data, ICPSR.

Haines, M. 2005. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: US, 1790-2000, ICPSR.

Hornbeck, R. 2012. “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short- and Long-run
Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.” American Economic Review, Vol. 102, No. 4, pp.
1477-1507.

Hornbeck, R. 2010. “Barbed Wire: Property Rights and Agricultural Development,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 125, No. 2, pp. 767–810.

Hornbeck, R. and P. Keskin. 2011. “The Evolving Impact of the Ogallala Aquifer: Agricultural
Adaptation to Groundwater and Climate.” NBER Working Paper #17625.

Howe, C.W., J.K. Lazo, and K.R. Weber. 1990. “The Economic Impacts of Agriculture-to-
Urban Water Transfers on the Area of Origin: A Case Study of the Arkansas River Valley in
Colorado.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 72, No. 5, pp. 1200-1204.



                                              16
Howe, C.W. and C. Goemans. 2003. “Water Transfers and their Impacts: Lessons from Three
Colorado Water Markets.” Journal of the American Water Resources Association, October, pp.
1055-1065.

Johnson, D. 2000. “Population, Food, and Knowledge.” American Economic Review, Vol. 90,
No. 1, pp. 1-14.

Kirwan, B. 2009. “The Incidence of U.S. Agricultural Subsidies on Farmland Rental Rates.”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 117, No. 1, pp. 138-164.

Nunn, N. and N. Qian. 2011. “The Potato’s Contribution to Population and Urbanization:
Evidence from a Historical Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 126, pp. 593-
650.

Roback, J. 1982. “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
90, pp. 1257-1278.

Rosegrant, M. and H. Binswanger. 1994. “Markets in Tradable Water Rights: Potential for
Efficiency Gains in Developing Country Water Resource Allocation.” World Development, Vol.
22, No. 11, pp. 1613-1625.

Thobani, M. 1997. “Formal Water Markets: Why, When, and How to Introduce Tradable Water
Rights.” World Bank Research Observer, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 161-79.

USDA. 2012. “Agricultural Trade Multipliers: 2010 Data Overview.” Effects of Trade on the
U.S. Economy, Economic Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture.

Vogel, S. 1994. “Structural Changes in Agriculture: Production Linkages and Agricultural
Demand-Led Industrialization.” Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 46, No. 1, pp. 136-156.

World Bank. 2008. “World Development Report: Agriculture for Development.” The World
Bank: Washington DC.




                                             17
Figure 1. Ogallala Region and Counties within 100km




Notes: The shaded area represents the original boundary of the Ogallala Aquifer, as mapped by the United States
Geological Survey. This map is overlaid with county borders, as defined in 1920, for all counties within 100km of
the Ogallala boundary.




                                                        18
Figure 2. Estimated Impacts of the Ogallala on Agriculture and Population
Panel A. Log Value of Agricultural Land and Buildings (Table 2, Column 3)




Panel B. Rural Farm Population (in thousands), relative to 1940 (Table 3, Column 3)




Panel C. Total Population (in thousands), relative to 1940 (Table 3, Column 2)




Notes: Relative to the omitted year of 1940, each panel reports estimated changes in Ogallala counties compared to
changes in non-Ogallala counties (from estimating equation 4 in the text). The dashed lines reflect 95% confidence
intervals around the estimated coefficients (reported in Table 2 and 3).


                                                        19
Figure 3. Estimated Impacts of the Ogallala on Non-Agricultural Sector Sales
Panel A. Log Manufacturing Value Added (Table 4, Column 2)    Panel B. Log Wholesale Sales (Table 4, Column 4)




Panel C. Log Retail Sales (Table 4, Column 6)                                   Panel D. Log Service Receipts (Table 4, Column 8)




Notes: Relative to the omitted year of 1940, each panel reports estimated changes in Ogallala counties compared to changes in non-Ogallala counties (from
estimating equation 4 in the text). The dashed lines reflect 95% confidence intervals around the estimated coefficients (reported in Table 4).


                                                                              20
Table 1. Average County Characteristics in 1940 and Differences by Ogallala Share
                                                                              Coefficient on Ogallala Share:
                                      County Mean         No Controls            State            State and          State, Soil,
                                                                             Fixed Effects      Soil Group          Climate, X/Y
Per county acre:                            (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)
Panel A. Agriculture (per county acre)
Farmland                                  0.851             0.118**             0.046*                0.005              0.013
                                         (0.174)            (0.025)             (0.023)             (0.026)            (0.029)
Irrigated Farmland (1935)                 0.007              -0.001              -0.001              -0.003             -0.004
                                         (0.020)            (0.002)             (0.002)             (0.003)            (0.003)
Log Value of Farmland                     2.261             0.343*               -0.164              -0.107             -0.024
 and Farm Buildings                      (1.050)            (0.150)             (0.122)             (0.088)            (0.104)
Log Value of Farm                         0.668               0.214              -0.170              -0.129             -0.080
 Revenue                                 (0.958)            (0.132)             (0.134)             (0.096)            (0.112)
Panel B. Population
Total Population                             14318           -7763**            -8505**             -5197*               -4756
                                            (15960)           (1674)             (2227)              (2481)             (2970)
Rural Farm Population                         5136            -1118*            -1498**             -1409*               -1191
                                             (4081)            (510)              (471)               (636)              (810)
Rural Non-Farm                                3863           -1712**            -1617**                -669               -287
 Population                                  (3109)            (405)              (418)               (544)              (693)
Urban Population                              5319           -4933**            -5390**               -3119              -3278
                                            (12134)           (1186)             (1799)              (1870)             (2154)
Panel C. Non-Agricultural Sector Establishments and Output
Log Manufacturing                              1.95          -0.63**            -0.65**               -0.38              -0.37
 Establishments                              (1.09)            (0.16)            (0.18)              (0.23)             (0.25)
Log Manufacturing                             12.42          -1.12**             -0.92*               -0.40              -0.55
 Value Added                                 (1.69)            (0.34)            (0.36)              (0.48)             (0.53)
Log Wholesale                                  3.13             -0.15             -0.20               -0.05               0.00
 Establishments                              (0.94)            (0.13)            (0.14)              (0.16)             (0.18)
Log Wholesale Sales                           13.98           -0.37*              -0.30               -0.05               0.04
                                             (1.30)            (0.18)            (0.20)              (0.24)             (0.27)
Log Retail                                     5.02          -0.56**            -0.55**              -0.31*              -0.25
 Establishments                              (0.86)            (0.11)            (0.12)              (0.14)             (0.15)
Log Retail Sales                              14.70          -0.60**            -0.54**               -0.24              -0.18
                                             (1.10)            (0.15)            (0.15)              (0.18)             (0.20)
Log Service                                    3.91          -0.41**            -0.50**               -0.25              -0.14
 Establishments                              (0.92)            (0.12)            (0.14)              (0.16)             (0.18)
Log Service Receipts                          11.65          -0.60**            -0.61**               -0.38              -0.25
                                             (1.24)            (0.17)            (0.19)              (0.22)             (0.25)
Panel D. Housing Costs and Income Proxies
Log Median Dwelling                            7.14              0.17              0.04                0.02              -0.06
 Value (Owner-Occupied)                      (0.53)            (0.09)            (0.09)              (0.09)             (0.10)
Log Median Dwelling                            2.45              0.03              0.09                0.06              -0.01
 Rent (Renter-Occupied)                      (0.33)            (0.05)            (0.05)              (0.06)             (0.06)
Log Retail Sales                               5.52             -0.09             -0.05                0.05               0.02
 per capita                                  (0.44)            (0.06)            (0.06)              (0.08)             (0.08)
Log Manufacturing                              8.01              0.04              0.02                0.05               0.07
 Payroll per worker (1950)                   (0.41)            (0.08)            (0.08)              (0.09)             (0.10)
Notes: Column 1 reports average county characteristics in 1940, except for irrigated farmland for which data are first available in
1935. County averages are weighted by county acres, and standard deviations are reported in parentheses. Columns 2 through 5
report estimates from regressing each outcome on the fraction of county area over the Ogallala. Column 2 reports the
unconditional difference. Column 3 controls for state fixed effects. Column 4 also controls for the fraction of county area in each
soil group. Column 5 also controls for linear functions of county average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and
latitude. The regressions are weighted by county acres, and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. ** denotes
statistical significance at the 1% level, * at the 5% level.




                                                                21
Table 2. Estimated Differences in Agricultural Outcomes, by Ogallala Share and Year
                        Irrigated Farmland         Farmland Acres         Log Value Farmland Log Farm Revenue
                          per county acre          per county acre           per county acre         per county acre
Coefficient in year:            (1)                        (2)                     (3)                      (4)
  1920                                                  -0.003                   -0.038                  -0.010
                                                        (0.038)                  (0.135)                 (0.128)
  1925                                                  -0.015                   -0.035                  0.044
                                                        (0.036)                  (0.112)                 (0.131)
  1930                                                  0.044                    0.223*                  0.207
                                                        (0.032)                  (0.103)                 (0.107)
  1935                        -0.004                    0.054*                   0.160
                              (0.003)                   (0.023)                  (0.093)
  1940                                                  0.013                    -0.024                  -0.080
                                                        (0.029)                  (0.104)                 (0.112)
  1945                                                  0.052                    0.096                   0.355**
                                                        (0.029)                  (0.093)                 (0.105)
  1950                        0.013                     0.016                    0.273**                 0.423**
                              (0.007)                   (0.029)                  (0.085)                 (0.112)
  1954                        0.030**                   0.039                    0.360**                 0.382**
                              (0.009)                   (0.032)                  (0.084)                 (0.121)
  1959                        0.051**                   0.008                    0.352**                 0.480**
                              (0.010)                   (0.030)                  (0.090)                 (0.116)
  1964                        0.062**                   0.043                    0.415**                 0.464**
                              (0.010)                   (0.027)                  (0.081)                 (0.129)
  1969                        0.080**                   0.055*                   0.394**                 0.584**
                              (0.010)                   (0.024)                  (0.076)                 (0.126)
  1974                        0.097**                   0.052**                  0.369**                 0.888**
                              (0.012)                   (0.020)                  (0.072)                 (0.133)
  1978                        0.113**                   0.060**                  0.239**                 0.813**
                              (0.014)                   (0.019)                  (0.072)                 (0.129)
  1982                        0.104**                   0.071**                  0.219**                 0.935**
                              (0.013)                   (0.020)                  (0.073)                 (0.132)
  1987                        0.093**                   0.058**                  0.158*                  0.880**
                              (0.012)                   (0.020)                  (0.069)                 (0.130)
  1992                        0.105**                   0.051*                   0.209**                 1.016**
                              (0.013)                   (0.022)                  (0.076)                 (0.145)
  1997                        0.114**                   0.064**                  0.245**                 1.177**
                              (0.014)                   (0.023)                  (0.068)                 (0.150)
  2002                                                  0.055*                   0.178*                  1.291**
                                                        (0.021)                  (0.080)                 (0.155)
Sample Counties                 368                       368                      368                     368
Notes: Each column reports estimates from equation (3): the indicated outcome variable is regressed on the share
of county area over the Ogallala, state fixed effects, the fraction of county area in each soil group, and linear
functions of county average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude. All coefficients are allowed
to vary in each year. The regressions are weighted by county acres, and robust standard errors clustered by county
are reported in parentheses. ** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, * at the 5% level.




                                                         22
Table 3. Estimated Changes in Population by Ogallala Share, Relative to 1940
                                                                         Population:
                     Log Population           Total            Rural Farm       Rural Non-Farm           Urban
Relative to 1940:         (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)
 1920                    -0.092              -390                                                       500
                         (0.083)             (1036)                                                     (735)
 1930                    0.007               -265                -22                   -132             -111
                         (0.046)             (549)               (229)                 (226)            (398)
 1940                       0                   0                   0                     0                0

 1950                     0.068               -369               496**                 73                  -938
                          (0.042)             (1133)             (159)                 (386)               (945)
  1960                    0.066               -2652              941**                 -287                -3306
                          (0.068)             (3156)             (336)                 (712)               (2692)
  1970                    0.030               -6973              1129*                 -802                -7300
                          (0.084)             (5055)             (469)                 (646)               (4774)
  1980                    0.018               -10739             1125*                 -1619               -10246
                          (0.096)             (7041)             (538)                 (842)               (6865)
  1990                    -0.050              -16174
                          (0.117)             (9789)
  2000                    -0.083              -23637
                          (0.128)             (12673)
Sample Counties             368                 368                368                   368                 368
Notes: Each column reports estimates from equation (4): the change in the indicated outcome variable, relative to
1940, is regressed on the share of county area over the Ogallala, state fixed effects, the fraction of county area in
each soil group, and linear functions of county average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude.
All coefficients are allowed to vary in each year. The regressions are weighted by county acres, and robust
standard errors clustered by county are reported in parentheses. ** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level,
at the 5% level.




                                                         23
Table 4. Estimated Changes in Non-Agricultural Sectors by Ogallala Share, Relative to 1940
                         Log Manufacturing                       Log Wholesale                        Log Retail                          Log Service
                  Establishments Value Added            Establishments       Sales          Establishments       Sales          Establishments      Receipts
Relative to 1940:       (1)             (2)                   (3)             (4)                 (5)             (6)                 (7)             (8)
 1920                 -0.055
                        (0.179)
 1930                   -0.175
                        (0.114)
 1940                     0                  0                 0                 0                 0                 0                 0                 0

 1950                   -0.009            0.330                0.101             0.417**            0.059             0.173**         0.059              0.192**
                        (0.087)           (0.223)              (0.066)           (0.130)            (0.036)           (0.048)         (0.061)            (0.070)
  1959                  -0.034            0.173                -0.029            -0.110             0.082             0.215**         -0.078             -0.090
                        (0.113)           (0.224)              (0.084)           (0.160)            (0.052)           (0.067)         (0.077)            (0.116)
  1969                  0.151             0.351                -0.079            0.085              0.094             0.222*          0.015              -0.064
                        (0.147)           (0.323)              (0.092)           (0.177)            (0.059)           (0.096)         (0.078)            (0.121)
  1978                  0.073             0.191                0.107             0.051              0.023             -0.008          -0.075             -0.060
                        (0.156)           (0.374)              (0.122)           (0.260)            (0.079)           (0.120)         (0.100)            (0.166)
  1987                  0.062             0.214                -0.104            -0.243             -0.039            -0.124          -0.194             -0.230
                        (0.179)           (0.443)              (0.142)           (0.258)            (0.098)           (0.146)         (0.147)            (0.188)
  1997                                                         -0.136            -0.229             -0.061            -0.192
                                                               (0.154)           (0.234)            (0.125)           (0.169)
Sample Counties           200                 149               352               231                367               333             359                340
Notes: Each column reports estimates from equation (4): the change in the indicated outcome variable, relative to 1940, is regressed on the share of county
area over the Ogallala, state fixed effects, the fraction of county area in each soil group, and linear functions of county average precipitation, average
temperature, longitude, and latitude. All coefficients are allowed to vary in each year. The regressions are weighted by county acres, and robust standard
errors clustered by county are reported in parentheses. ** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, at the 5% level.




                                                                               24
Table 5. Estimated Changes in Housing Costs and Income Proxies, Relative to 1940
                          Log Median               Log Median
                         Dwelling Value           Dwelling Rent          Log Retail Sales       Log Manufacturing
                        (Owner Occupied)        (Renter Occupied)          per capita           Payroll per Worker
Relative to 1940:             (1)                       (2)                   (3)                       (4)
 1940                          0                         0                     0                         0

 1950                          0.071                  0.036                     0.075                    0.058
                               (0.067)                (0.063)                   (0.051)                  (0.096)
  1959                         0.075                  -0.028                    0.123*                   0.152
                               (0.079)                (0.066)                   (0.060)                  (0.100)
  1969                         0.064                  -0.026                    0.189**                  0.070
                               (0.087)                (0.069)                   (0.064)                  (0.096)
  1982                         0.039                  -0.014                    -0.065
                               (0.096)                (0.070)                   (0.082)
  1992                         0.027                  -0.001                    -0.091
                               (0.096)                (0.061)                   (0.082)
Sample Counties                  343                    298                       357                      174
Notes: Each column reports estimates from equation (4): the change in the indicated outcome variable, relative to
1940, is regressed on the share of county area over the Ogallala, state fixed effects, the fraction of county area in
each soil group, and linear functions of county average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude.
For column 4, data in 1940 are unavailable and the reported changes are relative to 1930. All coefficients are
allowed to vary in each year. The regressions are weighted by county acres, and robust standard errors clustered by
county are reported in parentheses. ** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, at the 5% level.




                                                         25
Table 6. Estimated Geographic Spillovers: Nearby Non-Ogallala Counties vs. Counties 100km from the Ogallala
                                               Population:                                                   Value Added or Total Sales:
                         Log           Rural Farm    Rural Non-Farm          Urban        Manufacturing      Wholesale         Retail            Services
Relative to 1940:        (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)             (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)
 1920                   -0.203*                                              -2867
                        (0.099)                                              (1458)
 1930                   -0.012            -3               -153              -415
                        (0.049)           (399)            (537)             (466)
 1940                     0                  0               0                 0                 0                0                0                 0

 1950                  0.095              -57               742               1907            -0.103              0.238            0.016             0.127
                       (0.083)            (274)             (660)             (2326)          (0.381)             (0.402)          (0.058)           (0.162)
  1960                 0.046              -727              3634*             7341            -0.270              0.317            0.065             0.054
                       (0.165)            (453)             (1550)            (6169)          (0.361)             (0.480)          (0.113)           (0.227)
  1970                 -0.069             -696              1787              13311           -0.500              0.382            -0.002            0.038
                       (0.167)            (543)             (1392)            (11198)         (0.435)             (0.467)          (0.165)           (0.249)
  1980                 -0.135             -830              1738              18335           -0.110              0.601            -0.035            -0.361
                       (0.184)            (629)             (1553)            (16493)         (0.588)             (0.660)          (0.209)           (0.298)
  1990                 -0.115                                                                 -0.076              0.889            0.073             0.077
                       (0.220)                                                                (0.783)             (0.674)          (0.260)           (0.360)
  2000                 -0.131
                       (0.234)
Sample Counties         136                136               136               136             72                  84               116               132
Notes: For counties with zero area over the Ogallala, each column reports estimates from a modified equation (4): coefficients report the impact of "Negative
Distance to Ogallala Boundary," measured in 100km units. Coefficients reflect average outcomes in counties next to the Ogallala boundary, relative to
counties 100km away. Otherwise, the specifications are as described in Tables 3-5. ** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, at the 5% level.




                                                                             26
Appendix Figure 1. Irrigated Percent of County Area in 1935 and 1974
A. Irrigation in 1935                                    B. Irrigation in 1974




Notes: Appendix Figures 1a and 1b show 368 counties within 100km of the Ogallala boundary, shaded to reflect the
percent of county land irrigated in 1935 and 1974. White areas are omitted from the sample.




                                                      27
Appendix Figure 2. Value of Agricultural Land per County Acre, Shaded by Quintile
A. Land Value in 1920                                        B. Land Value in 1964




Notes: Counties are shaded to reflect their quintile in the distribution of counties' average value of agricultural land
per county acre in 1920 (Panel A) and 1964 (Panel B). The lightest gray represents the 20% least valuable counties
in each year, while the darkest gray represents the 20% most valuable counties in each year. White areas are
omitted from the sample.




                                                           28
A1. Estimated Differences in Agricultural Disamenities by Ogallala Share and Year
                           Log Expenditure on           Log Expenditure on                  Log Swine
                          Commercial Fertilizer        Agricultural Chemicals
Coefficient in year:              (1)                            (2)                            (3)
 1920                                                                                          0.133
                                                                                               (0.172)
 1930                                                                                          0.573**
                                                                                               (0.139)
 1940                                                                                          0.311
                                                                                               (0.167)
 1950                                                                                          0.459*
                                                                                               (0.182)
 1954                             0.230                                                        0.409*
                                  (0.316)                                                      (0.179)
 1959                                                                                          0.599**
                                                                                               (0.173)
 1964                             1.160**                                                      0.662**
                                  (0.262)                                                      (0.189)
 1969                             1.149**                        0.986**                       0.716**
                                  (0.198)                        (0.190)                       (0.206)
 1974                             1.548**                        1.199**                       0.659**
                                  (0.242)                        (0.204)                       (0.252)
 1982                             1.247**                        1.191**                       0.616*
                                  (0.182)                        (0.226)                       (0.254)
 1987                             1.205**                        0.902**                       0.747**
                                  (0.195)                        (0.169)                       (0.271)
 1992                             1.250**                        0.927**                       0.532
                                  (0.187)                        (0.187)                       (0.291)
 2002                             1.302**                        1.244**                       1.099*
                                  (0.225)                        (0.222)                       (0.504)
Sample Counties                    352                            356                           247
Notes: Each column reports estimates from equation (3): the indicated outcome variable is regressed on the
share of county area over the Ogallala, state fixed effects, the fraction of county area in each soil group, and
linear functions of county average precipitation, average temperature, longitude, and latitude. All
coefficients are allowed to vary in each year. The regressions are weighted by county acres, and robust
standard errors clustered by county are reported in parentheses. ** denotes statistical significance at the 1%
level, at the 5% level.




                                                      29
