NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN INTERTEMPORAL CAPM WITH STOCHASTIC VOLATILITY
John Y. Campbell
Stefano Giglio
Christopher Polk
Robert Turley
Working Paper 18411
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18411
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

We are grateful to Torben Andersen, Gurdip Bakshi, John Cochrane, Bjorn Eraker, Bryan Kelly, Ian
Martin, Sydney Ludvigson, Monika Piazzesi, Ken Singleton, Tuomo Vuolteenaho, an Associate Editor,
two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at various venues for comments. We thank Josh
Coval, Ken French, Nick Roussanov, Mila Getmansky Sherman, and Tyler Shumway for providing
data used in the analysis. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18411.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by John Y. Campbell, Stefano Giglio, Christopher Polk, and Robert Turley. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

An Intertemporal CAPM with Stochastic Volatility
John Y. Campbell, Stefano Giglio, Christopher Polk, and Robert Turley
NBER Working Paper No. 18411
September 2012, Revised June 2015
JEL No. G12,N22
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the pricing of volatility risk using the first-order conditions of a long-term equity
investor who is content to hold the aggregate equity market rather than tilting towards value stocks
and other equity portfolios that are attractive to short-term investors. We show that a conservative
long-term investor will avoid such tilts in order to hedge against two types of deterioration in investment
opportunities: declining expected stock returns, and increasing volatility. Empirically, we present novel
evidence that low-frequency movements in equity volatility, tied to the default spread, are priced in
the cross-section of stock returns.
John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu
Stefano Giglio
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
stefano.giglio@chicagobooth.edu

A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18411

Christopher Polk
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton St.
London WC2A 2AE
UK
c.polk@lse.ac.uk
Robert Turley
Harvard University
Baker Library 220D
Boston MA 02163
robert.turley@dodgeandcox.com

1

Introduction

The fundamental insight of intertemporal asset pricing theory is that long-term investors
should care just as much about the returns they earn on their invested wealth as about the
level of that wealth.

In a simple model with a constant rate of return, for example, the

sustainable level of consumption is the return on wealth multiplied by the level of wealth,
and both terms in this product are equally important. In a more realistic model with timevarying investment opportunities, long-term investors with relative risk aversion greater than
one (conservative long-term investors) will seek to hold “intertemporal hedges”, assets that
perform well when investment opportunities deteriorate.

Merton’s (1973) intertemporal

capital asset pricing model (ICAPM) shows that such assets should deliver lower average
returns in equilibrium if they are priced from conservative long-term investors’ …rst-order
conditions.
Investment opportunities in the stock market may deteriorate either because expected
stock returns decline or because the volatility of stock returns increases.

The relative

importance of these two types of intertemporal risk is an empirical question. In this paper,
we estimate an econometric model of stock returns that captures time-variation in both
expected returns and volatility and permits tractable analysis of long-term portfolio choice.
The model is a vector autoregression (VAR) for aggregate stock returns, realized variance,
and state variables, restricted to have scalar a¢ ne stochastic volatility so that the volatilities
of all shocks move proportionally.
Using this model and the …rst-order conditions of an in…nitely-lived investor with EpsteinZin (1989, 1991) preferences, who is assumed to hold an aggregate stock index, we calculate
the risk aversion needed to make the investor content to hold the market index rather than
tilting his portfolio towards value stocks that o¤er higher average returns. We …nd that a
moderate level of risk aversion, around 7, is su¢ cient to dissuade the investor from a tilt
towards value stocks. Growth stocks are attractive to a moderately conservative long-term
investor because they hedge against both declines in expected market returns and increases
1

in market volatility. These considerations would not be relevant for a single-period investor.
We obtain similar results for several other equity portfolio tilts, including tilts to portfolios
of stocks sorted by their past betas with market returns and with long-run volatility shocks,
and to managed portfolios that vary equity exposure in response to the level of expected
volatility.

The major exception is that the conservative long-term investor would …nd it

attractive to hold a managed portfolio that varies equity exposure in response to timevariation in expected stock returns. The reason is that we estimate only a weak correlation
between expected returns and volatility, so a market timing strategy does not lead to an
undesired volatility exposure.
Following Merton (1973), one might interpret the conservative long-term investor we
consider in this paper as a representative investor who trades freely in all asset markets.
There are however two obstacles to this interpretation.

First, as already mentioned, our

model does not explain why such an agent would not vary equity exposure with the level
of the equity premium. Borrowing constraints can …x equity exposure at 100% when they
bind, but we estimate that they will not bind at all times in our historical sample. Second,
the aggregate stock index we consider here may not be an adequate proxy for all wealth,
a point emphasized by many papers including Campbell (1996), Jagannathan and Wang
(1996), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), and Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Verdelhan (2013).
For both these reasons, we interpret our results in microeconomic terms, as a description
of the intertemporal considerations that limit the desire of conservative long-term equity
investors (including institutions such as pension funds and endowments) to follow value
strategies and other equity strategies with high average returns.

These considerations

may contribute to the explanation of cross-sectional patterns in stock returns in a general
equilibrium setting with heterogeneous investors, even if they do not provide a complete
explanation in themselves.
Our empirical model provides a novel description of stochastic equity volatility that is of
independent interest. Our VAR system includes not only stock returns and realized vari2

ance, but also other …nancial indicators including the price-smoothed earnings ratio and the
default spread, the yield spread of low-rated over high-rated bonds. We …nd low-frequency
movements in volatility tied to these variables. While this phenomenon has received little
attention in the literature, we argue that it is a natural outcome of investor behavior. Investors in risky bonds perceive the long-run component of volatility and incorporate this
information when they set credit spreads, as risky bonds are short the option to default
over long maturities. GARCH-based methods that …lter only the information in past stock
returns fail to extract this low-frequency component of volatility, which is of key importance to long-horizon investors who care mostly about persistent changes in their investment
opportunity set.
The organization of our paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews related literature. Section
3 presents the …rst-order conditions of an in…nitely-lived Epstein-Zin investor, allowing for a
speci…c form of stochastic volatility, and shows how they can be used to estimate preference
parameters.

Section 4 presents data, econometrics, and VAR estimates of the dynamic

process for stock returns and realized volatility. This section documents the empirical success of our model in forecasting long-run volatility.

Section 5 introduces our test assets

and estimates their betas with news about the market’s future cash ‡ows, discount rates,
and volatility. Section 6 turns to cross-sectional asset pricing and estimates the investor’s
preference parameters to …t a cross-section of excess returns on test assets, taking the dynamics of stock returns as given. This section also explores the implications of our model
for the history of our investor’s marginal utility. Section 7 concludes. An online appendix to
the paper (Campbell, Giglio, Polk, and Turley 2015a) provides supporting details including
a battery of robustness tests, and a companion paper (Campbell, Giglio, Polk, and Turley
2015b) considers non-equity test assets.

3

2

Literature Review

Since Merton (1973) …rst formulated the ICAPM, a large empirical literature has explored
the relevance of intertemporal considerations for the pricing of …nancial assets in general,
and the cross-sectional pricing of stocks in particular.

One strand of this literature uses

the approximate accounting identity of Campbell and Shiller (1988a) and the …rst-order
conditions of an in…nitely-lived investor with Epstein-Zin preferences to obtain approximate
closed-form solutions for the ICAPM’s risk prices (Campbell 1993). These solutions can be
implemented empirically if they are combined with vector autoregressive (VAR) estimates
of asset return dynamics.

Campbell and Vuolteenaho (CV 2004), Campbell, Polk, and

Vuolteenaho (2010), and Campbell, Giglio, and Polk (CGP 2013) use this approach to argue
that value stocks outperform growth stocks on average because growth stocks hedge longterm investors against declines in the expected return on the aggregate stock market.
A weakness of these papers is that they ignore time-variation in the volatility of stock
returns. We remedy this weakness by augmenting the VAR system with a scalar a¢ ne stochastic volatility model, in which a single state variable governs the volatility of all shocks to
the VAR. In the continuous-time limit of the model, volatility always remains positive.2 We
extend the approximate closed-form ICAPM to allow for this type of stochastic volatility,
and derive three priced risk factors corresponding to three important attributes of aggregate
market returns: revisions in expected future cash ‡ows, discount rates, and volatility.
An attractive feature of our model is that the prices of these three risk factors depend on
only one free parameter, the long-horizon investor’s coe¢ cient of risk aversion. This protects
our empirical analysis from the critique of Daniel and Titman (1997, 2012) and Lewellen,
Nagel, and Shanken (2010) that models with multiple free parameters can spuriously …t the
returns to a set of test assets with a low-order factor structure. Our use of risk-sorted test
assets further protects us from this critique.
2

A¢ ne stochastic volatility models date back at least to Heston (1993) in continuous time. Similar
models have been applied in the long-run risk literature by Eraker (2008) and Hansen (2012), among others,
but much of this literature uses volatility speci…cations that are not guaranteed to remain positive.

4

Our work is complementary to recent research on the “long-run risk model”of asset prices
(Bansal and Yaron 2004) which can be traced back to insights in Kandel and Stambaugh
(1991). Both the approximate closed-form ICAPM and the long-run risk model start with
the …rst-order conditions of an in…nitely-lived Epstein-Zin investor.

As originally stated

by Epstein and Zin (1989), these …rst-order conditions involve both aggregate consumption
growth and the return on the market portfolio of aggregate wealth. Campbell (1993) pointed
out that the intertemporal budget constraint could be used to substitute out consumption
growth, turning the model into a Merton-style ICAPM. Restoy and Weil (1998, 2011) used
the same logic to substitute out the market portfolio return, turning the model into a generalized consumption CAPM in the style of Breeden (1979).

Bansal and Yaron (2004)

added stochastic volatility to the Restoy-Weil model, and subsequent theoretical and empirical research in the long-run risk framework has increasingly emphasized the importance
of stochastic volatility (Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron 2012, Beeler and Campbell 2012, Hansen
2012).

In this paper, we give the approximate closed-form ICAPM the same ability to

handle stochastic volatility that its cousin, the long-run risk model, already possesses.3
Bansal, Kiku, Shaliastovich and Yaron (BKSY 2014), a paper written contemporaneously
with the …rst version of this paper, explores the e¤ects of stochastic volatility in the longrun risk model. Like us, they …nd stochastic volatility to be an important feature in the
time series of equity returns. An important di¤erence is that BKSY’s benchmark model
assumes a homoskedastic process driving volatility. In our theoretical analysis, we discuss
some conditions that are required for their model solution to be valid and argue that these
conditions are not satis…ed empirically.

The di¤erent modeling assumptions and some

di¤erences in empirical implementation account for our contrasting empirical results; we
show that volatility risk is very important in explaining the cross-section of stock returns
while they …nd it has little impact on cross-sectional di¤erences in risk premia. Indeed,
BKSY …nd that a value-minus-growth bet has a positive beta with volatility news, while we
3

Two unpublished papers by Chen (2003) and Sohn (2010) also attempt to do this. As we discuss in detail
in the online appendix, these papers make strong assumptions about the covariance structure of various news
terms when deriving their pricing equations.

5

…nd it always has a negative volatility beta. Our negative volatility beta estimate is more
consistent with models of real options held by growth …rms, such as McQuade (2012), and
with the underperformance of value stocks during periods of elevated volatility including the
Great Depression, the technology boom of the late 1990s, and the Great Recession of the
late 2000s (CGP 2013).
Stochastic volatility has been explored in other branches of the …nance literature that we
summarize in the online appendix. Most obviously, this is a prime concern of the …eld of
…nancial econometrics. However, the focus has mostly been on univariate models, such as the
GARCH class of models (Engle 1982, Bollerslev 1986), or univariate …ltering methods that
use realized high-frequency volatility (Barndor¤-Nielsen and Shephard 2002, Andersen et al.
2003). A much smaller literature has, like us, looked directly at the information in other
economic and …nancial variables concerning future volatility (Schwert 1989, Christiansen,
Schmeling, and Schrimpf 2012, Paye 2012, Engle, Ghysels, and Sohn 2013).

3

An Intertemporal Model with Stochastic Volatility

In this section, we derive an expression for the log stochastic discount factor (SDF) of
the intertemporal CAPM model that allows for stochastic volatility. We then discuss the
properties of the model, including the requirements for a solution to exist, the implications
for asset pricing, and methods for estimation.

3.1
3.1.1

The stochastic discount factor
Preferences

We assume a representative agent with Epstein–Zin preferences and write the value function
as

6

h
Vt = (1

1

) Ct

1
Et Vt+1

+

i1

1=

(1)

;

where Ct is consumption and the preference parameters are the discount factor ; risk aversion
, and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS)
= (1

)=(1

. For convenience, we de…ne

1= ).

The corresponding stochastic discount factor (SDF) can be written as

Mt+1 =

Ct
Ct+1

1=

!

1

W t Ct
Wt+1

(2)

;

where Wt is the market value of the consumption stream owned by the agent, including
current consumption Ct .4
We will be studying risk premia and are therefore concerned with innovations in the SDF.
We will also assume that asset returns and the SDF are conditionally jointly lognormally
distributed. Since we allow for changing conditional moments, we are careful to write both
…rst and second moments with time subscripts to indicate that they can vary over time.
De…ning the log return on wealth rt+1 = ln (Wt+1 = (Wt

Ct )), and the log consumption-

wealth ratio ht+1 = ln (Wt+1 =Ct+1 ) (denoted by h because this is the variable that determines
intertemporal hedging demand), we can write the innovation in the log SDF as
mt+1

Et mt+1 =
=

( ct+1
(ht+1

Et ct+1 ) + (

Et ht+1 )

The second equality uses the identity rt+1

(rt+1

1) (rt+1

Et rt+1 )

Et rt+1 ):

Et rt+1 = ( ct+1

Et ct+1 ) + (ht+1

(3)
Et ht+1 )

to substitute consumption out of the SDF, replacing it with the wealth-consumption ratio
and the log return on the wealth portfolio.
4

This notational convention is not consistent in the literature. Some authors exclude current consumption
from the de…nition of current wealth.

7

3.1.2

Solving the SDF forward

The online appendix shows that by using equation (3) to price the wealth portfolio, and
taking a loglinear approximation of the wealth portfolio return (that is perfectly accurate
when the elasticity of intertemporal substitution equals one), we obtain a di¤erence equation
for the innovation in ht+1 that can be solved forward to an in…nite horizon to obtain:
ht+1

Et ht+1 = (

Et )

1)(Et+1

1
X

j

rt+1+j

j=1

+
= (
where

1
(Et+1
2

Et )

1
X

j

Vart+j [mt+1+j + rt+1+j ]

j=1

1)NDR;t+1 +

1
NRISK;t+1 ;
2

(4)

is a parameter of loglinearization related to the average consumption-wealth ratio,

and somewhat less than one. The second equality in (4) follows CV (2004) and uses the
notation NDR (“news about discount rates”) for revisions in expected future returns. In a
similar spirit, we write revisions in expectations of future risk (the variance of the future log
return plus the log stochastic discount factor) as NRISK .
Substituting (4) into (3) and simplifying, we obtain:
mt+1

Et mt+1 =
=

[rt+1
NCF;t+1

1
1)NDR;t+1 + NRISK;t+1
2
1
[ NDR;t+1 ] + NRISK;t+1 :
2

Et rt+1 ]

(

(5)

The …rst equality in (5) expresses the log SDF in terms of the market return and news about
future variables. In particular, it identi…es three priced factors: the market return (with
a price of risk ), discount rate news (with price of risk (
risk (with price of risk of

1
).
2

1)), and news about future

This is an extension of the ICAPM as derived by Campbell

(1993), with no reference to consumption or the elasticity of intertemporal substitution :5
5

Campbell (1993) brie‡y considers the heteroskedastic case, noting that when = 1, Vart [mt+1 + rt+1 ]
is a constant. This implies that NRISK does not vary over time so the stochastic volatility term disappears.

8

The second equality rewrites the model, following CV (2004), by breaking the market
return into cash-‡ow news and discount-rate news. Cash-‡ow news NCF;t+1 is de…ned by
NCF;t+1 = rt+1 Et rt+1 + NDR;t+1 . The price of risk for cash-‡ow news is

times greater

than the unit price of risk for (negative) discount-rate news, hence CV call betas with cash‡ow news “bad betas”and those with negative discount-rate news “good betas”. The third
term in (5) shows the risk price for exposure to news about future risks and did not appear
in CV’s model, which assumed homoskedasticity. Not surprisingly, the model implies that
an asset providing positive returns when risk expectations increase will o¤er a lower return
on average; equivalently, the log SDF is high when future volatility is anticipated to be high.
Because the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) has no e¤ect on risk prices in
our model, we do not identify this parameter and therefore do not face the recent critique of
Epstein, Farhi, and Strzalecki (2014) that models with a large wedge between risk aversion
and the reciprocal of the EIS imply an unrealistic willingness to pay for early resolution
of uncertainty.6 However, the EIS does in‡uence the implied behavior of the investor’s
consumption, a topic we explore further below.

3.1.3

From news about risk to news about volatility

The risk news term NRISK;t+1 in equation (5) represents news about the conditional variance
of returns plus the stochastic discount factor, Vart [mt+1 + rt+1 ]. It therefore depends on the
SDF and its innovations. To close the model and derive its empirical implications, we must
make assumptions concerning the nature of the data generating process for stock returns
and the variance terms that will allow us to solve for Vart [mt+1 + rt+1 ] and NRISK;t+1 .
Campbell claims that the stochastic volatility term also disappears when = 1, but this is incorrect. When
limits are taken correctly, NRISK does not depend on
(except indirectly through the loglinearization
parameter, ).
6
We use the standard terminology to describe the two parameters of the Epstein-Zin utility function, as
risk aversion and as the elasticity of intertemporal substitution, although Garcia, Renault, and Semenov
(2006) and Hansen, Heaton, Lee, and Roussanov (2007) point out that this interpretation may not be correct
when di¤ers from the reciprocal of .

9

We assume that the economy is described by a …rst-order VAR
xt+1 = x +
where xt+1 is an n

(xt

x) +

(6)

t ut+1 ;

2
t+1

1 vector of state variables that has rt+1 as its …rst element,

as its

second element, and n 2 other variables that help to predict the …rst and second moments of
aggregate returns. x and

are an n

1 vector and an n

n matrix of constant parameters,

and ut+1 is a vector of shocks to the state variables normalized so that its …rst element
has unit variance. We assume that ut+1 has a constant variance-covariance matrix
element

11

= 1.

We also de…ne n

, with

1 vectors e1 and e2 , all of whose elements are zero

except for a unit …rst element in e1 and second element in e2 .
The key assumption here is that a scalar random variable,

2
t,

equal to the conditional

variance of market returns, also governs time-variation in the variance of all shocks to this
system. Both market returns and state variables, including variance itself, have innovations
whose variances move in proportion to one another. This assumption makes the stochastic
volatility process a¢ ne, as in Heston (1993).

It implies that the conditional variance of

returns plus the stochastic discount factor is proportional to the conditional variance of
returns themselves.
Given this structure, news about discount rates can be written as
NDR;t+1 = e01

(I

)

1

(7)

t ut+1 ;

while implied cash ‡ow news is:
NCF;t+1 = e01 + e01

(I

)

1

(8)

t ut+1 :

Our log-linear model makes the log SDF a linear function of the state variables, so
all shocks to the log SDF are proportional to

10

t,

and Vart [mt+1 + rt+1 ] = !

2
t

for some

constant parameter !. This implies that news about risk, NRISK , is proportional to news
about market return variance, NV :7
NRISK;t+1 = ! e02 (I

)

1

t ut+1

(9)

= !NV;t+1 :

The parameter ! is a nonlinear function of the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion , as
well as the VAR parameters and the loglinearization coe¢ cient , but it does not depend on
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution

except indirectly through the in‡uence of

on

. In the online appendix, we show that ! solves:
!

2
t

= (1

)2 Vart [NCF;t+1 ] + !(1

1
)Covt [NCF;t+1 ; NV;t+1 ] + ! 2 Vart [NV;t+1 ] :
4

There are two main channels through which

(10)

a¤ects !. First, a higher risk aversion—

given the underlying volatilities of all shocks— implies a more volatile stochastic discount
factor m, and therefore higher risk. This e¤ect is proportional to (1

)2 , so it increases

rapidly with . Second, there is a feedback e¤ect on current risk through future risk: !
appears on the right-hand side of the equation as well. Given that in our estimation we …nd
Covt [NCF;t+1 ; NV;t+1 ] < 0, this second e¤ect makes ! increase even faster with .
The quadratic equation (10) has two solutions, but the online appendix shows that one
of them can be disregarded. The false solution is easily identi…ed by its implication that !
becomes in…nite as volatility shocks become small. The appendix also shows how to write
(10) directly in terms of the VAR parameters.
Finally, substituting (9) into (5), we obtain an empirically testable expression for the
7

This property does not generally hold in the model with a homoskedastic process for 2t proposed by
BKSY (2014). In BKSY’s model, Vart (mt+1 + rt+1 ) is not in general proportional to 2t , but depends on
both 2t and t . Therefore, NRISK is not in general proportional to NV , and NV is not in general the right
news term to use in cross-sectional asset pricing. The online appendix shows that BKSY’s use of NV for asset
pricing in this model can only be justi…ed with additional special assumptions not stated by BKSY: that
NCF and NV are uncorrelated, and that the NV shock only depends on innovations of state variables which
are themselves homoskedastic. As these assumptions are inconsistent with the data, and the homoskedastic
process allows 2t to become negative even in continuous time, we do not further consider this model.

11

SDF innovations in the ICAPM with stochastic volatility:
mt+1

Et mt+1 =

NCF;t+1

1
[ NDR;t+1 ] + !NV;t+1 ;
2

(11)

where ! solves equation (10).

3.2
3.2.1

Properties and estimation of the model
Existence of a solution

With constant volatility, our model can be solved for any level of risk aversion, but in the
presence of stochastic volatility the model admits a solution only for values of risk aversion
consistent with the existence of a real solution to the quadratic equation (10). Given our VAR
estimates of the variance and covariance terms, the online appendix plots ! as a function of
and shows that a real solution for ! exists when

lies between zero and 7.2.

The online appendix also shows that existence of a real solution for ! requires

to satisfy

the upper bound:
1
where

n

(

n

1
1)

(12)
cf

v

is the correlation between the news terms NCF and NV ,

of the scaled cash-‡ow news NCF;t+1 = t , and

v

cf

is the standard deviation

is the standard deviation of the scaled

variance news NV;t+1 = t .
To develop the intuition behind these equations further, the online appendix studies a
simple example in which the link between the existence to a solution for equation (10) and
the existence of a value function for the representative agent can be shown analytically. The
example assumes

= 1, since we can then solve directly for the value function without

any need for a loglinear approximation of the return on the wealth portfolio (Tallarini 2000,
Hansen, Heaton, and Li 2008). In the example, we …nd that the condition for the existence of
the value function coincides precisely with the condition for the existence of a real solution
12

to the quadratic equation for !.

This result shows that the possible non-existence of a

solution to the quadratic equation for ! is a deep feature of the model, not an artifact
of our loglinear approximation to the wealth portfolio return— which is not needed in the
special case where

= 1. The problem arises because the value function becomes ever more

sensitive to volatility as the volatility of the value function increases, and this sensitivity
feeds back into the volatility of the value function, further increasing it. When this positive
feedback becomes too powerful, then the value function ceases to exist.8
In our empirical analysis, we take seriously the constraint implied by the quadratic equation (10), and require that our parameter estimates satisfy this constraint.9 Given the high
average returns to risky assets in historical data, this means in practice that our estimate of
risk aversion is often close to the estimated upper bound of 7.2.

3.2.2

Asset pricing equation and risk premia

To explore the implications of the model for risk premia, we use the general asset pricing
equation under conditional lognormality,
1
0 = ln Et expfmt+1 + ri;t+1 g = Et [mt+1 + ri;t+1 ] + Vart [mt+1 + ri;t+1 ] :
2

(13)

Combining this with the approximation
Et ri;t+1 +

1
2

2
it

' (Et Ri;t+1

8

1) ;

In the online appendix, we show that existence of the solution for ! also imposes a lower bound on :
1 (1=( n + 1) cf v ). We do not focus on this lower bound on since in our case it lies far below zero,
at -6.8.
9
The constraint is ignored in BKSY (2014), when they consider the case of time-varying volatility of
volatility as a robustness test in their Sections II.E and III.D. There, rather than imposing that ! and
satisfy equation (10), they linearize the equation so that a solution exists for all values of , allowing
combinations of ( ,!) for which the true model does not have a solution. In the …rst draft of our paper we
also used this inappropriate linearization.

13

which links expected log returns (adjusted by one-half their variance) to expected gross level
returns Ri;t+1 , and subtracting equation (13) for any reference asset j (which could be but
does not need to be a true risk-free rate) from the equation for asset i, we can write a moment
condition describing the relative risk premium of i relative to j as:
Et [Ri;t+1
= Et Ri;t+1

Rj;t+1 + (ri;t+1

rj;t+1 )(mt+1

Rj;t+1

rj;t+1 )( NCF;t+1 + [ NDR;t+1 ]

(ri;t+1

Et mt+1 )]
1
!NV;t+1 ) = 0;(14)
2

where the second equality uses equation (11). This will be our main pricing equation: it
contains all conditional implications of the model, for any pair of assets i and j. We note that
in general the model does not restrict the covariances between the various assets’ returns
and the news terms: these are taken as given in the data and not derived from the theory
(with the exception of the market portfolio itself, discussed in the next subsection).
We can alternatively write the moment conditions in covariance form:
Et [Ri;t+1

Rj;t+1 ] = Covt [ri;t+1
+ Covt [ri;t+1

rj;t+1 ; NCF;t+1 ]
rj;t+1 ; NDR;t+1 ]

1
!Covt [ri;t+1
2

rj;t+1 ; NV;t+1 ] : (15)

As in CV (2004), this equation breaks an asset’s overall covariance with unexpected returns
on the wealth portfolio, rt+1

Et rt+1 = NCF;t+1

has a higher risk price than the second whenever

NDR;t+1 , into two pieces, the …rst of which
> 1. Importantly, it also adds a third

term capturing the asset’s covariance with shocks to long-run expected future volatility.

3.2.3

Conditional and unconditional implications of the model

The moment condition (14) summarizes the conditional asset pricing implications of the
model. It can be conditioned down to obtain the model’s unconditional implications, replacing the conditional expectation in (14) with an unconditional expectation.

14

A special conditional implication of the model can be obtained when we focus on the
wealth portfolio and the real risk free rate Rf . In this case, since both rt+1 and mt+1 are
linear functions of the VAR state vector, their conditional covariance will be proportional to
the stochastic variance term
Et [Rt+1

2
t:

Rf;t+1 ] =

Covt [rt+1 ; mt+1

Et mt+1 ] /

2
t

(16)

The model implies that the risk premium on the market varies in proportion with the oneperiod conditional variance of the market.
This conditional restriction has some implications for the relation between news terms,
in particular NDR and NV . While it does not tie the two terms precisely together (since
NDR also re‡ects news about the risk-free rate), it suggests that the two should be highly
correlated: news about high future variance should correspond to news about high future
discount rates. In the case that the risk-free rate is constant or at least unpredictable, the
model predicts NDR;t+1 / NV;t+1 .
In our empirical implementation, we do not impose this restriction on the VAR. One
f
reason for this is that we do not assume that we observe the riskless real return Rt+1
. In

addition, a large literature has shown that empirically this restriction fails to hold when
standard empirical proxies for Rf;t+1 are used.10 Consistent with this, we …nd that our
empirical measure of

2
t,

EVAR, does not signi…cantly forecast returns in our unrestricted

VAR.
However, in our empirical analysis we do test conditional asset pricing implications of
the model by performing our GMM estimation using as instruments conditioning variables
implied by the model (speci…cally

2
t ).

The only restriction we do not impose on the dynamics

of returns in the VAR is the counterfactual tight link between NDR and NV .
10

See for example Campbell (1987), Harvey (1989, 1991), or the review in Lettau and Ludvigson (2010).

15

3.2.4

Estimation

Estimation via GMM is straightforward in this model given the moment representation of
the asset pricing equation (14). Conditional on the news terms, the model is a linear factor
model (with the caveat that both level and log returns appear), which is easy to estimate via
GMM even though it imposes nonlinear restrictions on the factor risk prices. The model has
only one free parameter, , that determines the risk prices as

for NCF , 1 for

NDR , and

!( )=2 for NV , where !( ) is the solution of the quadratic equation (10) corresponding to
and the estimated news terms.
We estimate the VAR parameters and the news terms separately via OLS, and use GMM
to estimate the preference parameter . Our GMM standard errors for

then condition on

the estimated news terms. In theory, it would be possible to estimate both the dynamics
and the moment conditions via GMM in one step. However, as discussed in CGP (2013),
this estimation is numerically involved and unstable given the large number of parameters.
The moment condition (14) holds for any two assets i and j. If a real risk-free rate were
available (which we would refer to as Rf ), it would be a natural choice for the reference asset
j. In our empirical analysis, we use a nominal Treasury bill as the reference asset, writing
its return as RT bill , but we do not assume that this is a real riskless return. We do allow for
a free intercept relative to the Treasury bill return, as in Black’s (1972) implementation of
the CAPM, to account for the fact that investors are unable to borrow at the Treasury bill
rate but must typically pay a spread over this rate. The Treasury bill rate plus that spread
is the zero-beta rate of the intertemporal model.
Finally, we perform our GMM estimation using a prespeci…ed diagonal weighting matrix W whose elements are the inverse of the variances of the test assets. This approach
ensures that the GMM estimation is not focusing on some extreme linear combination of
the assets, while still taking into account the di¤erent variances of individual moment conditions. We have repeated our analysis using one-step and two-step e¢ cient estimation, and

16

the qualitative results in the paper continue to hold in these cases.

3.2.5

Implied consumption innovations

As in Campbell (1993), we can estimate the model without having to observe the consumption process of the investor. However, it is interesting to look at the model-implied
consumption, and compare it with the observed process of aggregate consumption.
Consumption innovations for our investor are given by
ct+1

Et ct+1 = (rt+1

The EIS parameter

Et rt+1 )

(

1)NDR;t+1

(

1)

1 !
NV;t+1 :
21

(17)

, which enters this equation, is not pinned down by our VAR estima-

tion so we calibrate it to three di¤erent values, 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5. The online appendix shows
that implied consumption volatility is positively related to
return dynamics. With

, given our VAR estimates of

= 0:5, our investor’s consumption (which need not equal aggre-

gate consumption) is considerably more volatile than aggregate consumption but roughly as
volatile as equity dividend growth. Implied and actual consumption growth are positively
correlated, and more so when both series are exponentially smoothed.11

4
4.1

Predicting Aggregate Stock Returns and Volatility
State variables

Our full VAR speci…cation of the vector xt+1 includes six state variables, four of which are
among the …ve variables in CGP (2013). To those four variables, we add the Treasury bill
11

An interesting exercise would be to confront our implied consumption series with microeconomic data
on stockholders’consumption, as in Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-Jørgensen (2009). However, the short
sample period over which such data are available is an obstacle to this approach.

17

rate RT bill (using it instead of the term yield spread used by CGP) and an estimate of
conditional volatility. The data are all quarterly, from 1926:2 to 2011:4.
The …rst variable in the VAR is the log real return on the market, rM , the di¤erence
between the log return on the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) value-weighted
stock index and the log return on the Consumer Price Index. This is a standard proxy for
the aggregate wealth portfolio, but in the online appendix we consider alternative proxies
that delever the market return by combining it in various proportions with Treasury bills.
The second variable is expected market variance (EV AR). This variable is meant to
capture the variance of market returns,

2
t,

conditional on information available at time

t, so that innovations to this variable can be mapped to the NV term described above.
To construct EV ARt , we proceed as follows. We …rst construct a series of within-quarter
realized variance of daily returns for each time t, RV ARt . We then run a regression of
RV ARt+1 on lagged realized variance (RV ARt ) as well as the other …ve state variables at
time t. This regression then generates a series of predicted values for RV AR at each time
d
t + 1, that depend on information available at time t: RV
ARt+1 . Finally, we de…ne our
expected variance at time t to be exactly this predicted value at t + 1:
EV ARt

d
RV
ARt+1 :

Note that though we describe our methodology in a two-step fashion where we …rst estimate
EV AR and then use EV AR in a VAR, this is only for interpretability. Indeed, this approach
to modeling EV AR can be considered a simple renormalization of equivalent results we would
…nd from a VAR that included RV AR directly.12
The third variable is the log of the S&P 500 price-smoothed earnings ratio (P E) adapted
from Campbell and Shiller (1988b), where earnings are smoothed over ten years. The variable
12

Since we weight observations based on RV AR in the …rst stage and then reweight observations using
EV AR in the second stage, our two-stage approach in practice is not exactly the same as a one-stage
approach. However, the online appendix shows that results from a RV AR-weighted, single-step estimation
are qualitatively very similar to those produced by our two-stage approach.

18

is constructed as in GCP (2013). The fourth is the yield on a three-month Treasury Bill
(RT bill ) from CRSP. The …fth is the small-stock value spread (V S), constructed as described
in CGP (2013).
The sixth and …nal variable is the default spread (DEF ), de…ned as the di¤erence between
the log yield on Moody’s BAA and AAA bonds, obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis. We include the default spread in part because that variable is known to track
time-series variation in expected real returns on the market portfolio (Fama and French
1989), but also because shocks to the default spread should to some degree re‡ect news
about aggregate default probabilities, which in turn should re‡ect news about the market’s
future cash ‡ows and volatility.

4.2

Short-run volatility estimation

In order for the regression model that generates EV ARt to be consistent with a reasonable
data-generating process for market variance, we deviate from standard OLS in two ways.
First, we constrain the regression coe¢ cients to produce …tted values (i.e. expected market
return variance) that are positive. Second, given that we explicitly consider heteroskedasticity of the innovations to our variables, we estimate this regression using Weighted Least
Squares (WLS), where the weight of each observation pair (RV ARt+1 , xt ) is initially based
on the time-t value of (RV AR) 1 . However, to ensure that the ratio of weights across observations is not extreme, we shrink these initial weights towards equal weights. In particular,
we set our shrinkage factor large enough so that the ratio of the largest observation weight
to the smallest observation weight is always less than or equal to …ve. Though admittedly
somewhat ad hoc, this bound is consistent with reasonable priors on the degree of variation
over time in the expected variance of market returns. More importantly, we show in the
online appendix that our results are robust to variation in this bound. Both the constraint
on the regression’s …tted values and the constraint on WLS observation weights bind in the
sample we study.
19

The …rst-stage regression generating the state variable EV ARt is reported in Table 1,
Panel A. Perhaps not surprisingly, past realized variance strongly predicts future realized
variance. More importantly, the regression documents that an increase in either P E or DEF
predicts higher future realized volatility. Both of these results are strongly statistically significant and are a novel …nding of the paper. The predictive power of very persistent variables
like P E and DEF indicates a potentially important role for lower-frequency movements in
stochastic volatility.
We argue that these empirical patterns are sensible. Investors in risky bonds incorporate
their expectation of future volatility when they set credit spreads, as risky bonds are short
the option to default. Therefore we expect higher DEF to predict higher RV AR. The
positive predictive relationship between P E and RV AR might seem surprising at …rst, but
one has to remember that the coe¢ cient indicates the e¤ect of a change in P E holding
constant the other variables, in particular the default spread DEF . Since the default spread
should also generally depend on the equity premium and since most of the variation in P E
is due to variation in the equity premium, we can regard P E as purging DEF of its equity
premium component to reveal more clearly its forecast of future volatility. We discuss this
interpretation further in section 4.4 below.
The R2 of the variance forecasting regression is nearly 38%. The relatively low R2 masks
the fact that the …t is indeed quite good, as we can see from Figure 1, in which RV AR and
EV AR are plotted together. The R2 is heavily in‡uenced by occasional spikes in realized
variance, which the simple linear model we use is not able to capture. Indeed, our WLS
approach downweights the importance of these spikes in the estimation procedure.

20

4.3

Estimation of the VAR and the news terms

4.3.1

VAR estimates

We estimate a …rst-order VAR as in equation (6), where xt+1 is a 6

1 vector of state

variables ordered as follows:
xt+1 = [rM;t+1 EV ARt+1 P Et+1 RT bill;t+1 DEFt+1 V St+1 ]
so that the real market return rM;t+1 is the …rst element and EV AR is the second element. x
is a 6 1 vector of the means of the variables, and
Finally,

t ut+1

is a 6 6 matrix of constant parameters.

is a 6 1 vector of innovations, with the conditional variance-covariance matrix

of ut+1 a constant

, so that the parameter

2
t

scales the entire variance-covariance matrix

of the vector of innovations.
The …rst-stage regression forecasting realized market return variance described in the
previous section generates the variable EV AR. The theory in Section 3 assumes that

2
t,

proxied for by EV AR, scales the variance-covariance matrix of state variable shocks. Thus,
as in the …rst stage, we estimate the second-stage VAR using WLS, where the weight of each
observation pair (xt+1 , xt ) is initially based on (EV ARt ) 1 . We continue to constrain both
the weights across observations and the …tted values of the regression forecasting EV AR.
Table 1, Panel B presents the results of the VAR estimation for the full sample (1926:2
to 2011:4). We report bootstrap standard errors for the parameter estimates of the VAR
that take into account the uncertainty generated by forecasting variance in the …rst stage.
Consistent with previous research, we …nd that P E negatively predicts future returns, though
the t-statistic indicates only marginal signi…cance. The value spread has a negative but not
statistically signi…cant e¤ect on future returns. In our speci…cation, a higher conditional
variance, EV AR, is associated with higher future returns, though the e¤ect is not statistically
signi…cant. Of course, the relatively high degree of correlation among P E, DEF , V S, and

21

EV AR complicates the interpretation of the individual e¤ects of those variables. As for the
other novel aspects of the transition matrix, both high P E and high DEF predict higher
future conditional variance of returns. High past market returns forecast lower EV AR,
higher P E, and lower DEF .13
Table 1, Panel C reports the sample correlation matrices of both the unscaled residuals
t ut+1

and the scaled residuals ut+1 . The correlation matrices report standard deviations

on the diagonals. A comparison of the standard deviations of the unscaled and scaled
residuals provides a rough indication of the e¤ectiveness of our empirical solution to the
heteroskedasticity of the VAR. In general, the standard deviations of the scaled residuals are
several times larger than their unscaled counterparts. More speci…cally, our approach implies
that the scaled return residuals should have unit standard deviation. Our implementation
results in a sample standard deviation of 1.14.14
Table 1, Panel D reports the coe¢ cients of a regression of the squared unscaled residuals
t ut+1

of each VAR equation on a constant and EV AR. These results are broadly consistent

with our assumption that EV AR captures the conditional volatility of the market return and
other state variables. The coe¢ cient on EV AR in the regression forecasting the squared
market return residuals is 1.85, rather than the theoretically expected value of one, but this
coe¢ cient is sensitive to the weighting scheme used in the regression. The fact that EV AR
signi…cantly predicts with a positive sign all the squared errors of the VAR shows that the
volatilities of all innovations are driven by a common factor, as we assume, although of course
it is possible that empirically, other factors also in‡uence the volatilities of certain variables.
13

One worry is that many of the elements of the transition matrix are estimated imprecisely. Though these
estimates may be zero, their non-zero but statistically insigni…cant in-sample point estimates, in conjunction
with the highly-nonlinear function that generates discount-rate and volatility news, may result in misleading
estimates of risk prices. However, the online appendix shows that results are qualitatively similar if we
instead employ a partial VAR where, via a standard iterative process, only variables with t-statistics greater
than 1.0 are included in each VAR regression.
14
A comparison of the unscaled and scaled autocorrelation matrices, in the online appendix, reveals in addition that much of the sample autocorrelation in the unscaled residuals is eliminated by our WLS approach.

22

4.3.2

News terms

The top panel of Table 2 presents the variance-covariance matrix and the standard deviation/correlation matrix of the news terms, estimated as described above. Consistent with
previous research, we …nd that discount-rate news is nearly twice as volatile as cash-‡ow
news.
The interesting new results in this table concern the variance news term NV .

First,

news about future variance has signi…cant volatility, with nearly a third of the variability of
discount-rate news. Second, variance news is negatively correlated ( 0:12) with cash-‡ow
news: as one might expect from the literature on the “leverage e¤ect”(Black 1976, Christie
1982), news about low cash ‡ows is associated with news about higher future volatility.
This …nding makes it unappealing to assume that variance news and cash-‡ow news are
uncorrelated, as would be required for the validity of the model solution in BKSY (2014).
Third, NV is close to uncorrelated ( 0:03) with discount-rate news.15 The net e¤ect of these
correlations, documented in the lower left panel of Table 2, is a slightly negative correlation
of

0:03 between our measure of volatility news and contemporaneous market returns.
The lower right panel of Table 2 reports the decomposition of the vector of innovations

2
t ut+1

into the three terms NCF;t+1 ; NDR;t+1 , and NV;t+1 . As shocks to EV AR are just a

linear combination of shocks to the underlying state variables, which includes RV AR, we
“unpack”EV AR to express the news terms as a function of rM , P E, RT bill , V S, DEF , and
RV AR. The panel shows that innovations to RV AR are mapped more than one-to-one to
news about future volatility. However, several of the other state variables also drive news
about volatility. Speci…cally, we …nd that innovations in P E, DEF , and V S are associated
with news of higher future volatility. This panel also indicates that all state variables with
the exception of RT bill are statistically signi…cant in terms of their contribution to at least
one of the three news terms. We choose to leave RT bill in the VAR, though its presence in
15

Though the point estimate of this correlation is negative, the large standard error implies that we
cannot reject the “volatility feedback e¤ect”(Campbell and Hentschel 1992, Calvet and Fisher 2007), which
generates a positive correlation. For related research see French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987).

23

the system makes little di¤erence to our conclusions.
Figure 2 plots the smoothed series for NCF ,

NDR and NV using an exponentially-

weighted moving average with a quarterly decay parameter of 0:08. This decay parameter
implies a half-life of approximately two years. The pattern of NCF and

NDR we …nd is

consistent with previous research. As a consequence, we focus on the smoothed series for
market variance news. There is considerable time variation in NV , and in particular we …nd
episodes of news of high future volatility during the Great Depression and just before the
beginning of World War II, followed by a period of little news until the late 1960s. From
then on, periods of positive volatility news alternate with periods of negative volatility news
in cycles of 3 to 5 years. Spikes in news about future volatility are found in the early 1970s
(following the oil shocks), in the late 1970s and again following the 1987 crash of the stock
market. The late 1990s are characterized by strongly negative news about future returns,
and at the same time higher expected future volatility. The recession of the late 2000s is
instead characterized by strongly negative cash-‡ow news, together with a spike in volatility
of the highest magnitude in our sample. The recovery from the …nancial crisis has brought
positive cash-‡ow news together with news about lower future volatility.

4.4

Predicting long-run volatility

The predictability of volatility, and especially of its long-run component, is central to this
paper. In the previous sections, we have shown that volatility is strongly predictable, specifically by variables beyond lagged realizations of volatility itself: P E and DEF contain
essential information about future volatility. We have also proposed a VAR-based methodology to construct long-horizon forecasts of volatility that incorporate all the information in
lagged volatility as well as in the additional predictors like P E and DEF .
We now ask how well our proposed long-run volatility forecast captures the long-horizon
component of volatility. In the online appendix we regress realized, discounted, annualized

24

long-run variance up to period h,
LHRV ARh =

4

h
j 1
RV ARt+j
j=1
;
h
j 1
j=1

on the variables included in our VAR system, the VAR long-horizon forecast, and some
alternative forecasts of long-run variance. We focus on a 10-year horizon (h = 40) as longer
horizons come at the cost of fewer independent observations; however, the online appendix
con…rms that our results are robust to horizons ranging from one to 15 years.
As alternatives to the VAR approach, we estimate two standard GARCH-type models,
speci…cally designed to capture the long-run component of volatility: the two-component
exponential (EGARCH) model proposed by Adrian and Rosenberg (2008), and the fractionally integrated (FIGARCH) model of Baillie, Bollerslev, and Mikkelsen (1996). We …rst
estimate both GARCH models using the full sample of daily returns and then generate the
appropriate forecast of LHRV AR40 . To these two models, we add the set of variables from
our VAR, and compare the forecasting ability of these di¤erent models. We …nd that while
the EGARCH and FIGARCH forecasts do forecast long-run volatility, our VAR variables
provide as good or better explanatory power, and RV AR, P E and DEF are strongly statistically signi…cant.

Our long-run VAR forecast has a coe¢ cient of 1.02, which remains

highly signi…cant at 0.82 even in the presence of the FIGARCH forecast. We also …nd that
DEF does not predict long-horizon volatility in the presence of our VAR forecast, implying
that the VAR model captures the long-horizon information in the default spread.
The online appendix also examines more carefully the links between P E, DEF , and
LHRV AR40 . We …nd that by itself, P E has almost no information about low-frequency
variation in volatility. In contrast, DEF forecasts nearly 22% of the variation in LHRV AR40 .
And if we use the component of DEF that is orthogonal to P E, which we call DEF O, the R2
increases to over 51%. Our interpretation of these results is that DEF contains information
about future volatility because risky bonds are short the option to default. However, DEF
also contains information about future aggregate risk premia. We know from previous work

25

that most of the variation in P E re‡ects aggregate risk premia. Therefore, including P E in
the volatility forecasting regression cleans up variation in DEF due to aggregate risk premia
and thus sharpens the link between DEF and future volatility. Since P E and DEF are
negatively correlated (default spreads are relatively low when the market trades rich), both
P E and DEF receive positive coe¢ cients in the multiple regression.
Figure 3 provides a visual summary of the long-run volatility-forecasting power of our
key VAR state variables and our interpretation. The top panel plots LHRV AR40 together
with lagged DEF and P E. The graph con…rms the strong negative correlation between P E
and DEF (correlation of -0.6) and highlights how both variables track long-run movements
in long run volatility. To isolate the contribution of the default spread in predicting long run
volatility, the bottom panel plots LHRV AR40 together with DEF O. The improvement in
…t moving from the top panel to the bottom panel is clear.
The contrasting behavior of DEF and DEF O in the two panels during episodes such
as the tech boom help illustrate the workings of our story. Taken in isolation, the relatively
stable default spread throughout most of the late 1990s would predict little change in future
market volatility. However, once the declining equity premium over that period is taken into
account (as shown by the rapid increase in P E), one recognizes that a P E-adjusted default
spread in the late 1990s actually forecasted much higher volatility ahead.
As a further check on the usefulness of our VAR approach, in the online appendix we
compare our variance forecasts to option-implied variance forecasts over the period 1998–
2011. We …nd that when both the VAR and option data are used to predict realized variance,
the VAR forecasts drive out the option-implied forecasts while remaining statistically and
economically signi…cant.
Taken together, these results make a strong case that credit spreads and valuation ratios contain information about future volatility not captured by simple univariate models,
even those designed to …t long-run movements in volatility, and that our VAR method for
calculating long-horizon forecasts preserves this information.
26

5

Test Assets and Beta Measurement

5.1

Test assets

In addition to the six VAR state variables, our analysis requires excess returns on a cross
section of test assets. We construct several sets of portfolios for this purpose, reporting
details on the construction method in the online appendix.
Our primary cross section consists of the excess returns over Treasury bills on the 25
ME- and BE/ME-sorted portfolios, studied in Fama and French (1993), extended in Davis,
Fama, and French (2000), and made available by Professor Kenneth French on his website.
We consider two main subsamples: early (1931:3-1963:3) and modern (1963:4-2011:4) due
to the …ndings in CV (2004) of important di¤erences in the risks of these portfolios between
the early and modern period.
To guard against the concerns of Daniel and Titman (1997, 2012) and Lewellen, Nagel,
and Shanken (2010) that characteristic-sorted portfolios may have a low-order factor structure that is easily …t by spurious models, we construct a second set of six portfolios doublesorted on past multiple betas with market returns and variance innovations (approximated
by a weighted average of changes in the VAR explanatory variables).
We also consider excess returns on equity portfolios that are formed based on both
characteristics and past risk loadings. One possible explanation for our …nding that growth
stocks hedge volatility relative to value stocks is that growth …rms are more likely to hold
real options, whose value increases with volatility. To test this interpretation, we …rst sort
stocks based on two …rm characteristics that are often used to proxy for the presence of real
options and that are available for a large percentage of …rms throughout our sample period:
BE/ME and idiosyncratic volatility (ivol). Having formed nine portfolios using a two-way
characteristic sort, we split each of these portfolios into two subsets based on pre-formation
estimates of each stock’s simple beta with variance innovations.

27

One might expect that

sorts on simple rather than partial betas will be more e¤ective in establishing a link between
pre-formation and post-formation estimates of volatility beta, since the market is correlated
with volatility news.

5.2

Beta measurement

We …rst examine the betas implied by the covariance form of the model in equation (15). We
cosmetically multiply and divide all three covariances by the sample variance of the unexpected log real return on the market portfolio to facilitate comparison to previous research,
de…ning

i;CFM

i;DRM

and

i;VM

Cov(ri;t rT bill;t ; NCF;t )
,
V ar(rM;t Et 1 rM;t )
Cov(ri;t rT bill;t ; NDR;t )
,
V ar(rM;t Et 1 rM;t )
Cov(ri;t rT bill;t ; NV;t )
.
V ar(rM;t Et 1 rM;t )

The risk prices on these betas are just the variance of the market return innovation times
the risk prices in equation (15).
We estimate cash-‡ow, discount-rate, and variance betas using the …tted values of the
market’s cash ‡ow, discount-rate, and variance news estimated in the previous section.
Speci…cally, we estimate simple WLS regressions of each portfolio’s log returns on each news
term, weighting each time-t + 1 observation pair by the weights used to estimate the VAR in
Table 1 Panel B. We then scale the regression loadings by the ratio of the sample variance
of the news term in question to the sample variance of the unexpected log real return on the
market portfolio to generate estimates for our three-beta model.

28

5.2.1

Characteristic-sorted portfolios

Table 3 Panel A shows the estimated betas for the 25 size- and book-to-market portfolios over
the 1931-1963 period. The portfolios are organized in a square matrix with growth stocks at
the left, value stocks at the right, small stocks at the top, and large stocks at the bottom.
At the right edge of the matrix we report the di¤erences between the extreme growth and
extreme value portfolios in each size group; along the bottom of the matrix we report the
di¤erences between the extreme small and extreme large portfolios in each BE/ME category.
The top matrix displays post-formation cash-‡ow betas, the middle matrix displays postformation discount-rate betas, while the bottom matrix displays post-formation variance
betas. In square brackets after each beta estimate we report a standard error, calculated
conditional on the realizations of the news series from the aggregate VAR model.
In the pre-1963 sample period, value stocks have both higher cash-‡ow and higher
discount-rate betas than growth stocks. An equal-weighted average of the extreme value
stocks across size quintiles has a cash-‡ow beta 0.12 higher than an equal-weighted average
of the extreme growth stocks. The di¤erence in estimated discount-rate betas, 0.25, is in
the same direction. Similar to value stocks, small stocks have higher cash-‡ow betas and
discount-rate betas than large stocks in this sample (by 0.16 and 0.36, respectively, for an
equal-weighted average of the smallest stocks across value quintiles relative to an equalweighted average of the largest stocks). These di¤erences are extremely similar to those in
CV (2004), despite the exclusion of the 1929-1931 subperiod, the replacement of the excess
log market return with the log real return, and the use of a richer, heteroskedastic VAR.
The new …nding in the top portion of Table 3 Panel A is that value stocks and small
stocks are also riskier in terms of volatility betas. An equal-weighted average of the extreme
value stocks across size quintiles has a volatility beta 0.06 lower than an equal-weighted
average of the extreme growth stocks. Similarly, an equal-weighted average of the smallest
stocks across value quintiles has a volatility beta that is 0.06 lower than an equal-weighted
average of the largest stocks. In summary, value and small stocks were unambiguously riskier
29

than growth and large stocks over the 1931-1963 period.
Table 3 Panel B reports the corresponding estimates for the post-1963 period. As documented in this subsample by CV (2004), value stocks still have slightly higher cash-‡ow
betas than growth stocks, but much lower discount-rate betas. Our new …nding here is that
value stocks continue to have much lower volatility betas, and the spread in volatility betas
is even greater than in the early period. The volatility beta for the equal-weighted average
of the extreme value stocks across size quintiles is 0.11 lower than the volatility beta of an
equal-weighted average of the extreme growth stocks, a di¤erence that is more than 85%
higher than the corresponding di¤erence in the early period.16
These results imply that in the post-1963 period where the CAPM has di¢ culty explaining the low returns on growth stocks relative to value stocks, growth stocks are relative
hedges for two key aspects of the investment opportunity set. Consistent with CV (2004),
growth stocks hedge news about future real stock returns. The novel …nding of this paper is
that growth stocks also hedge news about the variance of the market return.
One interesting aspect of these …ndings is the fact that the average

V

of the 25 size-

and book-to-market portfolios changes sign from the early to the modern subperiod. Over
the 1931-1963 period, the average

V

is -0.10 while over the 1964-2011 period this average

becomes 0.06. Of course, given the strong positive link between P E and volatility news
documented in the lower right panel of Table 2, one should not be surprised that the market’s
V

can be positive. Nevertheless, in the online appendix we study this change in sign more

carefully.

We show that the market’s beta with realized volatility has remained negative

in the modern period, highlighting the important distinction between realized and expected
future volatility. We also show that the change in the sign of

V

is driven by a change in

the correlation between the aggregate market and DEF O, our simple proxy for news about
long-horizon variance.
16

Our …ndings are in sharp contrast to BKSY (2014), who estimate that value-minus-growth portfolios
are volatility hedges. (See their Tables VII, X, and XI.) Their …nding is hard to reconcile with theory (real
option models such as McQuade 2012) and stylized facts (notably the performance of value-minus-growth
bets during the Great Depression, the Tech Boom, and the Great Recession).

30

5.2.2

Risk-sorted portfolios

Panels C and D of Table 3 show the estimated betas for the six risk-sorted portfolios over the
1931-1963 and post-1963 periods. The portfolios are organized in a rectangular matrix with
low market-beta stocks at the left, high market-beta stocks at the right, low volatility-beta
stocks at the top, and high volatility-beta stocks at the bottom. Otherwise the format is
the same as that of Panels A and B.
In the pre-1963 sample period, high market-beta stocks have both higher cash-‡ow and
higher discount-rate betas than low market-beta stocks. Similarly, low volatility-beta stocks
have higher cash-‡ow betas and discount-rate betas than high volatility-beta stocks. High
market-beta stocks also have lower volatility betas, but sorting stocks by their past volatility
betas induces little spread in post-formation volatility betas. Putting these results together,
in the 1931-1963 period high market-beta stocks and low volatility-beta stocks were unambiguously riskier than low market-beta and high volatility-beta stocks.
In the post-1963 (modern) period, high market-beta stocks again have higher cash-‡ow
and higher discount-rate betas than low market-beta stocks.

However, high market-beta

stocks now have higher volatility betas and are therefore safer in this dimension. Thus our
three-beta model with priced volatility risk can potentially explain the well-known result
that stocks with high past market betas have o¤ered relatively little extra return in the past
50 years (Fama and French 1992).
In the modern period, sorts on volatility beta generate an economically and statistically
signi…cant spread in post-formation volatility beta. These high volatility-beta portfolios also
tend to have higher discount-rate betas and lower cash-‡ow betas, though the patterns are
not uniform.
We also examine test assets that are formed based on both characteristics and risk estimates. The online appendix reports the estimated betas for the 18 BE/ME-ivol-b

V AR -

sorted portfolios in both the early and modern sample periods. In the early period, …rms
31

with higher ivol have lower post-formation volatility betas regardless of their book-to-market
ratio. Consistent with this …nding, higher ivol stocks have higher average returns. In the
modern period, however, we …nd that among stocks with low BE/ME, …rms with higher ivol
have higher post-formation volatility betas and lower average returns; but these patterns
reverse among stocks with high BE/ME.
We argue that these di¤erences make economic sense. High idiosyncratic volatility increases the value of growth options, which is an important e¤ect for growing …rms with
‡exible real investment opportunities, but much less so for stable, mature …rms. Valuable
growth options in turn imply high betas with aggregate volatility shocks. Hence high idiosyncratic volatility naturally raises the volatility beta for growth stocks more than for value
stocks.

This e¤ect is stronger in the modern sample where growing …rms with ‡exible

investment opportunities are more prevalent.
These results have the potential to explain the puzzling …nding that high idiosyncraticvolatility stocks have lower average returns than low idiosyncratic-volatility stocks (Ang,
Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang 2006 AHXZ), as well as the fact that the unconditional ivol e¤ect
is non-monotonic (AHXZ Table VI).17 They may also explain why the ivol e¤ect appears
to be less robust in some samples using di¤erent methodologies (Bali and Cakici 2008) and
even switches sign in others (Fu 2009), because di¤erent samples and weighting schemes may
alter the value characteristic and hence the volatility beta of stocks with high idiosyncratic
volatility.
Taken together, the …ndings from the characteristic- and risk-sorted test assets suggest
that volatility betas vary with multiple stock characteristics, and that techniques that take
this into account may be more e¤ective in generating a spread in post-formation volatility
beta.
17

Barinov (2013) and Chen and Petkova (2014) also argue that the idiosyncratic volatility e¤ect can be
explained by aggregate volatility risk, but they do not use a theoretically-motivated volatility risk factor.

32

6

Pricing the Cross-Section of Stock Returns

We now turn to pricing the cross section of excess returns on our test assets. We estimate our
model’s single parameter via GMM, using the moment condition (14). For ease of exposition,
we report our results in terms of the expected return-beta representation from equation (15),
rescaled by the variance of market return innovations as in section 5.2:
Ri

RT bill = g0 + g1 bi;CFM + g2 bi;DRM + g3 bi;VM + ei ;

(18)

where bars denote time-series means and betas are measured using excess returns over Treasury bills.
We evaluate the performance of …ve asset-pricing models, all estimated via GMM: 1)
the traditional CAPM that restricts cash-‡ow and discount-rate betas to have the same
price of risk and sets the price of variance risk to zero; 2) the two-beta intertemporal asset
pricing model of CV (2004) that restricts the price of discount-rate risk to equal the variance
of the market return and again sets the price of variance risk to zero; 3) our three-beta
intertemporal asset pricing model that restricts the price of discount-rate risk to equal the
variance of the market return and constrains the prices of cash-‡ow and variance risk to
be related by equation (10), with

= 0:95 per year; 4) a partially-constrained three-beta

model that restricts the price of discount-rate risk to equal the variance of the market return
but freely estimates the other two risk prices (e¤ectively decoupling

and !); and 5) an

unrestricted three-beta model that allows free risk prices for cash-‡ow, discount-rate, and
volatility betas.
Each model is estimated in two di¤erent forms: one with a restricted zero-beta rate
equal to the Treasury-bill rate as in the Sharpe-Lintner version of the CAPM, and one with
an unrestricted zero-beta rate following Black (1972). Allowing for an unrestricted zerobeta rate may be particularly important given the extensive evidence in Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012) that Treasury Bills provide convenience bene…ts in terms of

33

liquidity and safety.18
We present our main pricing results in the next two subsections. The online appendix
examines the robustness of our results to a wide variety of methodological changes. This
analysis includes using various subsets of variables in our baseline VAR, estimating the VAR
in di¤erent ways, using di¤erent estimates of realized variance, altering the set of variables in
the VAR, exploring the VAR’s out-of-sample properties, using di¤erent proxies for the wealth
portfolio including delevered equity portfolios, and varying both

and the excess zero-beta

rate. Such robustness analysis is important because the VAR’s news decomposition can be
sensitive to the forecasting variables included.19 We also use our model to understand Fama
and French’s (1993) risk factors, decomposing the volatility betas of both RM RF and HM L
and linking the returns on HM L to our three news terms.

6.1

Characteristic-sorted test assets

Table 4 reports separate results for the early sample period 1931-1963 (Panel A) and the
modern sample period 1963-2011 (Panel B), using 25 size- and book-to-market-sorted portfolios as test assets. The table has ten columns, two speci…cations for each of our …ve asset
pricing models. The …rst 8 rows of each panel in Table 4 are divided into four sets of two
rows. The …rst set of two rows corresponds to the zero-beta rate (in excess of the Treasurybill rate), the second set to the premium on cash-‡ow beta, the third set to the premium on
discount-rate beta, and the fourth set to the premium on volatility beta. Within each set,
the …rst row reports the point estimate in fractions per quarter, and the second row reports
the corresponding standard error. Below the premia estimates, we report the R2 statistic
for a cross-sectional regression of average returns on our test assets onto the …tted values
18

Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2012) conclude, “Our …nding of a convenience demand for Treasury debt suggests caution against the common practice of identifying the Treasury interest rate with models’
riskless interest rate.” Similar arguments can be found in Du¢ e and Singleton (1997) and Hull, Predescu,
and White (2004).
19
All our VAR systems forecast returns rather than cash ‡ows. As Engsted, Pedersen, and Tanggaard
(2012) clarify, results are approximately invariant to this decision, notwithstanding the concerns of Chen
and Zhao (2009).

34

from the model as well as the J statistic. In the …nal two rows of each panel, we report the
implied risk-aversion coe¢ cient, , which can be recovered as g1 =g2 , as well as the sensitivity
of news about risk to news about market variance, !, which can be recovered as

2g3 =g2 .

Table 4 Panel A shows that in the 1931-1963 period, all our models explain the crosssection of stock returns reasonably well. The cross-sectional R2 statistics are approximately
52% for both forms of our three-beta ICAPM. Both the Sharpe-Lintner and Black versions
of the CAPM do a slightly poorer job describing the cross section (both R2 statistics are
roughly 50%). The two-beta ICAPM of CV (2004) performs slightly better than the CAPM
and about as well as the three-beta ICAPM. Consistent with the claim that the three-beta
model does a good job describing the cross-section, Table 4 shows that the constrained
and the unrestricted factor model barely improve pricing relative to the three-beta ICAPM.
Despite this apparent success, all models are rejected based on the standard J test. This
may not be surprising, given that even the empirical three-factor model of Fama and French
(1993) is rejected by this test.
Results are very di¤erent in the 1963-2011 period. Table 4 Panel B shows that in this
period, both versions of the CAPM do a very poor job of explaining cross-sectional variation
in average returns on portfolios sorted by size and book-to-market. When the zero-beta rate
is left as a free parameter, the cross-sectional regression picks a zero-beta rate greater than
the average return on the market and a negative beta premium, and implies an R2 of 1%.
When the zero-beta rate is constrained to the risk-free rate, the CAPM R2 falls to -35%.
The unconstrained zero-beta rate version of the two-beta CV (2004) model does a better
job describing the cross section of average returns than the CAPM. However, the zero-beta
rate is counterintuitively lower than the Treasury bill rate, and the implied coe¢ cient of risk
aversion is arguably extreme at 23.
If we restrict the zero-beta rate to equal the Treasury bill rate in our three-beta model,
this model also does a poor job explaining cross-sectional variation in average returns across
our test assets. However, if we allow an unrestricted zero-beta rate, the explained variation

35

of the three-beta model increases to 63%. The estimated risk price for cash-‡ow beta is an
economically reasonable 24.8% per year with an implied coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion
of 7.2. As before, all models are rejected based on the J statistic.
The relatively poor performance of the risk-free rate version of the three-beta ICAPM
is due to the derived link between

and !.

This is illustrated by the pricing results in

Table 4 for a partially-constrained factor model that removes the constraint linking

and !

but retains the constraints on the zero-beta rate and the discount-rate beta premium. The
cross-sectional R2 for this model increases from -37% to 71%, and the risk prices for

and

! remain economically large and of the right sign.
The top part of Figure 4 provides a visual summary of the modern-period results. The
poor performance of the CAPM in this sample period is immediately apparent. The version
of the ICAPM with a restricted zero-beta rate, equal to the risk-free rate or Treasury bill
rate, generates some cross-sectional spread in predicted returns that lines up qualitatively
with average realized returns. However, almost all returns are underpredicted because stocks
are estimated to be volatility hedges in the modern period, so the model implies a relatively
low equity premium. This problem disappears when we free up the zero-beta rate in the
ICAPM, adding the spread between the zero-beta rate and the Treasury bill rate to the
predicted excess return over the bill rate.

6.1.1

Implications for the history of marginal utility

As a further check on the reasonableness of the model estimated in Table 4, Panel B, we can
ask what the model implies for the history of our investor’s marginal utility. Figure 5 plots
the time-series of the exponentially smoothed combined shock NCF

NDR

1
!NV
2

based

on the estimate of the three-beta model with an unrestricted zero-beta rate, The smoothed
shock has correlation 0.77 with equivalently smoothed NCF , 0.02 with smoothed

NDR ,

and -0.80 with smoothed NV . Figure 5 also plots the corresponding smoothed shock series
for the CAPM (NCF

NDR ) and for the two-beta ICAPM ( NCF
36

NDR ). The two-beta

model shifts the history of good and bad times relative to the CAPM, as emphasized by
CGP (2013). The model with stochastic volatility further accentuates that periods with
high market volatility, such as the 1930s and the late 2000s, are particularly hard times for
long-term investors.

6.2

Alternative test assets

We con…rm that the success of the three-beta ICAPM is robust by expanding the set of test
portfolios beyond the 25 size- and book-to-market-sorted portfolios. In particular, we add
six risk-sorted portfolios and 18 characteristic- and risk-sorted assets as test assets, as well
as managed versions of all of these portfolios (including the 25 characteristic-sorted assets),
scaled by EV AR. We add …ve additional rows to each panel that report the cross-sectional
R2 statistics for various subsets of the test assets.
Table 5 Panel A shows that even in the 1931-1963 period, the addition of risk-sorted
and managed portfolios presents a strong challenge to restricted zero-beta rate versions of
all three models under consideration. Though the overall cross-sectional R2 s are relatively
high, all struggle to explain some of the test asset subsets. For example, the R2 for the
original test assets (the 25 unscaled size- and book-to-market-sorted portfolios) becomes
strongly negative for each of the three models. Unconstrained zero-beta rate versions of all
three models perform signi…cantly better with not only R2 s over 70% but also positive R2 s
for all the test asset subsets studied.
Table 5 Panel B documents that the performance of the Black CAPM in the modern
period further deteriorates when asked to price not only characteristic-sorted but also risksorted and managed portfolios. The unconstrained zero-beta rate version of the two-beta
CV (2004) model does a better job describing the cross section of average returns than the
CAPM but struggles pricing the risk-sorted assets.
The three-beta model with a restricted zero-beta rate outperforms both the Black CAPM
37

and the unconstrained two-beta ICAPM model, delivering an overall R2 of 47%. Of particular
note, the three-beta model does a good job explaining cross-sectional variation in the average
returns on the characteristic- and risk-sorted assets. These portfolios present an interesting
challenge as they incorporate the idiosyncratic risk anomaly of AHXZ (2006). Of all of
the three models considered, only our stochastic volatility ICAPM is able to explain the
idiosyncratic anomaly e¤ect. On the other hand, with a restricted zero-beta rate the threebeta model’s explanatory power varies substantially across the test asset subsets, and in
particular the model struggles when faced with either the 25 characteristic-sorted or the six
risk-sorted portfolios.
If the zero-beta rate is no longer restricted, the explained variation of the three-beta
model increases to 59%, with consistent pricing across the various subsets of test assets.
Moreover, the freely estimated zero-beta rate is far from extreme, exceeding the Treasury
Bill rate by only 40 basis points a quarter (a statistically insigni…cant di¤erence).
The bottom part of Figure 4 provides a visual summary of the modern-period results with
the larger set of test assets. The version of the three-beta ICAPM with a restricted zerobeta rate explains cross-sectional variation in average returns well for all of the test assets
considered. This success is in stark contrast to the abysmal performance of the CAPM.

7

Conclusion

We extend the approximate closed-form intertemporal capital asset pricing model of Campbell (1993) to allow for stochastic volatility. Our model recognizes that an investor’s investment opportunities may deteriorate either because expected stock returns decline or because
the volatility of stock returns increases. A long-term investor with Epstein-Zin preferences
and relative risk-aversion greater than one, holding an aggregate stock index, will wish to
hedge against both types of changes in investment opportunities. Such an investor’s perception of a stock’s risk is determined not only by its beta with unexpected market returns
38

and news about future returns (or equivalently, news about market cash ‡ows and discount
rates), but also by its beta with news about future market volatility. Although our model
has three dimensions of risk, the prices of all these risks are determined by a single free
parameter, the investor’s coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion.
Our implementation models the return on the aggregate stock market as one element
of a vector autoregressive (VAR) system; the volatility of all shocks to the VAR is another
element of the system. The empirical implementation of our VAR reveals new low-frequency
movements in market volatility tied to the default spread. We show that the negative
post-1963 CAPM alphas of growth stocks are justi…ed because these stocks hedge longterm investors against both declining expected stock returns, and increasing volatility. The
addition of volatility risk to the model helps it …t the cross-section of value and growth
stocks, and small and large stocks, with a moderate, economically reasonable value of risk
aversion.
We confront our model with portfolios of stocks sorted by past betas with the market
return and volatility, and portfolios double-sorted by characteristics and past volatility betas.
We also confront our model with managed portfolios that vary equity exposure in response
to our estimates of market variance.

The explanatory power of the model is quite good

across all these sets of test assets, with stable parameter estimates.

Notably, the model

helps to explain the low cross-sectional reward to past market beta and the negative return to
idiosyncratic volatility as the result of volatility exposures of stocks with these characteristics
in the post-1963 period.
We do not interpret our model as a representative-agent model of general equilibrium in
…nancial markets, because the model does not explain why a conservative long-term investor
with constant risk aversion retains a constant equity exposure in response to changes in
the equity premium that are not proportional to changes in the variance of stock returns.
However, our model does answer the interesting microeconomic question: Are there reasonable preference parameters that would make a long-term investor, constrained to invest

39

100% in equity, content to hold the market rather than tilting towards value stocks or other
high-return stock portfolios? Our answer is clearly yes.

40

References
Adrian, Tobias and Joshua Rosenberg, 2008, “Stock Returns and Volatility: Pricing the
Short-Run and Long-Run Components of Market Risk”, Journal of Finance 63:2997–
3030.
Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Paul Labys, 2003, “Modeling
and Forecasting Realized Volatility”, Econometrica 71:579–625.
Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, “The CrossSection of Volatility and Expected Returns”, Journal of Finance 61:259–299.
Baillie, Richard T., Tim Bollerslev and Hans Ole Mikkelsen, 1996, “Fractionally integrated
generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity”, Journal of Econometrics
74:3–30.
Bali, Turan and Nusret Cakici, 2009, “Idiosyncratic Volatility and the Cross Section of
Expected Stock Returns”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43:29–58.
Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, 2004, “Risks for the Long Run”, Journal of Finance 59:1481–
1509.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku and Amir Yaron, 2012, “An Empirical Evaluation of the Long-Run
Risks Model for Asset Prices”, Critical Finance Review 1:183–221.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, Ivan Shaliastovich and Amir Yaron, 2014, “Volatility, the Macroeconomy and Asset Prices”, Journal of Finance 69:2471–2511.
Barinov, Alexander, 2013, “Idiosyncratic Volatility, Growth Options, and the Cross-Section
of Returns”, working paper, University of Georgia.
Barndor¤-Nielsen, Ole E. and Neil Shephard, 2002, “Econometric Analysis of Realized
Volatility and Its Use in Estimating Stochastic Volatility Models”, Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society B, 64(2):253–280.
Beeler, Jason and John Y. Campbell, 2012, “The Long-Run Risks Model and Aggregate
Asset Prices: An Empirical Assessment”, Critical Finance Review 1:141–182.
Black, Fischer, 1972, “Capital Market Equilibrium with Restricted Borrowing”, Journal of
Business 45:444–454.
Black, Fischer, 1976, “Studies of Stock Price Volatility Changes”, Proceedings of the 1976
Meetings of the American Statistical Association, Business and Economic Statistics
Section, Washington 177–181.
Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, “An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities”, Journal of Financial Economics 7:265–296.
41

Bollerslev, Tim, 1986, “Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity”, Journal of Econometrics 31:307–327.
Calvet, Laurent and Adlai Fisher, 2007, “Multifrequency News and Stock Returns”, Journal
of Financial Economics 86:178–212.
Campbell, John Y., 1987, “Stock Returns and the Term Structure”, Journal of Financial
Economics 18:373–399.
Campbell, John Y., 1993, “Intertemporal Asset Pricing Without Consumption Data”,
American Economic Review 83:487–512.
Campbell, John Y., 1996, “Understanding Risk and Return”, Journal of Political Economy
104:298–345.
Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Christopher Polk, 2013, “Hard Times”, Review of
Asset Pricing Studies 3:95–132.
Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, Christopher Polk, and Robert Turley, 2015a, “Appendix to An Intertemporal CAPM with Stochastic Volatility”, available online at
http://scholar.harvard.edu/campbell/publications.
Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, Christopher Polk, and Robert Turley, 2015b, “An
Intertemporal CAPM with Stochastic Volatility: Non-Equity Test Assets”, available
online at http://scholar.harvard.edu/campbell/publications.
Campbell, John Y. and Ludger Hentschel, 1992, “No News is Good News: An Asymmetric Model of Changing Volatility in Stock Returns”, Journal of Financial Economics
31:281–318.
Campbell, John Y., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2010, “Growth or Glamour?
Fundamentals and Systematic Risk in Stock Returns” Review of Financial Studies
23:305–344.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988a, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors”, Review of Financial Studies 1:195–
228.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1988b, “Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected
Dividends”, Journal of Finance 43:661–676.
Campbell, John Y. and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2004, “Bad Beta, Good Beta”, American
Economic Review 94:1249–1275.
Chen, Joseph, 2003, “Intertemporal CAPM and the Cross Section of Stock Returns”, unpublished paper, University of California Davis.

42

Chen, Zhanhui and Ralitsa Petkova, 2014, Does Idiosyncratic Volatility Proxy for Risk
Exposure?, Review of Financial Studies 25:2745–2787.
Chen, Long and Xinlei Zhao, 2009, “Return Decomposition”, Review of Financial Studies
22:5213–5249.
Christiansen, Charlotte, Maik Schmeling and Andreas Schrimpf, 2012, “A Comprehensive
Look at Financial Volatility Prediction by Economic Variables”, Journal of Applied
Econometrics 27: 956-977.
Christie, Andrew, “The Stochastic Behavior of Common Stock Variances –Value, Leverage,
and Interest Rates E¤ects”, Journal of Financial Economics 10:407–432.
Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman, 1997, “Evidence on the Characteristics of Crosssectional Variation in Common Stock Returns”, Journal of Finance 52:1–33.
Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman, 2012, “Testing Factor-Model Explanations of Market
Anomalies”, Critical Finance Review 1:103–139.
Davis, James L., Eugene F. Fama, and Kenneth R. French, 2000, “Characteristics, Covariances, and Average Returns: 1929 to 1997”, Journal of Finance 55:389–406.
Du¢ e, Darrell and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1997, “An Econometric Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rate Swap Yields”, Journal of Finance 52: 1287-1321.
Engle, Robert F, 1982, “Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity with Estimates of
the Variance of United Kingdom In‡ation,”Econometrica 50: 987–1007.
Engle, Robert F., Eric Ghysels and Bumjean Sohn, 2013, “Stock Market Volatility and
Macroeconomic Fundamentals”, Review of Economics and Statistics 95: 776–797.
Engsted, Tom, Thomas Q. Pedersen, and Carsten Tanggaard, 2012, “Pitfalls in VAR Based
Return Decompositions: A Clari…cation”, Journal of Banking and Finance 36: 12551265.
Epstein, Lawrence and Stanley Zin, 1989, “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework”, Econometrica 57:937–69.
Epstein, Lawrence and Stanley Zin, 1991, “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis”, Journal of
Political Economy 99:263–86.
Epstein, Lawrence, Emmanuel Farhi, and Tomasz Strzalecki, 2014, “How Much Would You
Pay to Resolve Long-Run Risk?”, American Economic Review 104:2680–2697.
Eraker, Bjorn, 2008, “A¢ ne General Equilibrium Models”, Management Science 54:2068–
2080.
43

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1989, “Business Conditions and Expected Returns
on Stocks and Bonds”, Journal of Financial Economics 25:23–50.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992, “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
Returns”, Journal of Finance 47: 427-465.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
Stocks and Bonds”, Journal of Financial Economics 33:3–56.
French, Kenneth, G. William Schwert, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1987, “Expected Stock
Returns and Volatility”, Journal of Financial Economics 19:3–29.
Fu, Fangjian, 2009, “Idiosyncratic Risk and the Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns”,
Journal of Financial Economics 91:24–37.
Garcia, Rene, Eric Renault, and A. Semenov, 2006, “Disentangling Risk Aversion and
Intertemporal Substitution”, Finance Research Letters 3:181–193.
Hansen, Lars Peter, 2012, “Dynamic Valuation Decomposition Within Stochastic Economies”,
Econometrica 80:911–967.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, J. Lee, and Nicholas Roussanov, 2007, “Intertemporal
Substitution and Risk Aversion”, in J.J. Heckman and E.E. Leamer eds. Handbook of
Econometrics Vol. 6A, 3967–4056, North-Holland.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li, 2008, “Consumption Strikes Back?
Measuring Long-Run Risk”, Journal of Political Economy 116:260–302.
Harvey, Campbell, 1989, “Time-Varying Conditional Covariances in Tests of Asset Pricing
Models”, Journal of Financial Economics 24:289–317.
Harvey, Campbell, 1991, “The World Price of Covariance Risk”, Journal of Finance 46:111–
157.
Heston, Steven L., 1993, “A Closed-Form Solution for Options with Stochastic Volatility
with Applications to Bond and Currency Options”, Review of Financial Studies 6:327–
343.
Hull, John, Mirela Predescu and Alan White, 2004, “The Relationship Between Credit
Default Swap Spreads, Bond Yields, and Credit Rating Announcements,” Journal of
Banking and Finance 28:2789-2811.
Jagannathan, Ravi and Zhenyu Wang, 1996, “The Conditional CAPM and the CrossSection of Expected Returns”, Journal of Finance 51, 3–54.
Kandel, Shmuel and Robert Stambaugh, 1991, “Asset Returns and Intertemporal Preferences”, Journal of Monetary Economics 27:39–71.

44

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, 2012, “The Aggregate Demand for
Treasury Debt”, Journal of Political Economy 120:233–267.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2001, “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and
Expected Stock Returns”, Journal of Finance 56, 815–849.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2010, “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the
Risk-Return Trade-o¤”, Chapter 11 in Yacine Ait-Sahalia and Lars Peter Hansen eds.
Handbook of Financial Econometrics, Elsevier, 617–690.
Lewellen, Jonathan, Stefan Nagel, and Jay Shanken, 2010, “A Skeptical Appraisal of Asset
Pricing Tests”, Journal of Financial Economics 96:175–194.
Lustig, Hanno, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2013, “The Wealth-Consumption
Ratio”, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 3, 38–94.
Malloy, Christopher J., Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, 2009, “LongRun Stockholder Consumption Risk and Asset Returns”, Journal of Finance, 64: 2427–
2479.
McQuade, Timothy J., 2012, “Stochastic Volatility and Asset Pricing Puzzles”, Harvard
University working paper.
Merton, Robert C., 1973, “An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model”, Econometrica
41:867–887.
Paye, Bradley, 2012, “Deja Vol: Predictive Regressions for Aggregate Stock Market Volatility using Macroeconomic Variables”, Journal of Financial Economics 106: 527–546.
Restoy, Fernando, and Philippe Weil, 1998, “Approximate Equilibrium Asset Prices”,
NBER Working Paper 6611.
Restoy, Fernando, and Philippe Weil, 2011, “Approximate Equilibrium Asset Prices”, Review of Finance 15:1–28.
Schwert, William, 1989, “Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?”, Journal
of Finance 44:1115–1153.
Sohn, Bumjean, 2010, “Stock Market Volatility and Trading Strategy Based Factors”, unpublished paper, Georgetown University.
Tallarini, Thomas D., 2000, “Risk Sensitive Real Business Cycles”, Journal of Monetary
Economics 45:507–532.

45

Table 1: VAR Estimation
The table shows the WLS parameter estimates for a …rst-order VAR model. The state
variables in the VAR include the log real return on the CRSP value-weight index (rM ),
the realized variance (RV AR) of within-quarter daily simple returns on the CRSP valueweight index, the log ratio of the S&P 500’s price to the S&P 500’s ten-year moving average
of earnings (P E), the log three-month Treasury Bill yield (rT bill ), the default yield spread
(DEF ) in percentage points, measured as the di¤erence between the log yield on Moody’s
BAA bonds and the log yield on Moody’s AAA bonds, and the small-stock value spread (V S),
the di¤erence in the log book-to-market ratios of small value and small growth stocks. The
small-value and small-growth portfolios are two of the six elementary portfolios constructed
by Davis et al. (2000). For the sake of interpretation, we estimate the VAR in two stages.
Panel A reports the WLS parameter estimates of a …rst-stage regression forecasting RV AR
with the VAR state variables. The forecasted values from this regression are used in the
second stage of the estimation procedure as the state variable EV AR, replacing RV AR in
the second-stage VAR. Panel B reports WLS parameter estimates of the full second-stage
VAR. Initial WLS weights on each observation are inversely proportional to RV ARt and
EV ARt in the …rst and second stages respectively and are then shrunk to equal weights so
that the maximum ratio of actual weights used is less than or equal to …ve. Additionally,
the forecasted values for both RV AR and EV AR are constrained to be positive. In Panels
A and B, the …rst seven columns report coe¢ cients on an intercept and the six explanatory
variables, and the remaining column shows the implied R2 statistic for the unscaled model.
Bootstrapped standard errors that take into account the uncertainty in generating EV AR are
in parentheses. Panel C of the table reports the correlation ("Corr/std") matrices of both the
unscaled and scaled shocks from the second-stage VAR, with shock standard deviations on
the diagonal. Panel D reports the results of regressions forecasting the squared second-stage
residuals from the VAR with EV ARt . Bootstrap standard errors that take into account the
uncertainty in generating EV AR are in parentheses. The sample period for the dependent
variables is 1926.3-2011.4, 342 quarterly data points.
Panel A: Forecasting Quarterly Realized Variance (RV ARt+1 )
Constant
rM;t
RV ARt
P Et
rT bill;t
DEFt
V St
R2 %
-0.020
-0.005
0.374
0.006
-0.042
0.006
0.000 37.80%
(0.009) (0.005) (0.066) (0.002) (0.057) (0.001) (0.003)

46

Second stage
rM;t+1
EV ARt+1
P Et+1
rT bill;t+1
DEFt+1
V St+1

Constant
0.221
(0.113)
-0.016
(0.007)
0.155
(0.113)
0.001
(0.004)
0.194
(0.309)
0.147
(0.111)

Panel B: VAR Estimates
rM;t
EV ARt
P Et
rT bill;t
0.041
0.335
-0.042
-0.810
(0.063) (2.143) (0.032) (0.736)
-0.002
0.441
0.005
-0.021
(0.001) (0.057) (0.002) (0.046)
0.130
0.674
0.961
-0.399
(0.062) (2.112) (0.032) (0.734)
0.002
-0.084
0.001
0.948
(0.002) (0.075) (0.001) (0.024)
-0.293
11.162
-0.118
4.102
(0.176) (5.838) (0.086) (1.925)
0.069
2.913
-0.017
-0.253
(0.065) (2.169) (0.031) (0.705)

DEFt
0.010
(0.022)
0.004
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.022)
0.001
(0.001)
0.744
(0.062)
-0.004
(0.022)

Panel C: Correlations and Standard Deviations
Corr/std
rM
EV AR
PE
rT bill DEF
unscaled
rM 0.105
-0.509
0.907 -0.041 -0.482
EV AR -0.509
0.004
-0.592 -0.163 0.688
P E 0.907
-0.592
0.099 -0.004 -0.598
rT bill -0.041 -0.163 -0.004 0.003 -0.111
DEF -0.482
0.688
-0.598 -0.111 0.287
V S -0.039
0.106
-0.066 0.013 0.323
scaled
rM 1.138
-0.494
0.905 -0.055 -0.367
EV AR -0.494
0.044
-0.570 -0.178 0.664
P E 0.905
-0.570
1.047 -0.014 -0.479
rT bill -0.055 -0.178 -0.014 0.041 -0.160
DEF -0.367
0.664
-0.479 -0.160 2.695
V S 0.022
0.068
0.005 -0.001 0.273
Panel D: Heteroskedastic
Squared, second-stage,
unscaled residual
Constant
rM;t+1
-0.002
(0.003)
EV ARt+1
0.000
(0.000)
P Et+1
-0.004
(0.003)
rT bill;t+1
0.000
(0.000)
DEFt+1
-0.113
(0.041)
V St+1
0.004
(0.002)

VS
-0.039
0.106
-0.066
0.013
0.323
0.086
0.022
0.068
0.005
-0.001
0.273
0.996

Shocks
EV ARt
1.85
(0.283)
0.004
(0.001)
1.89372
(0.289)
0.000
(0.000)
27.166
(3.411)
0.472
(0.133)

V St
-0.051
(0.035)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.024
(0.035)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.175
(0.094)
0.932
(0.034)

R2 %
20.43%
6.36%
19.75%
-0.29%
27.50%
5.57%

R2 %
3.36%
60.78%
94.29%
94.07%
88.22%
93.93%

Table 2: Cash-‡ow, Discount-rate, and Variance News for the Market Portfolio
The table shows the properties of cash-‡ow news (NCF ), discount-rate news (NDR ), and
volatility news (NV ) implied by the VAR model of Table 1. The upper-left section of the
table shows the covariance matrix of the news terms. The upper-right section shows the
correlation matrix of the news terms with standard deviations on the diagonal. The lowerleft section shows the correlation of shocks to individual state variables with the news terms.
The lower-right section shows the functions (e10 +e10 DR , e10 DR , e20 V ) that map the statevariable shocks to cash-‡ow, discount-rate, and variance news. We de…ne DR
(I
) 1
and V
(I
) 1 , where is the estimated VAR transition matrix from Table 1 and is
set to 0.95 per annum. rM is the log real return on the CRSP value-weight index. RV AR is
the realized variance of within-quarter daily simple returns on the CRSP value-weight index.
P E is the log ratio of the S&P 500’s price to the S&P 500’s ten-year moving average of
earnings. rT bill is the log three-month Treasury Bill yield. DEF is the default yield spread in
percentage points, measured as the di¤erence between the log yield on Moody’s BAA bonds
and the log yield on Moody’s AAA bonds. V S is the small-stock value-spread, the di¤erence
in the log book-to-market ratios of small value and small growth stocks. Bootstrap standard
errors that take into account the uncertainty in generating EV AR are in parentheses.

News cov.
NCF
NDR
NV

Shock corr.
rM shock
EV AR shock
P E shock
rT bill shock
DEF shock
V S shock

NCF
NDR
NV
0.00236
-0.00018 -0.00015
(0.00087) (0.00119) (0.00030)
-0.00018
0.00838
-0.00008
(0.00119) (0.00270) (0.00065)
-0.00015 -0.00008
0.00065
(0.00030) (0.00065) (0.00030)
NCF
0.497
(0.213)
-0.001
(0.168)
0.158
(0.239)
-0.372
(0.219)
-0.041
(0.188)
-0.397
(0.187)

NDR
-0.888
(0.045)
0.472
(0.113)
-0.960
(0.044)
-0.151
(0.142)
0.533
(0.115)
-0.165
(0.141)

NV
-0.026
(0.332)
0.452
(0.180)
-0.097
(0.354)
-0.034
(0.331)
0.751
(0.223)
0.567
(0.261)

48

News corr/std
NCF
NDR
NV

Functions
rM shock
RV AR shock
P E shock
rT bill shock
DEF shock
V S shock

NCF
NDR
NV
0.049
-0.041 -0.121
(0.008) (0.225) (0.264)
-0.041
0.092
-0.034
(0.225) (0.014) (0.355)
-0.121 -0.034
0.025
(0.264) (0.355) (0.007)
NCF
0.908
(0.031)
-0.300
(1.134)
-0.814
(0.167)
-4.245
(3.635)
0.008
(0.034)
-0.248
(0.127)

NDR
-0.092
(0.031)
-0.300
(1.134)
-0.814
(0.167)
-4.245
(3.635)
0.008
(0.034)
-0.248
(0.127)

NV
-0.011
(0.015)
1.280
(0.571)
0.187
(0.084)
0.867
(1.821)
0.079
(0.017)
0.099
(0.064)

Table 3: Cash-‡ow, Discount-rate, and Variance Betas
The table shows the estimated cash-‡ow (bCF ), discount-rate (bDR ), and variance betas (bV )
for the 25 ME- and BE/ME-sorted portfolios (Panels A and B) and six risk-sorted portfolios
(Panels C and D) for the early (1931:3-1963:2) and modern (1963:3-2011:4) subsamples
respectively. “Growth” denotes the lowest BE/ME, “Value” the highest BE/ME, “Small”
the lowest ME, and "Large" the highest ME stocks. bb V AR and bbrM are past return-loadings
on the weighted sum of changes in the VAR state variables, where the weights are according
to V as estimated in Table 2, and on the market-return shock. “Di¤.” is the di¤erence
between the extreme cells. Bootstrapped standard errors [in brackets] are conditional on the
estimated news series. Estimates are based on quarterly data using weighted least squares
where the weights are the same as those used to estimate the VAR.

49

25 ME- and BE/ME-sorted portfolios

b

CF

Small
2
3
4
Large
Di¤
b

DR

Small
2
3
4
Large
Di¤
b

V

Small
2
3
4
Large
Di¤

b

CF

Small
2
3
4
Large
Di¤
b

DR

Small
2
3
4
Large
Di¤
b

V

Small
2
3
4
Large
Di¤

Growth
0.49 [0.13]
0.30 [0.08]
0.32 [0.08]
0.26 [0.07]
0.24 [0.07]
-0.26 [0.07]

0.42
0.36
0.29
0.28
0.23
-0.19

Growth
1.20 [0.15]
0.87 [0.11]
0.95 [0.13]
0.67 [0.07]
0.70 [0.08]
-0.50 [0.14]

1.21
1.03
0.81
0.81
0.66
-0.56

Growth
-0.14 [0.05]
-0.08 [0.03]
-0.09 [0.03]
-0.04 [0.02]
-0.05 [0.02]
0.09 [0.04]

Panel A: Early Period (1931:3-1963:2)
2
3
4
Value
[0.11] 0.44 [0.11] 0.44 [0.10] 0.46 [0.10]
[0.09] 0.37 [0.09] 0.39 [0.09] 0.42 [0.10]
[0.08] 0.34 [0.09] 0.33 [0.08] 0.47 [0.12]
[0.08] 0.31 [0.09] 0.35 [0.08] 0.44 [0.11]
[0.07] 0.27 [0.09] 0.34 [0.10] 0.40 [0.29]
[0.05] -0.17 [0.04] -0.10 [0.03] -0.06 [0.03]
2

3
[0.16]
[0.14]
[0.09]
[0.10]
[0.08]
[0.11]

1.20
1.01
0.97
0.85
0.80
-0.40

-0.14
-0.10
-0.07
-0.06
-0.05
0.09

[0.04]
[0.03]
[0.02]
[0.02]
[0.02]
[0.02]

-0.15
-0.10
-0.09
-0.08
-0.09
0.06

Growth
0.23 [0.06]
0.23 [0.06]
0.21 [0.05]
0.21 [0.05]
0.15 [0.04]
-0.08 [0.04]

0.24
0.24
0.25
0.24
0.20
-0.04

Panel B:
2
[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.04]
[0.03]
[0.03]

Growth
1.30 [0.11]
1.19 [0.09]
1.11 [0.08]
1.00 [0.07]
0.82 [0.05]
-0.48 [0.10]

1.05
0.94
0.87
0.82
0.68
-0.37

Growth
0.13 [0.07]
0.14 [0.06]
0.14 [0.06]
0.13 [0.05]
0.09 [0.05]
-0.04 [0.03]

0.08
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.07
-0.01

2

4
[0.17]
[0.15]
[0.12]
[0.10]
[0.12]
[0.16]

1.19
0.99
0.93
0.93
1.05
-0.13

[0.05]
[0.03]
[0.03]
[0.03]
[0.04]
[0.02]

-0.14
-0.11
-0.10
-0.10
-0.12
0.02

3

2
0.87
0.82
0.73
0.73
0.60
-0.26

[0.06]
[0.06]
[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.04]
[0.03]

0.05
0.05
0.05
0.03
0.03
-0.02

2

Value
1.13 [0.17]
1.14 [0.14]
1.22 [0.16]
1.24 [0.17]
0.90 [0.12]
-0.23 [0.08]

Di¤
-0.07 [0.07]
0.27 [0.08]
0.27 [0.09]
0.58 [0.13]
0.20 [0.13]

[0.04]
[0.03]
[0.03]
[0.04]
[0.04]
[0.02]

Value
-0.14 [0.04]
-0.14 [0.04]
-0.14 [0.04]
-0.15 [0.05]
-0.11 [0.03]
0.03 [0.02]

Di¤
0.00 [0.02]
-0.06 [0.02]
-0.05 [0.02]
-0.10 [0.03]
-0.07 [0.03]

(1963:3-2011:4)
4
0.25 [0.04]
0.27 [0.05]
0.25 [0.05]
0.25 [0.04]
0.20 [0.04]
-0.05 [0.03]

3
[0.09]
[0.08]
[0.06]
[0.06]
[0.04]
[0.08]

[0.17]
[0.16]
[0.12]
[0.14]
[0.16]
[0.13]
4

Modern Period
3
0.26 [0.05]
0.26 [0.05]
0.24 [0.05]
0.25 [0.04]
0.18 [0.03]
-0.08 [0.03]

4
[0.07]
[0.07]
[0.06]
[0.07]
[0.05]
[0.06]

0.81
0.74
0.70
0.70
0.59
-0.22

[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.04]
[0.02]

0.05
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.02
-0.03

3

Di¤
-0.04 [0.05]
0.12 [0.04]
0.15 [0.05]
0.18 [0.05]
0.16 [0.04]

Value
0.28 [0.05]
0.29 [0.05]
0.27 [0.05]
0.28 [0.05]
0.20 [0.04]
-0.07 [0.03]

0.05
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.05

Di¤
[0.04]
[0.04]
[0.03]
[0.03]
[0.03]

[0.07]
[0.07]
[0.07]
[0.07]
[0.07]
[0.07]

Value
0.86 [0.09]
0.80 [0.08]
0.69 [0.07]
0.75 [0.07]
0.64 [0.06]
-0.23 [0.08]

Di¤
-0.44 [0.08]
-0.39 [0.08]
-0.42 [0.08]
-0.26 [0.08]
-0.18 [0.06]

[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.06]
[0.05]
[0.02]

Value
0.01 [0.07]
0.03 [0.06]
0.04 [0.04]
0.01 [0.06]
0.02 [0.04]
0.01 [0.03]

Di¤
-0.13 [0.03]
-0.12 [0.02]
-0.10 [0.03]
-0.11 [0.02]
-0.08 [0.02]

4

6 risk-sorted portfolios

b

CF

Lo bbV AR
Hi bbV AR
Di¤
b

DR

Lo bbV AR
Hi bbV AR
Di¤
bV

Lo bbV AR
Hi bbV AR
Di¤
b

CF

Lo bbV AR
Hi bbV AR
Di¤
b

DR

Lo bbV AR
Hi bbV AR
Di¤
b

V

Lo bbV AR
Hi bbV AR
Di¤

Panel C: Early Period (1931:3-1963:2)
Lo bbrM
2
Hi bbrM
0.23 [0.07] 0.34 [0.09] 0.42 [0.11]
0.21 [0.06] 0.28 [0.08] 0.41 [0.11]
-0.02 [0.02] -0.05 [0.03] -0.01 [0.02]

Di¤
0.19 [0.04]
0.20 [0.05]

Lo bbrM
0.60 [0.06] 0.89
0.58 [0.07] 0.83
-0.02 [0.04] -0.06

Di¤
0.54 [0.11]
0.54 [0.13]

2

Hi bbrM
[0.11] 1.13 [0.13]
[0.10] 1.11 [0.16]
[0.08] -0.02 [0.06]

Lo bbrM
2
Hi bbrM
Di¤
-0.04 [0.02] -0.07 [0.03] -0.10 [0.04] -0.06 [0.02]
-0.05 [0.02] -0.07 [0.03] -0.11 [0.04] -0.06 [0.03]
-0.01 [0.02] 0.00 [0.02] -0.01 [0.02]
Panel D: Modern Period (1963:3-2011:4)
Lo bbrM
2
Hi bbrM
Di¤
0.20 [0.04] 0.20 [0.04] 0.26 [0.06] 0.06 [0.04]
0.17 [0.03] 0.21 [0.04] 0.21 [0.06] 0.05 [0.05]
-0.04 [0.03] 0.01 [0.02] -0.05 [0.02]
Lo bbrM
0.63 [0.06]
0.58 [0.06]
-0.04 [0.09]
Lo bbrM
0.04 [0.05]
0.06 [0.04]
0.02 [0.02]

[0.06]
[0.05]
[0.06]

Hi bbrM
1.18 [0.09]
1.24 [0.09]
0.06 [0.05]

Di¤
0.56 [0.08]
0.66 [0.11]

[0.05]
[0.05]
[0.02]

Hi bbrM
0.09 [0.07]
0.12 [0.07]
0.03 [0.02]

Di¤
0.05 [0.03]
0.06 [0.04]

2
0.79
0.85
0.06
2
0.06
0.09
0.03

51

Table 4: Asset Pricing Tests: 25 Size and Book-to-Market Portfolios
The table reports GMM estimates of the CAPM, the 2-beta ICAPM, the 3-beta volatility ICAPM, a factor model where only the

b premium is restricted, and an unrestricted factor model for the early (Panel A: 1931:3-1963:2) and modern (Panel B: 1963:3

2011:4) subsamples. The test assets are 25 ME- and BE/ME-sorted portfolios. The first column per model constrains the zero-beta
rate ( ) to equal the T-bill rate (  ) while the second column allows  to be a free parameter. The 5% critical value for the
test of overidentifying restrictions is 36.5 in columns 1, 3, and 5; 35.2 in columns 2, 4, 6, and 7; 34.0 in columns 8 and 9; and 32.7
in column 10.

Parameter

CAPM

 less  (0 )
0
0.001
Std. err.
0
(0.015)
b
0.035
0.034
  premium (1 )
Std. err.
(0.012) (0.018)
b premium (2 )
0.035
0.034

Std. err.
(0.012) (0.018)
b
   premium (3 )
Std. err.
c2
50%
50%

 statistic
49.1
46.6
Implied 
2.2
2.2
Implied 
N/A
N/A
 less  (0 )
0
0.026
Std. err.
0
(0.010)
b
0.020
-0.003
  premium (1 )
Std. err.
(0.008) (0.012)
b premium (2 )
0.020
-0.003

Std. err.
(0.008) (0.012)
b
   premium (3 )
Std. err.
c2
-35%
1%

 statistic
93.4
79.5
Implied 
2.6
-0.4
Implied 
N/A
N/A

2-beta ICAPM
3-beta ICAPM
Panel A: Early Period
0
0.002
0
0.003
0
(0.013)
0
(0.012)
0.088
0.081
0.075
0.070
(0.048) (0.065) (0.033) (0.042)
0.016
0.016
0.016
0.016
0
0
0
0
-0.040 -0.032
(0.050) (0.055)
52%
52%
52%
52%
54.4
51.5
51.4
49.6
5.5
5.1
4.8
4.4
N/A
N/A
5.0
4.0
Panel B: Modern Period
0
-0.027
0
0.008
0
(0.013)
0
(0.009)
0.068
0.178
0.052
0.055
(0.035) (0.061) (0.014) (0.000)
0.008
0.008
0.008
0.008
0
0
0
0
-0.062 -0.096
(0.079) (0.043)
29%
56%
-37%
63%
68.2
48.4
70.6
54.2
8.7
23.0
6.8
7.2
N/A
N/A
16.0
24.9

Constrained

Unrestricted

0
0
0.069
(0.053)
0.016
(0.000)
-0.063
(0.143)
52%
49.4
N/A
N/A

0.007
0
0.020
(0.014)
0
(0.018)
0.031
0.081
0.066
(0.072) (0.066) (0.071)
0.016
0.010
-0.025
(0.000) (0.027) (0.035)
-0.124 -0.067 -0.259
(0.144) (0.155) (0.192)
53%
52%
56%
40.5
50.3
34.6
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

0
0
0.091
(0.037)
0.008
(0.000)
-0.103
(0.048)
71%
53.9
N/A
N/A

-0.012
0
-0.012
(0.014)
0
(0.015)
0.136
0.121
0.160
(0.069) (0.036) (0.052)
0.008
-0.005 -0.004
(0.000) (0.017) (0.020)
-0.083 -0.047 -0.035
(0.064) (0.067) (0.068)
75%
73%
76%
46.8
55.6
46.3
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

Table 5: Asset Pricing Tests: Adding Risk-sorted and Managed Portfolios
The table reports GMM estimates of the CAPM, the 2-beta ICAPM, the 3-beta volatility ICAPM, a factor model where only the

b premium is restricted, and an unrestricted factor model for the early (Panel A: 1931:3-1963:2) and modern (Panel B: 1963:3

2011:4) subsamples. The test assets are 25 ME- and BE/ME-sorted portfolios (“char.”), six risk-sorted portfolios (“risk”), and 18
characteristic and risk-sorted assets (“char./risk”). We include both “unscaled” and “managed” versions of these portfolios in our
pricing tests. For the managed portfolios, we scale the test assets by  . Thus, each column of estimates results from pricing
the returns on 98 portfolios. The first column per model constrains the zero-beta rate ( ) to equal the risk-free rate (  ) while
the second column allows  to be a free parameter. The 5% critical value for the test of overidentifying restrictions is 121.0 in
columns 1, 3, and 5; 119.9 in columns 2, 4, 6, and 7; 118.8 in columns 8 and 9; and 117.7 in column 10. The ninth row reports the
cross-sectional 2 , while rows 13 through 17 report the 2 for various test asset subsets.

Parameter

CAPM

2-beta ICAPM
3-beta
Panel A: Early Period
 less  (0 )
0
0.014
0
0.010
0
Std. err.
0
(0.015)
0
(0.017)
0
b
0.024
0.020
0.051
0.038
0.046
  premium (1 )
Std. err.
(0.013) (0.017) (0.058) (0.076) (0.045)
b
0.024
0.020
0.016
0.016
0.016
  premium (2 )
Std. err.
(0.013) (0.017)
0
0
0
b  premium (3 )
-0.009

Std. err.
(0.029)
c
2
71%
75%
75%
77%
74%

 statistic
673.0
617.1
728.1
641.8
721.6
Implied 
1.5
1.3
3.2
2.4
2.9
Implied 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
1.2
c
2
-112%
11%
-72%
6%
-82%
 : 25 unscaled char.
2
c
-71%
33%
-35%
31%
-44%
 : 49 unscaled
c2 : 49 managed
63%
59%
66%
62%
66%

c2 : 6 unscaled risk
-53%
82%
-10%
79%
-25%

2
c
44%
-14%
45%
-22%
 : 18 unscaled char./risk -49%

ICAPM

Constrained

Unrestricted

0.011
0
0.012
0
(0.016)
0
(0.013)
0
0.036
0.078
0.029
0.166
(0.063) (0.050) (0.053) (0.071)
0.016
0.016
0.016
-0.032
0
(0.000) (0.000) (0.024)
-0.004
0.063
-0.016 -0.085
(0.025) (0.147) (0.112) (0.173)
77%
76%
77%
82%
641.1
755.9
632.0
772.0
2.3
N/A
N/A
N/A
0.5
N/A
N/A
N/A
6%
-25%
6%
0%
31%
7%
30%
27%
62%
62%
62%
73%
79%
53%
79%
28%
45%
26%
44%
51%

0.019
(0.016)
0.105
(0.078)
-0.039
(0.021)
-0.229
(0.145)
84%
646.9
N/A
N/A
45%
64%
74%
72%
83%

Parameter
 less  (0 )
Std. err.
b premium (1 )

Std. err.
b premium (2 )

Std. err.
b  premium (3 )

Std. err.
c2

 statistic
Implied 
Implied 
c2 : 25 unscaled char.

c2 : 49 unscaled

c2 : 49 managed

c2 : 6 unscaled risk

c2 : 18 unscaled char./risk


CAPM

2-beta ICAPM
Panel B: Modern
0
0.015
0
-0.013
0
(0.010)
0
(0.014)
0.017
0.006
0.063
0.118
(0.008) (0.013) (0.043) (0.072)
0.017
0.006
0.008
0.008
(0.008) (0.013)
0
0

-10%
447.5
2.2
N/A
-58%
-31%
-2%
-24%
-32%

1%
408.9
0.7
N/A
-7%
-8%
2%
-50%
-17%

19%
350.5
8.1
N/A
26%
17%
16%
-9%
4%

25%
296.6
15.3
N/A
47%
35%
16%
17%
22%

54

3-beta
Period
0
0
0.055
(0.002)
0.008
0
-0.086
(0.036)
47%
450.7
7.1
22.5
-52%
16%
63%
-31%
48%

ICAPM

Constrained

Unrestricted

0.004
0
-0.007
0
(0.014)
0
(0.016)
0
0.055
0.073
0.100
0.104
(0.000) (0.059) (0.038) (0.026)
0.008
0.008
0.008
0.000
0
(0.000) (0.000) (0.014)
-0.096 -0.097 -0.094 -0.096
(0.059) (0.053) (0.058) (0.048)
59%
62%
63%
68%
407.0
386.4
331.8
295.6
7.2
N/A
N/A
N/A
24.9
N/A
N/A
N/A
28%
39%
44%
56%
53%
58%
61%
71%
61%
62%
63%
65%
49%
52%
44%
51%
62%
65%
67%
78%

0.002
(0.009)
0.098
(0.034)
0.000
(0.015)
-0.097
(0.047)
68%
294.4
N/A
N/A
56%
71%
65%
50%
78%

0.12
Realized Variance
Expected Variance

0.1

Variance

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
1926

1936

1946

1956

1966
Year

1976

1986

1996

2006

Figure 1: This …gure plots quarterly observations of realized within-quarter daily return
variance over the sample period 1926:2-2011:4 and the expected variance implied by the
model estimated in Table 1 Panel A.

55

Smoothed st. devs.

1
Sm oothed Ncf
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
1926

1936

1946

1956

1966
Year

1976

1986

1996

2006

1986

1996

2006

1986

1996

2006

Smoothed st. devs.

1
Sm oothed -Ndr
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
1926

1936

1946

1956

1966
Year

1976

Smoothed st. devs.

1
Sm oothed Nv
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
1926

1936

1946

1956

1966
Year

1976

Figure 2: This …gure plots normalized cash-‡ow news, the negative of normalized discountrate news, and normalized variance news. The series are smoothed with a trailing
exponentially-weighted moving average where the decay parameter is set to 0.08 per quarter,
and the smoothed news series is generated as M At (N ) = 0:08Nt +(1 0:08)M At 1 (N ). This
decay parameter implies a half-life of six years. The sample period is 1926:2-2011:4.

56

Standard Deviations

6
10-y r LHRVAR
lagged DEF
lagged PE

4
2
0
-2
-4
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

Y ear

0.1
10-y r LHRVAR
Forecasted Value

10-yr LHRVAR

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
1930

1940

1950

1960

1970
Y ear

Figure 3: We measure long-horizon realized variance (LHRV AR) as the annualized dis4

h

j

1 RV

ARt+j

j=1
counted sum of within-quarter daily return variance, LHRV ARh =
. Each
h
j 1
j=1
panel of this …gure plots quarterly observations of ten-year realized variance, LHRV AR40 ,
over the sample period 1930:1-2001:1. In Panel A, in addition to LHRV AR40 , we also plot
lagged P E and DEF . In Panel B, in addition to LHRV AR40 , we also plot the …tted value
from a regression forecasting LHRV AR40 with DEF O, de…ned as DEF orthogonalized to
demeaned P E. The appendix reports the WLS estimates of this forecasting regression.

57

Figure 4: Each diagram plots sample against predicted average excess returns. Test assets
in the top row are the 25 ME- and BE/ME-sorted portfolios and in the bottom row, both
unscaled (black) and scaled by EV AR (red) versions of the 25 ME- and BE/ME-sorted
portfolios (asterisks), six risk-sorted portfolios (circles), and 18 characteristic- and risk-sorted
portfolios (crosses). Predicted values are from Table 4 (top row) and Table 5 (bottom row)
for 1963:3-2011:4. From left to right, the models tested are the Sharpe/Lintner CAPM, the
Black CAPM, the three-factor ICAPM with the zero-beta rate constrained to the risk-freee
rate, and the three-factor ICAPM with a free zero-beta rate.

58

Smoothed st. devs.

1
CAPM
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
1926

1946

1966
Year

1986

2006

1986

2006

1986

2006

Smoothed st. devs.

1
T wo-Beta ICAPM
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
1926

1946

1966
Year

Smoothed st. devs.

1
T hree-beta ICAPM
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
1926

1946

1966
Year

Figure 5: This …gure plots the time-series of the smoothed combined shock for the CAPM
(NCF NDR ), the two-beta ICAPM ( NCF NDR ), and the three-beta ICAPM that includes
stochastic volatility ( NCF NDR 21 !NV ) for the unconstrained zero-beta rate speci…cations
estimated in Table 4 Panel B for the sample period 1963:3-2011:4. The shock is smoothed
with a trailing exponentially-weighted moving average. The decay parameter is set to 0.08
per quarter, and the smoothed news series is generated as M At (SDF ) = 0:08SDFt + (1
0:08)M At 1 (N ). This decay parameter implies a half-life of approximately two years.

59

