NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MOST EGALITARIAN OF ALL PROFESSIONS:
PHARMACY AND THE EVOLUTION OF A FAMILY-FRIENDLY OCCUPATION
Claudia Goldin
Lawrence F. Katz
Working Paper 18410
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18410
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

We are grateful to the Midwestern Pharmacy Research Consortium, especially John Schommer at
the University of Minnesota, College of Pharmacy and Akeem A. Yusuf a doctoral candidate, for making
the merged data of the National Pharmacist Workforce Surveys available to us. Tanya Avilova, Jane
Lee, and, especially, Chenzi Xu ably helped with data cleaning and other parts of this project. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18410.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Most Egalitarian of All Professions: Pharmacy and the Evolution of a Family-Friendly
Occupation
Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 18410
September 2012
JEL No. J24,J31,J44
ABSTRACT
Pharmacy has become a female-majority profession that is highly remunerated with a small gender
earnings gap and low earnings dispersion relative to other occupations. We sketch a labor market
framework based on the theory of equalizing differences to integrate and interpret our empirical findings
on earnings, hours of work, and the part-time work wage penalty for pharmacists. Using extensive
surveys of pharmacists for 2000, 2004, and 2009 as well as samples from the American Community
Surveys and the Current Population Surveys, we explore the gender earnings gap, the penalty to part-time
work, labor force persistence, and the demographics of pharmacists relative to other college graduates.
We address why the substantial entrance of women into the profession was associated with an increase
in their earnings relative to male pharmacists. We conclude that the changing nature of pharmacy
employment with the growth of large national pharmacy chains and hospitals and the related decline
of independent pharmacies played key roles in the creation of a more family-friendly, female-friendly
pharmacy profession. The position of pharmacist is probably the most egalitarian of all U.S. professions
today.
Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu
Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lkatz@harvard.edu

The eighth highest paid occupation for men in the United States is also the third highest
for women among more than 460 detailed occupations.1 It is a profession that was once
dominated by men working in independent practice, many of whom owned their own businesses.
But for the past three decades more than 60 percent of new hires in this occupation have been
women and most have been hired by large corporations, the government, and hospitals. Few
work long hours and part-time employment is common, particularly among women. The
educational requirement to enter this field was until recently a five-year undergraduate degree; in
the past decade it changed to a six-year combined BS and doctoral program. Does a highly-paid,
relatively short-hour, moderately high education, majority-female occupation sound too good to
be true? It is true and the field is pharmacy.
This paper concerns how the occupation of pharmacist changed during the last half
century and how it became a family-friendly profession with a high fraction of women and a
great ability to work part time. Pharmacy today has little or no hourly wage penalty for part-time
work. As the fraction female increased, the (full-time equivalent) earnings of pharmacists
relative to comparable professionals rose—not fell—for both men and women. As illustrated in
Figure 1, from 1970 to 2010 and especially since 2000 median earnings of full-time, year-round
pharmacists increased relative to physicians, lawyers and veterinarians.
Not only have the earnings of male and female pharmacists increased relative to other
professions, the ratio of female to male pharmacist earnings has also risen substantially. The
female to male ratio for median annual earnings of full-time, full-year workers grew from 0.66 in
1970 to 0.92 in 2010. The current gender earnings gap is now smaller for pharmacy than for
almost any other high-wage profession.
Earnings among pharmacists are high and largely differ by hours of work rather than
other job and individual characteristics. Managers and even owners earn more than employee
pharmacists largely because they work more hours. Women with children earn less largely
1

These rankings are for the median annual earnings by detailed occupation and sex of full-time, full-year
workers (those working 35 or more hours per week and 40 or more weeks in the year) from 25 to 64 years
old in the 2010 American Community Survey (ACS). Annual earnings are the sum of wage and salary
and self-employment income. Median annual earnings in 2010 were $115,000 for male pharmacists and
$105,000 for female pharmacists (in 2010 dollars). The rankings include ACS occupation-sex cells (491
for men and 463 for women) with at least 5 observations meeting the sample restrictions.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -1-

because they work fewer hours. Pharmacy earnings appear to be highly linear in hours and in
that sense pharmacy has a relatively low “career cost of family” (Goldin and Katz 2011,
forthcoming). In addition, pharmacists’ hourly earnings exhibit a low level of dispersion,
especially considering the high mean. Because of the extensive work flexibility and low
pecuniary penalty to short hours, female pharmacists with currently active licenses take little
time off during their careers even when they have children.2 Pharmacy has become the “most
egalitarian” of all U.S. professions.
The pharmacy sector has greatly changed in the US and elsewhere mainly because of an
increase in scale economies that can be reaped by nationwide chains. Drugs are increasingly
produced by pharmaceutical companies, not compounded in pharmacies and hospitals. Added to
this factor is the growing demand for pharmaceuticals with an aging population, Medicare Part D
drug coverage, and the many remarkable advances in medicine that have increased the use of
prescription drugs for a host of chronic diseases. These and other changes in the industrial
organization of pharmacy have altered the working environment and conditions.
The bottom line is that pharmacy is a family-friendly profession and one that is highly
remunerated with a low gender earnings gap relative to the occupations of other college
graduates. We sketch a labor market framework based on the theory of equalizing differences to
integrate and interpret our empirical findings on earnings, hours of work, and the part-time work
wage penalty for pharmacists. We address why the substantial entrance of women into the
profession was associated with an increase in their earnings relative to male pharmacists. We
conclude that the changing nature of pharmacy employment with the growth large national
pharmacy chains and hospitals and the related decline of independent pharmacies played key
roles in the creation of a more family-friendly pharmacy profession.

2

Knapp, et al. (1992) analyzes the results of a retrospective survey given to all living members of a
Midwestern pharmacy school. The use of graduating cohorts, rather than those with active pharmacy
licenses, allows them to measure the shift out of pharmacy as well as out of the labor force. Labor force
participation rates of women with pharmacy degrees were substantial at all ages (90 to 97 percent).

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -2-

I.

A Compensating Differentials Framework
Workplace flexibility is an amenity that entails a wage price to the worker and a cost to

the firm. The price of workplace flexibility to the worker includes penalties due to job
interruptions, short weeks, part-time work, and work flexibility during the day. Self-employment
in professions with office practices (e.g., dentists) or in retail sales (e.g., pharmacists) often
requires more hours of work from the owner because of classic agency problems. On the supply
side, firms face different costs of providing these amenities. Workers sort across occupations
and firms for various reasons, the career-family goal being one of them. Occupations with a
lower cost to workers of workplace flexibility will be demanded relatively more by those who
disproportionately value it, such as women.
The choice that employees make is not simply between having some workplace
flexibility and having none. Instead, they chose how much to “pay” for the amenity. Employees
differ in their demand for workplace flexibility and thus their willingness to pay for it. The
equilibrium cost of workplace flexibility is the tradeoff between earnings and the amenity. It
derives from the supply and the demand for workplace flexibility. The labor market equilibrates
the two sides of the market (the demand for flexibility and the supply of it) and generates
different amounts of workplace flexibility and its costs.
The implicit framework we use here is one of compensating differentials (also known as
equalizing differences).3 The framework reveals the impacts of demand-side changes by
workers concerning their willingness to pay for the amenity and supply-side changes by firms
regarding the shifting costs of providing the amenity. The two types of changes have different
effects on relative earnings and allow us to discriminate between whether the changes we
observe were caused largely by changes in tastes or technology.
Characteristics of work that are disliked by or noxious to some may be of no consequence
to others. Working in an environment free of peanuts will of great value to those who are
allergic but of little worth to others. The ability to shift hours during the day will be highly
valued by those with family responsibilities but of less worth to others. The same may be true of
on-site daycare and paid family leave.
3

See Rosen (1986). Our full model is contained in Goldin and Katz (forthcoming).

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -3-

The amenity of job flexibility (or family friendliness) is assumed in this model to be a
discrete variable. Jobs are either inflexible or flexible. Inflexible jobs come with a disamenity
(D = 1). Alternatively, jobs can be flexible and not have the disamenity (D = 0).
On the demand side of the market, workers value income and are assumed to be
heterogeneous in their tastes for the disamenity (D). Assume that the compensating differential
in earnings between a job with the disamenity and one without is W. Workers who highly
value the amenity will opt for the job without the disamenity and will pay W for it.
Alternatively, those who have a low value for the amenity, will not.
On the supply side of the market firms are assumed to be heterogeneous in the
productivity benefit of the disamenity and thus in the costs of getting rid of it. The firms’
technology that produces the amenity (or that ameliorates the disamenity) is assumed to be
distributed continuously. For some firms (or sectors) the provision of part-time work is not
costly whereas for others it is. If W* is the given wage differential firms are paying to
employees who take the disamenity, the firms with lower costs of providing the amenity would
do so and firms with higher costs would not.
The equilibrium occurs when amenity supply equals amenity demand. If the supply of
the amenity is equal to the demand for the amenity at the going wage differential, then the
market is in equilibrium. If the supply of the amenity was greater than its demand, the price of
the amenity (the wage differential) would fall, and if the supply were less than the demand, the
price of the amenity would rise.
The model can be made relevant to the issues explored here by considering two types of
workers: males and females. If at every W women demand more of the amenity than men, men
will walk away with a higher salary and incur the disamenity, about which they care little.
Two major changes can alter the equilibrium. The first is a labor supply shift. An influx
of women (who are more willing than men to pay for the amenity) into an occupation will mean
that, at the going wage differential, demand for the amenity will exceed supply and the price of
the amenity will rise. A larger wage differential between jobs with and without the amenity will
result, the fraction of jobs offering the amenity will increase, and the fraction of men who opt for
Most Egalitarian of All Professions -4-

the amenity will decrease since they are less willing to pay for it.
If, on the other hand, the cost of providing the amenity (or, alternatively, the productive
benefit of the disamenity) decreases, more firms would want to offer the amenity at the current
wage differential and pressure will mount for W to decrease to attract more workers to
purchase the amenity. More men and more women will shift into flexible jobs, but it is likely
that relatively more women than men will be enticed into these positions.
Individuals with a greater willingness to pay for the amenity earn less than others and a
decrease in the cost of supplying the amenity will increase their relative earnings. An increase in
the supply of individuals who value the amenity will increase the equilibrium amount paid for
the amenity and tend to widen the gap in earnings between men and women.
To summarize, the compensating differentials framework includes two cases. In one case
the change in workplace flexibility arises because of an increase in the group with the greater
demand for the amenity or because of a change in preferences for the amenity. The implications
of this demand side shift are: (a) an increase in the cost of the amenity and by implication a
likely relative decrease in women’s earnings, and (b) an increase in the fraction of the total
workforce with the amenity (but a decrease in the fraction of men with the amenity since its price
rises). In the other case, the costs to firms of providing the amenity or of reducing the amount of
the disamenity decrease. The implications are: (a) a decrease in the cost of the amenity and by
implication a likely relative increase in women’s earnings, and (b) an increase in the fraction of
the total workforce with the amenity (and an increase in the fraction of men with the amenity
since its price decreases).
In both cases—the demand side change or the supply side shift—a higher fraction of
workers will take the amenity after the change. The major difference concerns the equilibrium
wage effect. In the case of an increased demand for the amenity, the price of the amenity (e.g.,
the part-time work penalty) rises, thereby tending to widen the gender earnings gap. In the case
of an increase in the supply of the amenity, the price of amenity falls tending to narrow the
gender earnings gap.
We explore these implications to see if the cost of workplace flexibility is lower for
pharmacists than for comparable professionals and how the pharmacy profession was altered by
Most Egalitarian of All Professions -5-

the rise of chains and hospitals. Because some of the data used in this study are not widely
known we first discuss our sources.

II.

Pharmacist Workforce Surveys (PWS): 2000, 2004, and 2009
We use individual micro-data on about 5,300 pharmacists with active licenses from

surveys devised by the Midwestern Pharmacy Research Consortium for the years 2000, 2004,
and 2009.4 The surveys were mailed in each of the years to a randomly chosen group of about
4,500 currently licensed pharmacists. Response rates were around 40 percent in each year. Most
of the analyses here aggregate the data across years. The data set is termed the Pharmacist
Workforce Survey (PWS) and is described in the Data Appendix.
Each of the surveys contains detailed economic information including income from
primary and other jobs, bonuses, overtime, hours, weeks, and job experience. Data on education
includes post-secondary degrees in pharmacy and other fields. The dates and states of pharmacy
licensing are included. Demographic variables include race, ethnicity, marital status, and
numbers and ages of children.5 The three surveys are nearly identical but that for 2009 contains
richer information on all job changes during the individual’s career.

III.

Pharmacist Training and the Pharmacy Sector
To practice pharmacy today involves training in a college or university, practical

experience and a license. Pharmacy instruction was originally based in medical colleges but
shifted in the 1800s to dedicated pharmacy schools. After the 1880s most new pharmacy
colleges were established within existing colleges and universities. Since 1932 the pharmacy
curriculum has been specified by the American Council on Pharmaceutical Education (ACPE),
the group that accredits pharmacy colleges and programs. The length of the program is

4
5

Tabulations are contained in three reports (Midwest Pharmacy Research Consortium 2000, 2005, 2010).
The 2009 survey includes only children living at home.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -6-

recommended by the American Association of Colleges of Pharmacy (AACP), as it probably has
been ever since the inception of the AACP in 1900.6
In 1907 a two-year program was prescribed by the AACP, although some schools offered
advanced degrees. The standard program was increased to three years in 1925 and to four in
1932. In 1960 a five-year BS program was recommended and in 1992 a six-year combined BS
and PhD program, known as the PharmD, was proposed. In 1997 the ACPE adopted
accreditation standards requiring the PharmD and the last five-year BS for pharmacy graduates
was granted to the class of 2005. In the Pharmacist Workforce Survey 83 percent of those who
received their first licenses after 2000 earned a PharmD, whereas 30 percent did who received
their first licenses in the 1990s and just 15 percent did who were first licensed in the 1980s.
As the demand for pharmacists has increased, so has the number of schools and the
enrollment per school. In 2010 there were 118 U.S. colleges and schools of pharmacy with
active PharmD degree programs and 100 of them granted the degree in that year (11,487
degrees).7 In 2005 when the PharmD was first required of all pharmacy schools there were 92
active programs; in 2000 there were 82 schools granting either a PharmD or a BS in pharmacy.
Pharmacy program enrollment increased by 65 percent (from 34,481 to 56,841) and enrollments
per school by 14 percent (from 421 to 482) from 2000 to 2010. Similarly, total degrees
increased by 58 percent (from 7,260 to 11,487) and degrees per school increased by 22 percent
(from 94 to 115). Despite the increase in the size of each school, more than two-thirds of the
total increase in enrollments during the decade occurred because of the expansion in the number
of schools rather than in the size of the average school.8
Pharmacists are found in several sectors. The largest sector by employment today is
retail sales, although the sector was relatively larger in the past. Pharmacists are also employed
in hospitals, government, industry, and academia. In 2009 59 percent of all pharmacists were
6

For a history of pharmacy see Kremers, et al. (1986) and Henderson (2002)
The 18 that were not currently granting degrees had been established in the previous five years.
8
These data are from compilations by the American Association of Colleges of Pharmacy available on a
special part of their website. See http://www.aacp.org/about/Pages/Vitalstats.aspx for the main site and
http://www.aacp.org/resources/research/institutionalresearch/Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx?RootFolde
r=%2fresources%2fresearch%2finstitutionalresearch%2fDocuments%2fTrendData&FolderCTID=&View
=%7bD75638BD-228A-42B8-8071-8A3790AD8426%7d for the historical data [accessed last 8/24/12].
7

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -7-

employed in retail, 30 percent in hospitals, and 11 percent in the remaining sectors (see Table 1).
In 1966 83 percent of pharmacists worked in retail sales and just 8 percent worked in hospitals.
The increase in the fraction of pharmacists working in hospitals has reinforced another
important trend. During the past half century the fraction of pharmacists who are employees
rather than owners has soared. In addition, the fraction of pharmacists who work for large
corporations in the retail sector rather than for independent pharmacies has also increased
greatly. The relative shift into hospitals has strengthened the trend to employee status.
Of all practicing pharmacists across the three PWS samples in the 2000s, 7.5 percent
were self-employed (that is, owners or partners), 28.8 percent were managers and the remaining
63.7 percent were employees. Men were owners at four times the rate of women: 12 percent
versus 3 percent. In contrast, more than 35 percent of all pharmacists were self-employed in
1970 and 40 percent were in 1966 (see Table 1). Increased pharmaceutical employment in chain
stores and supermarkets has been the largest single reason for the industry changes. Just 14
percent of pharmacists were employed by non-independent retailers (e.g., chains) in 1966 but 45
percent were across the three samples in the 2000s. The overall self-employment rate for
pharmacists declined from 40 percent in the mid-1960s to less than 5 percent in 2010.
The decrease in the fraction self employed has meant that the fraction who are
employees—in chains, independent practice, hospitals, or elsewhere—has increased. More
recently (in 2009) about 54 percent of males and 71 percent of females working as licensed
pharmacists are employees. The rest are managers and owners.
Because there are relatively fewer self-employed pharmacists and more pharmacists
employed by the non-independents, there are also relatively fewer employed by independent
pharmacies. The fraction of pharmacists who were either owners or employees in independent
practice declined substantially (see Figure 2). In the late 1950s about 75 percent of all
pharmacists were owners or were employed by an independent practice. Around 1980 40
percent were and recently just 14 percent are.
Each of the changes mentioned—the decline in ownership and independent pharmacies
and the rise of employee status—has had major implications for the pharmacy work environment
Most Egalitarian of All Professions -8-

and for women in particular. The relative increase in employees decreased the implicit
pecuniary penalty to pharmacists from working part-time and part-year. In the corporate and
hospital sectors, pharmacist employees became better substitutes for each other. Similarly, the
decrease in the fraction owners decreased the implicit penalty for not being owners or equity
stakeholders. The impact on the relative earnings of female pharmacists has been substantial.
These changes are probably the single most important factors prompting the enormous increase
in female pharmacists and accounting for the fact that women are the majority of pharmacists.
The fraction of pharmacists who work part-time has greatly increased in the 40 years
after 1970, from around 9 percent to about 20 percent. But almost all of the change has been
compositional and driven by the rising share of women in the pharmacy profession. Female
pharmacists in past decades were employed part-time to about the same extent they are today and
often located part-time work in independent pharmacies as assistants to the owner (Henderson
2002). Their earnings were considerably less than those of the owners who were the residual
claimants and the main decision makers. As chain stores expanded more pharmacists became
employees. Their earnings no longer included a premium to compensate for the added risk and
responsibility and their hours in consequence could be reduced without much additional earnings
penalty. The annual earnings premium to ownership, we will show, is about 45 log points but
three quarters of the premium is due to the greater hours worked by owners than employees.

IV.

Demography of Pharmacists
The pharmacy industry experienced major structural changes precisely when female

pharmacists greatly increased in number. Women were about 8 percent of all pharmacists in
1960 and are more than 55 percent today. The fraction female among pharmacy school
graduates increased from 14 percent in the mid-1960s to about 65 percent today (see Figure 3).
Large organizational and structural changes in the pharmacy industry apparently
decreased the costs to retail establishments of offering various job amenities to all of their
employees without large earnings penalties, such as the ability to work short hours. Changes in
retail sales also reduced the compensating differential to ownership, long hours, and being the
residual claimant. Structural changes in pharmacy (and for similar reasons in professions such as
Most Egalitarian of All Professions -9-

optometry) were rooted in major shifts in retailing in America, and elsewhere in the world, that
increased the benefits of large scale. It would be hard to assign credit for the spread of WalMart,
Target, Costco, CVS, Rite Aid, Walgreens, and other chains that have pharmacies to women’s
increased numbers in the pharmacy profession.9
In most professions in which women have greatly increased their numbers, men and
women differ greatly in their demographics. The most obvious difference is that women are
much younger than men. But in most professions, even given age, a lower fraction of women
than men are married and a far lower fraction have children even among those who are married.
But in the case of pharmacy, these differences are less evident especially for those
younger than 45 years. Part of the reason is that parity between male and female graduates of
pharmacy colleges began around 1984, whereas near parity in law for example was achieved
around 2000. Another reason is that pharmacy is more enabling of family. Female pharmacists
marry at about the same rate as male pharmacists and have about the same number of children.
The fraction of female pharmacists without children by their forties is about 21 percent, which is
lower than for other female graduates of four-year colleges in that age group.10
As seen in Table 2, the fraction of (active) pharmacists 25 to 44 years old who have ever
married is somewhat greater for women than men. Although the fraction of women 25 to 44
years old without children is higher than for men, the fraction without children in their early
forties is more similar (0.18 for men and 0.21 for women).
The 2009 Pharmacist Workforce Survey (PWS) asked respondents to record the starting
and ending dates of all of their employments and to include periods when they were not in the
labor force. They also asked the reason employment had been terminated and why the individual
was not in the labor force during any spell. The surprising finding is that even though women
had more spells out of the labor force than men, the spells for women were few and the length of
9

See Bottero (1992) for a similar discussion of pharmacy in the United Kingdom.
Among all BA women in the United States 40 to 44 years old in 2008, 22.8 percent never had children
(derived from CPS data, see http://www.census.gov/prod/2010pubs/p20-563.pdf ). Comparable data from
the pharmacy surveys shows 21.0 percent excluding 2009 and 20.2 percent including 2009 (for currently
employed pharmacists). The CPS data refer to “biological” children whereas the pharmacy surveys could
include adopted and step-children.
10

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -10-

time spent away from work was brief.
According to the 2009 PWS 11.1 percent of women (but 4.3 percent of men) with active
pharmacy degrees (but not limited to those currently employed as pharmacists) ever had a spell
out of the workforce. The fraction for women increases to 15.2 percent for those 45 years and
older but does not change for men. The median total time out for women who had at least one
spell was about 1.8 years and was 2 years for men. The means were 3.4 and 4.4 for women and
men respectively. Although these data are based on a small sample because of the low fraction
of individuals who ever took time out, they are suggestive that female pharmacists do not take
much time out and conditional on taking out time, did not take more than did male pharmacists.
Because the Pharmacist Workforce Surveys are limited to those with active licenses, the
data may create a false impression that female pharmacists persist in the labor force. But
information from the 2009 and 2010 American Community Surveys (ACS) on the field of degree
suggests otherwise and indicates that women with a bachelor’s degree in pharmacy (and not
limited to those whose occupations are given as “pharmacist”) have higher labor force
participation rates than other educated women.
Among all women 25 to 64 years old with at least a bachelor’s degree in the 2009 and
2010 ACSs, those with a BS in pharmacy had a labor force participation rate of 85.6 percent as
compared with 81.5 percent for other college graduate women. And among college graduate
women aged 35 to 39 years, the labor force participation gap favoring pharmacy graduates over
other fields is even greater (88.6 percent as opposed to 82.2 percent). The bottom line is that an
unusually high fraction of women with pharmacy degrees persist in the labor force. 11 Rather
than taking time off, they work part-time.

V.

Pharmacist Hours and Part-time Employment
Pharmacist earnings per unit time are relatively high despite a large fraction working

part-time and fairly low hours for a high-powered profession. Male and female pharmacists have
similar total hours of work when young but hours of work for women subsequently decline.
11

See also Knapp et al. (1992) for data on those with pharmacy degrees in any employment.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -11-

They then level off and rise a bit before decreasing prior to retirement (see Figure 4.A). Total
hours in pharmacy employment include time spent working in the primary job plus overtime in
that position and hours in all secondary positions. Total hours for men average around 45 per
week and are about 37 for women. In terms of hours in their primary job, men work about 43
hours throughout their working lives; women begin at around 41 hours and decrease to 36 hours
in their early thirties and for just about the rest of their career.
Among women who have children of any age hours of work in the primary job are
around six to ten hours lower than for women without children, at least until women are in their
fifties when hours are about the same for both groups (see Figure 4.B). Hours are a bit higher for
men with children than for those without, consistent with the well-known finding that married
men with children earn more than observationally comparable men without. Although hours are
lower for women with children than for those without, they are lower for women without
children than for men suggesting that female pharmacists work fewer hours for reasons other
than taking care of their children.12
Part-time work in all jobs, defined as working fewer than 35 hours per week, is about 6
percent for males and 9 percent for females at the start of their careers. But the fraction part-time
falls to about 5 percent for males where it remains until close to retirement and rises to around 36
percent for females. For females the fraction part-time peaks around age 50 in the cross section
and then decreases for those currently employed as pharmacists before it rises prior to
retirement.13 A similar pattern is found for women with children. The fraction working fewer
than 35 hours at all jobs remains above 40 percent until women are in their late forties. It would
appear from these data that female pharmacists who work part-time when their kids are young
continue to work part-time even when their children are grown.
It will be recalled from the data in Table 1 that women have always worked part-time in
pharmacy. In 1970 36 percent of female pharmacists worked part-time and the fraction
decreased over time.14 The barrier to female employment in pharmacy in the past was not that
12

The sample of women without children at older ages is small.
The fraction working part-time across all employments is lower than for the primary job only, of
course.
14
The most recent data come from the ACS. The 2004 PWS figure for part-time in the primary job seems
13

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -12-

women could not work part-time, at least for part of their career. It was that the earnings penalty
to working part-time must have been far greater when the female part-time pharmacist was often
an assistant of a male pharmacist who owned the business. The implicit part-time and lowerhours penalty dropped as most pharmacists became employees.
As more pharmacists became employees and as the pecuniary penalty to part-time work
decreased, female pharmacist earnings gained on those of male pharmacists. The ratio of male to
female (mean) earnings for full-time, year-round pharmacists in 1970 was 1.67 (see Table 1, col.
9). Women gained on men over time and by 2010 the ratio had fallen to 1.18. The ratio for
median earnings of male to female full-time, year-round pharmacists was 1.52 in 1970 but 1.10
in 2010. The change from 1970 to the present is fairly continuous. Including the part-time and
part-year group would increase the female disadvantage at the start of the period relative to the
end and produce a larger narrowing of the gender earnings gap for all pharmacists.15
We will now see how earnings for male and female pharmacists vary with hours of work,
type of sector, and position. Our focus will be on the degree to which there is a penalty to
women from working shorter hours, fewer weeks, and for taking time off and how this penalty
fell over time leading to the relative increase in female pharmacists and in their relative earnings.

VI.

Earnings and the Gender Gap for Pharmacists
A.

Earnings levels, change, and dispersion

Not only are female pharmacist earnings relatively high compared with male pharmacist
earnings, pharmacist earnings are currently high for both men and women compared with all
comparable professions. For full-time, year-round workers in only seven other detailed

too high (also for 2009); even the value for all jobs is high (0.322 for 2004).
15
In fact, the ratio for median annual earnings of all male to all female pharmacists with positive earnings
(including the part-time and part-year workers) fell from 1.99 in 1970 to 1.13 in 2010 using the 1970
Census and 2010 ACS public use samples.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -13-

occupations does the median male worker earn more and in only two others does the median
female worker earn more.16
Pharmacist earnings have been rising relative to most other health care professionals ever
since the late 1990s.17 From 1999 to 2010 pharmacist earnings have risen relative to 41 out of
the 42 health care professionals listed in the BLS Occupational Employment Statistics (OES).18
In 1999 pharmacist earnings were 0.89 of chiropractors’, for example, but were 1.33 times that in
2010. Pharmacist earnings were 0.81 of optometrists’ in 1999 but were on par with them in
2010, and pharmacist earnings rose relative to the seven major physician specialties listed in the
OES even relative to surgeons and anesthesiologists.
Pharmacy is an extraordinarily egalitarian occupation especially given its high average
earnings. Using the May 2011OES pharmacists have the lowest wage dispersion of any of the
occupations with earnings greater than $60,000 per year (or more than $40 per hour), where
wage dispersion is measured either by the ratio of earnings at the 90th percentile relative to that at
the 10th percentile or similarly for the 75th and the 25th percentiles.19 In fact, if one uses data on
the 800 or so occupations in the OES and predicts wage dispersion on the basis of average
earnings, the level for pharmacists would be twice the actual. Pharmacist earnings have the
lowest dispersion among any of the healthcare occupations.
The bottom line is that pharmacy is a high paying and relatively egalitarian profession
economically. One factor that enables pharmacy to be so equal is that its remuneration is fairly
linear with respect to hours and weeks. Individuals who work more hours earn more. But they
are not, by and large, rewarded any more than would be predicted by a linear relationship among
earnings, the hourly wage, and hours. In contrast, many lawyers and those employed in the
corporate and financial sectors are rewarded considerably more if they work long hours
(Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz 2010; Goldin and Katz 2011; Goldin and Katz forthcoming).
16

The two higher paid occupations for women are nurse anesthetists and physicians. Source: 2010 ACS.
Census and ACS data from 1950 to 2010 show that, relative to physicians, pharmacist earnings first
declined and then increased. The increase from 1990 to the present has brought the ratio of their median
earnings back to approximately its level in 1950 (0.57).
18
http://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes_nat.htm was used for 2010, for example. Only Radiology
Therapists, a lower-paying healthcare occupation, had earnings that rose a bit faster from 1999 to 2010.
19
Tabulations from the National Cross-Industry Estimates of the May 2011 Occupational Employment
and Wage Estimates available at http://www.bls.gov/oes/oes_dl.htm.
17

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -14-

Part of the mechanism behind this linearity is that pharmacists are good substitutes for
each other. Their training is similar; they take the same national certification exams. But that is
also true of other professions in which there is significant non-linearity of earnings with respect
of hours. The way in which the case of pharmacy differs from the others is that there are no
great gains to having a pharmacist work 60 hours a week as opposed to having two pharmacists
each work 30 hours a week. The same is not the case in the legal and financial sectors often
because of real reasons. A trial lawyer, for example, has to be in front of the jury every trial day
and no camera equipment and Skyping are allowed. Traders in much of the financial sector are
generally required to be in their office during market hours.
The linearity in earnings with respect to hours and the apparent relative homogeneity
among pharmacists have implications for the gender gap in pharmacy. Although there is a
substantial raw gender gap in annual earnings, it is almost entirely explained by differences in
the hours of female and male pharmacists. Even the annual earnings premium to being a
manager or owner is largely due to their longer hours. Although women with children have
lower earnings, that is largely due to their shorter hours of work. Furthermore, shorter hours
early in one’s career or time off do not appear to lead to lower hourly earnings later in life.
One set of factors that appear unlikely to be responsible for the egalitarian structure of
earnings in pharmacy is the licensing and regulation of the profession. A host of other
professions require licensing but do not exhibit such an egalitarian earnings structure. Many
physicians become board certified and all need licenses to practice medicine, lawyers take the
bar exam, CPAs must pass a battery of national exams before becoming “certified,” and
engineers typically are required to have a state license. We know of no particular regulations
that would enforce greater uniformity of hourly earnings on pharmacists.
To make these points more precise, we examine the gender earnings gap for currently
practicing licensed pharmacists using the Pharmacist Workplace Surveys for 2000, 2004, and
2009. We estimate a standard log earnings equation with (log) hours, (log) weeks, dummies for
position (owner, manager, employee) and sector (chain, independents, hospital, other), education
(graduates degrees), age as a quadratic, and whether the person has a child.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -15-

The raw annual earnings gender gap given in Table 3 col. (1) is 27 log points, using data
pooled across the three years. The addition of log hours per week and log weeks worked to the
log annual earnings regression reduces the gender earnings gap from 27 to 7.6 log points (col. 2)
demonstrating that the gender gap in annual earnings for pharmacists largely reflects differences
in hours worked. The specification in col. (2) may understate the role of hours worked with
downward biased estimates on the log hours per week and log weeks coefficients because of
measurement error in self-reports of hours and weeks worked. The specification in col. (3)
addresses this issue by restricting the coefficients on log hours and log weeks in col. (2) to be
one. In that specification the gender gap in log hourly earnings is just 4.7 log points.
The shorter work week of female pharmacists is the largest single component of the
gender earnings gap. Female pharmacists in our earnings sample work 6.6 fewer hours per week
than male pharmacists (36.6 for women per week and 43.2 hours for men) for a 20 log point gap
and work 0.7 fewer weeks per year (47.5 weeks for women and 48.2 for men) for a 2 log point
gap. Thus, the overall 27 log point annual gender earnings gap consists of 20 log points from
gender differences in hours per week and 2 log points from differences in weeks worked per
year. The remaining 4.7 log points constitute the hourly wage gap.
We next examine the gender earnings gap conditional on covariates to control for
differences in educational attainment, race and ethnicity, potential labor market experience
(through a quadratic in age), ownership of a pharmacy and managerial responsibilities, and
sector of employment (retail chain, independent pharmacy, hospital, or other setting) in Table 3,
cols. (4) to (6). The addition of these covariates modestly reduces the gender annual earnings
gap from 27 log points to 23.5 log points in the specification without controlling for hours and
weeks worked (col. 4) largely because women are more likely to be employees and less likely to
be owners or managers. A substantial annual earnings premium is apparent for owners (47 log
points) and managers (24 log points) when not controlling for hours. The addition of hours and
weeks (col. 5) reduces the owner and manager premium substantially, as does the estimation
using hourly earnings. In the hourly estimation, owners earn just 5 log points more than
employees and managers just 3 log points more.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -16-

Differences in age and labor market experience between men and women play no role in
the estimated gender earnings gap since there is no significant labor market return to experience.
There is a surprisingly flat age earnings profile for licensed pharmacists. The additional
covariates only slightly reduce the gender earnings gap once one controls for hours and weeks
(compare cols. 5 and 6 with cols. 2 and 3).
Substantial gender differences in pharmacists’ hours worked and in earnings are only
apparent for those with children.20 The gender earnings gap for those without children is 3 log
points even without controlling for hours, but the gender earnings gap is 33 log points for those
with children (col. 7). In specifications controlling for hours and weeks, the gender earnings gap
for those without children is only 1 log point (cols. 8 and 9). Differences in hours worked by sex
substantially explain the much larger gender earnings gap for those with children.
Our findings from the PWS are similar to those found using the ACS for 2009 and 2010.
The samples are somewhat different because the former refers to currently employed pharmacists
with active licenses whereas the latter are for individuals who list themselves as employed
pharmacists. Using the data from the ACS we find a gender earnings gap of about 26 log points
for annual earnings in models controlling for a quadratic in age and dummy variables for
educational attainment, race and ethnicity, broad sector, and year. Further controls for hours and
weeks reduces the gender gap to 8 log points.21 The results from the rich data contained in the
PWS can be largely replicated using a pharmacy subsample in a nationally representative survey.
The gender earnings gap for pharmacists principally reflects differences in hours worked
by male and female pharmacists. These differences in hours for women are strongly related to
the presence of children. Owners and managers earn more largely because they work more
hours. The number of hours worked is decisive for almost all differences in pharmacy earnings.

20

Regressions in Table 3, cols. (7) to (9) are run on only the 2000 and 2004 samples because the 2009
survey asked only about children living at home. Results for cols. (1) to (6) run over the restricted sample
produce similar gender differences to those given in Table 3 for the full sample.
21
The regression sample includes all 5,615 individuals in the 2009 and 2010 ACS PUMS listing
pharmacy as their current occupation with positive weeks worked in the past year and non-outlier
earnings (implied hourly earnings between $6 and $300 an hour).

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -17-

B.

Hourly wage penalty to part-time employment

Pharmacy is a fairly egalitarian and standardized occupation with only modest hourly
wage premia for ownership and managerial responsibilities. We now examine the hourly wage
penalty to working part-time (fewer than 35 hours per week) for pharmacists. We limit the PWS
sample to those directly reporting hourly earnings and weekly hours to avoid measurement error
(division bias) problems.22
The 2000 and 2004 PWS allowed respondents to report earnings in their preferred
manner. The majority of the respondents (59 percent overall: 56 percent of males and 63 percent
of females) directly reported hourly earnings. Col. (1) of Table 4 repeats the log (hourly
earnings) regression specification in col. (6) of Table 3 adding a part-time work indicator
variable and restricting the sample only to those reporting hourly earnings. The gender hourly
earnings gap narrows to 2.5 log points for this sample and the part-time hourly earnings penalty
is nonexistent.23 The part-time hourly earnings penalty is also essentially zero when looking
only at female pharmacists in the 2000 and 2004 Pharmacist Workforce Surveys (col. 2). More
generally (in unreported regressions) we find no significant systematic relationship between
hourly earnings and weekly hours for pharmacists who directly reported hourly earnings.
Is pharmacy an occupation with a low penalty for part-time work in comparison with
other occupations? The question is addressed here using the point-in-time information on hourly
wages for workers paid by the hour, weekly earnings for all wage and salary workers, and usual
weekly hours in the large nationally-representative Current Population Survey Merged Outgoing
Rotation Group (CPS) samples for 2005 to 2011.
We first explore the gender hourly earnings gap and part-time wage penalty for
pharmacists and other college graduate wage and salary workers. Because most college
graduates are salaried workers and do not report an hourly wage in the CPS, we use the log of
constructed hourly earnings, that is log (weekly earnings/usual weekly hours), as the dependent
variable in Table 4, cols. (3) to (5) to compare pharmacists with all other college graduates.
22

These problems arise from using constructed hourly earnings from retrospective reports of annual
earnings, hours, and weeks worked.
23
There is enough precision to rule out even a 2 log point wage penalty for part-time work.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -18-

The estimates in col. (3) indicate a 25 log point part-time work penalty and 19 log point
gender hourly earnings gap for non-pharmacist college graduates and a much smaller part-time
penalty (5 log points) and gender earnings gap (10 log points) for pharmacists. The addition of a
full set of detailed (three-digit) occupation dummies in col. (4) reduces the non-pharmacist parttime wage penalty to 14 log points and gender earnings gap to 13 log points.24 But the
substantially smaller part-time work and gender hourly earnings penalties for pharmacists remain
intact. A part-time work penalty is nonexistent for female pharmacists (see col. 5) but is almost
20 log points for other female college graduates. Similarly, a much smaller part-time work
penalty and gender hourly earnings gap for pharmacists than other occupations and no part-time
wage deficit for female pharmacists are found when we use the log (hourly wage) based on direct
reports for current hourly wages for workers paid by the hour in the CPS (see cols. 6 to 8).
We have demonstrated that the part-time penalty for pharmacists is small in recent data.
But has it declined as pharmacists have shifted out of independent practice? The answer is that
the part-time penalty has substantially declined in the past four decades. We have estimated the
analogous hourly earnings regression to that of Table 4, col. (4) using the CPS Merged Outgoing
Rotation Group samples for 1979, 1980, and 1981 with all college graduate wage and salary
workers (25 to 64 years old) and a full set of 3-digit occupation dummies. In those data, we find
no significant difference in the part-time wage penalty for non-pharmacist college graduates (10
log points) and pharmacists (11 log points). Thus, the part-time wage penalty has shrunk and
essentially disappeared for pharmacists during the last three decades, whereas a substantial parttime wage penalty has persisted for other college graduates.

C.

Earnings premium and gender earnings gaps: Pharmacists versus

other college graduates
Pharmacists, as we have shown, are well paid and their work often entails low hours with
little penalty for part-time work. We now look at the earnings premium to being a pharmacist or
having a pharmacy professional degree using the large and nationally representative 2009 and
2010 ACS public use samples. The 2009 and 2010 ACS samples provide information on the
24

This specification has greater comparability to the within-occupation analysis for pharmacists in Table
4, col. (1).

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -19-

detailed field of undergraduate degree for all individuals with at least a bachelor’s degree. The
ACS samples are best suited for examining earnings differences among full-time, year-round
workers since they provide information on annual earnings, usual weekly hours in the past year,
but only categorical information on weeks worked in the previous year.
The log (annual earnings) regression for full-time, full-year college graduates, ages 25 to
64 shown in col. (1) of Table 5 shows a substantial earning premium of 25 log points for male
pharmacy bachelor’s degree holders in comparison with other college graduates (conditional on
potential experience, higher degrees, race and ethnicity). The premium for female pharmacy
bachelors is another 9 log points larger or 34 log points.25 These results imply a 9 log point
smaller conditional mean gender earnings gap for pharmacy bachelor’s relative to other college
graduates (19 log points versus 28 log points). The lower dispersion in earnings for pharmacists
means the earning premium for pharmacy bachelors is even larger and the gender earnings gap
even smaller when examining conditional median earnings differences in a median (quantile)
regression. The gender earnings gap remains significantly smaller for pharmacy bachelors (by 5
log points) than other college graduates even for within field-of-degree comparisons (see col. 3).
The high earnings premium for pharmacy degree holders is substantially driven by those
who work as pharmacists and that particularly true for women. The specification in col. (4)
shows that the earnings premium for pharmacy bachelors is lower for those not working as
pharmacists and that the earnings premium for working as a pharmacist is large, especially for
women (19 log points for men and exceeding 40 log points for women).
The specifications in cols. (5) to (7) of Table 5 further explore the earnings premium and
gender earnings gap for pharmacists relative to other college graduates in specifications that do
not include field of degree controls. The gender earnings gap is considerably smaller for
pharmacists than for other college graduates. The finding holds even using within-occupation

25

Altonji, Blom, and Meghir (2012) similarly find that pharmacy bachelor’s degree holders have the sixth
highest earnings for men and fifth highest earnings for women out of 171 detailed field-of-degree
categories for full-time, full-year college graduates, 23 to 59 years old in specifications controlling for
potential experience, higher-degree dummies, and race in the 2009 ACS. And female pharmacy degree
holders have the highest earnings for any degree field with a significant female presence.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -20-

comparisons and, as shown in col. (7), the gender earnings gap remains 18 log points for nonpharmacists and is less than 10 log points for pharmacists.
The bottom line from our exploration of earnings by field of degree and occupation in the
2009 and 2010 ACS is that male and female pharmacy degree holders earn substantially more
than other college graduates with comparable potential experience and advanced degrees. The
earnings premium to a pharmacy undergraduate degree largely reflects the returns to working in
the pharmacy field. The gender earnings gap, moreover, is significantly smaller in pharmacy
than in almost any other college graduate fields.

D.

Cross section and cohort data

A curious finding from the 2000, 2004, and 2009 Pharmacists Workforce Surveys is that
although pharmacist earnings are substantial, their earnings during the past decade have not
increased much with time on the job. The earnings profiles are almost flat using age or work
experience. In contrast, their real earnings rose considerably by cohort. Because we have three
similar cross sections, we can also create synthetic cohort real earnings data. We show these
men and women separately in four synthetic cohorts, given in Figure 5.
For both men and women earnings rise within cohort. But the cross section earnings are
sufficiently flat so that younger and older workers earn, on average, the same amount even
though each cohort earns more as it ages.
It is not clear why earnings are so flat in cross section. One possibility is that there is no
accumulation of on-the-job training and therefore no reason for firms to award higher earnings
for greater seniority. Another is that the 1990s and 2000s were anomalous decades in which
demand for pharmacists has outpaced supply. Signing bonuses for new graduates became more
common in the 1990s (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2000) and an increased
demand for new workers could temporarily skew the earnings profiles.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -21-

VII. Conclusion
Pharmacy is now a female majority profession. The fraction of active pharmacists who
are women increased from about 5 percent in 1960 to around 55 percent more recently. The
fraction of pharmacy graduates who are women reached 50 percent in around 1980. Rather than
being accompanied by falling incomes, as occurred in so many other feminized professions,
earnings among pharmacists have increased in recent decades. The position of pharmacist in the
occupational wage structure has risen, not fallen. Female pharmacists, moreover, have increased
their earnings relative to their male counterparts, from 1970, at least, to 2010. And the
profession as a whole has relatively low dispersion of earnings.
The pharmacist profession became feminized as the “career cost” of working low hours
and part-time in pharmacy decreased. The hourly earnings penalty to part-time work in
pharmacy has virtually disappeared during the past four decades whereas it has remained about
the same for other college graduates. Small independent pharmacies have been replaced by large
corporate-owned chains. Hospital employment of pharmacists increased. Pharmacists no longer
own their own operations, by and large, and no longer earn rents from that ownership. They
have become primarily employees and are fairly good substitutes for each other.
Earnings of pharmacists today are mainly a function of their hours of work. We have
shown that, conditional on hours of work, female pharmacists earn only 4 to 7 log points less
than comparable male pharmacists (see Table 3, cols. 5 and 6). Managers, conditional on hours,
earn only about 7 percent more than employees and owners earn about 12 log points more than
employees, once again conditional on hours (see Table 3, col. 5). In the hourly estimation
owners earn only 5 log points more than employees and managers 3 log points more. Owners
work more hours per week relative to employees (7.6 hours for men; 10.5 for women) and the
same is true for managers (3.9 hours for men and 8.3 for women).26

26

Hours differences are computed from a regression of hours in primary job on a cubic in age, and
position dummies (manager, owner) on a sample of active pharmacists less than 70 years old. Differences
for total hours are somewhat less for men compared with employees (3.4 hours for managers and 6.1
hours for owners) and about the same for women (8.0 hours for managers and 10.3 hours for owners).

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -22-

We find no penalty to working short hours using the PWS data for all years (see Table 4,
cols. 1 and 2). In our comparison of pharmacists with other college graduates using CPS data,
pharmacists earn 26 log points more than other college graduates. Their penalty to part-time
employment is just 5 log points whereas it is 25 log points for the entire group of college
graduates. For women, the penalty to part-time employment for pharmacists is effectively zero
whereas it is 20 log points for all college graduates.
In sum, the position of pharmacist is probably the most egalitarian of all professions in
the U.S. today. The facts we have presented concerning changes in the pharmacy profession are
more consistent with the labor market effects of changes in technology and in the structure of the
industry. They are less consistent with those stemming from an increase in the demand for
family-friendly workplace amenities. The changes, moreover, do not appear to have resulted
from legislation or anti-discrimination policy or licensing requirements or the regulation specific
to the pharmacy profession. Rather, a host of structural changes outside the realm of the labor
market has increased the demand for pharmacists and reorganized work in ways that have made
pharmacy a more family-friendly and female-friendly profession.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -23-

References
Altonji, Joseph G., Erica Blom and Costas Meghir. 2012. “Heterogeneity in Human Capital
Investments: High School Curriculum, College Major, and Careers.” NBER Working Paper
no. 17985, April.
Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz. 2010. “Dynamics of the Gender Gap
among Young Professionals in the Corporate and Financial Sectors,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 2 (July), pp. 228-55.
Bottero, Wendy. 1992. “The Changing Face of the Professions? Gender and Explanations of
Women’s Entry to Pharmacy,” Work, Employment and Society 6 (September), pp. 329-46.
Fulda, Thomas. 1974. Prescription Drug Data Summary. U.S. Department of Health, Education
and Welfare. U.S.: G.P.O.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2011. “The Cost of Workplace Flexibility for HighPowered Professionals,” The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science, 638 (November), pp. 45-67.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. Forthcoming. “Career Cost of Family.”
Harris, Norma. 1995. “How Does Your Salary Compare?” American Druggist, 211, no. 6.
Henderson, Metta Lou. 2002. American Women Pharmacists: Contributions to the Profession.
New York: Pharmaceutical Products Press.
Kapantais, Gloria. 1982. “Summary Data from the National Inventory of Pharmacists: United
States 1978-79.” NCHS Advance Data. Vital Health Statistics of the National Center for
Health Statistics: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Number 85 (October 8).
Knapp, Katherine K., Marianne J. Koch, Linda Norton and Michael A. Mergener. 1992. “Work
Patterns of Male and Female Pharmacists: A Longitudinal Analysis 1959-1989,” Evaluation
& the Health Professions 15 (June), pp. 231-49.
Kremers, Edward, Glenn Sonnedecker and George Urdang. 1986. Kremers and Urdang’s
History of Pharmacy. Fourth edition. Madison, WI: American Institute of the History of
Pharmacy.
Midwest Pharmacy Workforce Research Consortium. 2000. Final Report of the 2000 National
Pharmacist Workforce Survey: 2000. Pharmacy Manpower Project, Inc.
Midwest Pharmacy Workforce Research Consortium. 2005. Final Report of the 2004 National
Sample Survey of the Pharmacist Workforce to Determine Contemporary Demographic and
Practice Characteristics. Pharmacy Manpower Project, Inc.
Most Egalitarian of All Professions -24-

Midwest Pharmacy Workforce Research Consortium. 2010. Final Report of the 2009 National
Pharmacist Workforce Survey to Determine Contemporary Demographic and Practice
Characteristics. Pharmacy Manpower Project, Inc.
Mott, David A., William R. Doucette, Caroline A. Gaither, Craig A. Pedersen and Jon C.
Schommer. 2002. “A Ten-Year Analysis of Pharmacist Participation in the Workforce.”
American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education. Vol. 66 (Fall).
Northrup, Herbert R., Douglas F. Garrison and Karen M. Rose. 1979. Manpower in the Retail
Pharmacy Industry. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
Industrial Research Unit.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. “The Theory of Equalizing Differences.” In The Handbook of Labor
Economics, vol. 1, eds Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp.
641-92
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2010. Occupational Employment Wage Estimates 1997-2009.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau. 2010. “Table 1050 Summary Statistics for the
United States 2002.” Statistical Abstract of the United States.
http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/cats/wholesale_retail_trade.html (accessed: 4 May
2010 12:02).
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. Various years. Digest
of Education Statistics. http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/
U.S. Department of Labor. http://www.bls.gov/oes/oes_data.htm (Accessed: 2 April 2010 14:39).
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2000. Report to Congress: The Pharmacist
Workforce A Study of the Supply and Demand for Pharmacists. (December) U.S.: G.P.O.
U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, Health Resources
Administration. 1969. Pharmacy Manpower, United States – 1966. U.S.: G.P.O.
U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare. 1978. Pharmacy Manpower Resources.
U.S.: G.P.O.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -25-

Figure 1: Median Earnings of Full-Time, Year-Round Pharmacists Relative to Other Professions:
1970 to 2010, by Sex
A. Males
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Pharm/Physician
0.0
1965

1975

1985

Pharm/Lawyer
1995

Pharm/Vet
2005

2015

B. Females
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
Pharm/Physician

Pharm/Lawyer

Pharm/Vet

0.2
0.0
1965

1975

1985

1995

2005

2015

Sources: 1970 to 2000: U.S. census of population, public use samples. 2006 to 2010: American
Community Survey (ACS) public use samples. 1970 aggregate six 1 percent samples; 1980 to
2000 are 5 percent samples. The 2006 to 2010 ACS are 1 percent samples each year. 2007 is the
average of 2006, 2007, and 2008; 2010 is the average of 2009 and 2010.
Notes: Earnings is the sum of wage and salary, business, and farm incomes. The samples are
restricted to 25 to 64 year old full-time (35 or more hours per week) and full-year (40 or more
weeks per year) workers.
Most Egalitarian of All Professions -26-

Figure 2: Fraction of Pharmacists Working in Independent Practices, by Sex: 1957 to 2009
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1950

1960

1970
Fraction Ind

1980
Male Ind.

1990

2000

2010

Female Ind.

Sources: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare (1969), Fulda (1974), U.S. Department of
Health, Education and Welfare (1978), Kapantais (1982), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(2000); and Pharmacist Workforce Surveys for 2000, 2004, and 2009 (see Data Appendix).
Notes: A pharmacist working in an independent practice can be an owner or an employee. By
“independent practice” is meant a unit or series of units for which one of the owners makes the majority
of the decisions. Independent practices can have several stores, but are not “chains” in the sense that they
are not run by large corporations. Pharmacists can be employed by retail establishments, hospitals,
industry, academia, and government. The fraction in independent practice is obtained by taking the
number in independent retail practice relative to all active pharmacists.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -27-

Figure 3: Fraction Female among All Pharmacists and among Pharmacy Graduates
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1950

1960

1970

1980

Frac Fem Pharm

1990

2000

2010

Frac Fem Grads

Sources: Fraction female among pharmacists: see Table 1, col. (7). Fraction female among graduates of
pharmacy programs, U.S. Department of Education, Digest (various years).
Notes: Graduates of pharmacy programs include all who have attained a first professional degree. The
first professional pharmacy degree changed over the period; see text. Trend line for the fraction female
pharmacists is a third-degree polynomial.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -28-

Figure 4: Hours of Work and Part-time Employment for Male and Female Pharmacists
A. Hours of work (in all jobs) for all pharmacy positions by age

B. Hours of work (in all jobs) for women by age
46

50

Males

48

Females

44

46

42

44

40

42
40

38

38

36

36

34

34
32

32

Women without children

30

Women with children

30
25

35

45

55

65

25

35

45

55

65

C. Fraction part-time (including all employments) by age
0.6
All males

All females

Females with children

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
25

35

45

55

65

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -29-

Source: Pharmacist Workforce Surveys. See Data Appendix.
Notes: Figure A and the “all” lines for Figure B are for all years (2000, 2004, 2009); Figure B
“females with children” and Figure C are for years 2000 and 2004 only because of the different
reporting of children in 2009. All figures refer to currently employed individuals with active
pharmacy licenses and positions as pharmacists. Total hours include those on the primary job,
overtime on the primary job, and hours in secondary and other positions. Part-time is defined as
working fewer than 35 hours in all employments.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -30-

Figure 5: Pharmacist Earnings (in 2009 dollars) by Synthetic Cohorts
A. Males by age
120,000
110,000
100,000
90,000
80,000
70,000
Cohort 1

Cohort 2

Cohort 3

Cohort 4

60,000
25

30

35

40

45

50

55

B. Females by age
120,000
Cohort 1

Cohort 2

Cohort 3

Cohort 4

110,000
100,000
90,000
80,000
70,000
60,000
25

30

35

40

45

50

55

Source: Pharmacist Workforce Surveys. See Data Appendix.
Notes: The three points for each cohort line correspond to the survey years 2000, 2004, and 2009. Cohort
1 is approximately 27 years old in 2000 and 36 years old in 2009. Similarly cohort 4 is about 42 in 2000
and 51 in 2009. Data are grouped by five years and the means of the age groups are shown. Mean
earnings from primary job are given.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -31-

Table 1: Time Series on Pharmacists: Workplaces, Hours, Fraction Female, and Relative Earnings by Sex

Year
2010
2009
2007
2005
2004
2000
1995
1990
1980
1979
1974
1970
1966
1960
1957
1950

(1)
Fraction
Selfemployed
0.044
0.051
0.056

(2)
Fraction
Independent
Pharmacies

(3)
Fraction NonIndependent
Retail

(4)
Fraction
Hospitals

0.142

0.447

0.302

0.070
0.074

0.148
0.163

0.474
0.443

0.275
0.267

0.199
0.157

0.343
0.273

0.127
0.233
0.231

0.251

0.330

0.246

0.391
0.471

0.289
0.267

0.199
0.146

0.160
0.122

0.293
0.345

0.685

0.140

0.080

0.0865

0.361

0.775a

0.130b

0.034

0.354
0.402

Fraction Part-time (primary job,
25 to 64 year olds)
(5)
(6)
All
Females
0.187
0.273
0.196c
0.261c
0.183
0.272

(7)
Fraction
Femaleb
0.551
0.564
0.540
0.526
0.461
0.389
0.318
0.183
0.165
0.110
0.119
0.078
0.081

Male/Female (Full-time and
Full-year) Earnings
(8)
(9)
Median
Mean
1.095
1.176
1.057
1.180
1.068
1.209
1.129

1.286

1.139
1.268

1.316
1.370

1.515

1.666

0.087

a

Total for (2) and (3) is given in source. The 0.775 figure assumes fraction non-independent retail is 0.130
The data given for each year are from the most reliable sources. There are slight differences using other sources. For example, for census years
the data using the public use samples are: 0.471 for 2000; 0.356 for 1990; 0.226 for 1980; 0.117 for 1970.
c
The data from the PWS is 0.232 for “All” and 0.358 for “Females.”
b

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -32-

Sources:
(1) Self-employed. 1966: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare (1969), p. 12; 1970, 1980:
U.S. census public use samples (1970 aggregates six 1 percent samples; 1980 is a 5 percent sample);
1979: Karpantais (1982); 1990: Midwest Pharmacy Workforce Research Consortium (2005); 2000, 2004:
Pharmacist Workforce Surveys (PWS, see Data Appendix), for those currently practicing pharmacy;
2007: American Community Survey (ACS), 1 percent sample with three years (2006, 2007, 2008)
aggregated; 2009, 2010: ACS.
(2) Independent pharmacies. 1957: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare (1966); 1966:
Fulda (1974); 1974: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare (1978); 1979, 1990, 2000, 2004:
same as (1); 2009: 2009 PWS.
(3) Non-independent retail and (4) Hospitals: Same as in (2).
(5), (6) Part-time (defined as fewer than 35 hours in the primary job): 1970, 1980: U.S. Census of
Population; 1990: Mott, et al. (2002); 2000, 2004: same as in (1); 2007: Same as in (1); 2009, 2010: ACS.
(7) Fraction female. 1966: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare (1966); 1950, 1960, 1970:
Northrup et al. (1979, p. 19) data from U.S. population census publications; 1974: U.S. Department of
Health, Education and Welfare (1978); 1979: Karpantais (1982); 1980 to 2005 from U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services (2008) data from BLS, 2005 is a projection; 2007: ACS, 1 percent sample
with three years aggregated; 2009, 2010: ACS.
(8) and (9) Male/Female mean and median full-time, year-round earnings. 1970, 1980: same as (1); 1990,
2000: U.S. Census of Population; 2007: same as (1); 2009, 2010: ACS.
Notes: Cols. (2), (3), and (4) do not add to 1. The remaining group is clinic, mail service, home health,
academic, industry, and other. The samples from the U.S. census and ACS public use samples consist of
individuals aged 25 to 64 years who worked at least one week in the previous year. Hours are based on
“usual hours worked in a week.” Part-time means less than a 35-hour work week. Mean and median
earnings are the sum of wage and salary earnings plus self-employment (business, farm, and professional
practice) income. The estimates of mean and median incomes include only those aged 25 to 64 years who
worked full-time and full-year (that is, more than 39 weeks per year and more than 34 hours per week)
with implicit hourly earnings greater than one-half the minimum wage in that year. Top-coded incomes
are multiplied by 1.4 in the Census of Population samples. “2007” includes 2006 to 2008.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -33-

Table 2: Characteristics of Pharmacists and Pharmacist Workplaces, 2000 to 2009
Males

Females

Independent

0.190

0.112

Chain

0.276

0.253

Mass merchandiser

0.0593

0.0603

Supermarket

0.102

0.0987

Hospital

0.242

0.313

Other patient care

0.105

0.124

Other

0.0260

0.0384

Employee

0.543

0.738

Manager

0.337

0.235

Owner

0.120

0.0269

0.813

0.825

1.343

1.213

Number of children conditional on
having onea

2.02

1.99

No childrena

0.333

0.392

No children, 40-44 yearsa

0.180

0.210

Setting type

Position

Demographics (for 25-44 year olds)
Ever-married
Number of children

a

a

For the 2000 and 2004 surveys only. See Data Appendix.

Source: Pharmacist Workforce Surveys, 2000, 2004, 2009. See Data Appendix.
Notes: The merged sample from the three years is used and data are tabulated for those with
active pharmacy licenses who are currently employed as pharmacists. Owner = owner, partner,
executive. Gender differences in setting and position are not much affected by age differences
between men and women pharmacists.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -34-

Table 3: Log Annual and Hourly Earnings Regressions for Active Pharmacists
Variable
Female

(1)
Annual

(2)
Annual

(3)
Hourly

(4)
Annual

(5)
Annual

(6)
Hourly

(7)
Annual

(8)
Annual

(9)
Hourly

-0.2700
(0.0157)

-0.0764
(0.0095)

-0.0472
(0.0093)

-0.2354
(0.0166)

-0.0737
(0.0102)

-0.0402
(0.0102)

-0.0337
(0.0351)
0.0360
(0.0327)
-0.302
(0.0411)

-0.00645
(0.0197)
0.0559
(0.0183)
-0.0522
(0.0230)

0.4682
(0.0365)
0.2416
(0.0170)

0.8228
(0.0145)
0.9017
(0.0186)
0.1208
(0.0223)
0.0670
(0.0104)

0.0527
(0.0223)
0.0326
(0.0104)

0.462
(0.0440)
0.251
(0.0205)

-0.0100
(0.0193)
0.0538
(0.0180)
-0.0843
(0.0229)
0.867
(0.0166)
0.914
(0.0186)
0.0962
(0.0248)
0.0648
(0.0116)

Child
Female  child
ln(Hours)

0.8656
(0.0141)
0.9020
(0.0192)

ln(Weeks)
Owner
Manager

Year dummies
Age quadratic
Education
Ethnicity, race
Sector
Number observations
R-squared
Standard error of the
estimate

0.0441
(0.0246)
0.0383
(0.0115)

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
No
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

3,508
0.132
0.465

3,508
0.708
0.270

3,508
0.235
0.275

3,508
0.231
0.439

3,508
0.728
0.261

3,508
0.273
0.268

2,610
0.220
0.452

2,610
0.765
0.249

2,610
0.204
0.253

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -35-

Source: Pharmacist Workforce Surveys, 2000, 2004, and 2009. See Data Appendix.
Notes: The regressions merge the three years in the survey except for cols. (7) to (9), which are
restricted to 2000 and 2004. The survey only includes pharmacists with active pharmacy
licenses. The sample here is restricted to those currently working in pharmacy. Child is having
had any child. Education dummies are BS (base group), PharmD, PhD, MBA, other education
and missing degree information. Sector dummies are chain (base group), independents, hospital,
other, and missing sector. Race and ethnicity dummies are white (base group), black, Asian,
Hispanic, and other. Standard errors are listed in parentheses under the coefficients. An age
missing dummy is included when age is added; a dummy variable for missing information on
class of worker is included when the manager and owner dummies are included in the regression
specification.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -36-

Table 4: Hourly Wage Penalty for Part-time Work by Pharmacists and Other Occupations

Female (dummy)
Part-time (dummy)

PWS 2000, 2004
All
Female
(1)
(2)
-0.0247
(0.00768)
-0.00416
-0.00348
(0.00863) (0.00908)

Pharmacist (dummy)
Pharmacist  female
Pharmacist  part-time
Occupation dummies
R2
Total # of observations
Pharmacist observations

0.568
1,640
1,640

0.622
827
827

CPS 2005-2011, College Graduates
All
All
Females
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.185
-0.131
(0.0249) (0.00195)
-0.249
-0.135
-0.195
(0.00313) (0.00298) (0.00345)
0.262
0.321
(0.0177)
(0.0185)
0.0854
0.0465
(0.0429)
(0.0226)
0.195
0.0684
0.200
(0.0334)
(0.0304)
(0.0367)
no
yes
no
0.143
0.294
0.0971
329,845
329,845
169,309
1,891
1,891
1,022

CPS 2005-2011 Hourly Workers
All
All
Females
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.155
-0.107
(0.00118) (0.00134)
-0.225
-0.147
-0.172
(0.00156) (0.00143) (0.00178)
0.472
0.485
(0.0203)
(0.211)
0.0800
0.0426
(0.0271)
(0.0237)
0.148
0.0591
0.167
(0.0308)
(0.0270)
(0.035)
no
yes
no
0.245
0.421
0.258
518,767
518,767
271,936
993
993
586

Sources: Pharmacist Workforce Surveys (PWS), 2000 and 2004 (see Data Appendix); Current Population Survey Merged Outgoing Rotation
Groups (CPS), 2005 to 2011.
Notes: The samples in cols. (1) and (2) are restricted to currently-employed pharmacists with active licenses who directly reported hourly earnings
in the PWS. Cols. (3) to (5) include college graduate wage and salary workers, 25 to 64 years old. Cols. (6) to (8) include workers paid on an
hourly basis, 25 to 64 years old. The dependent variable in cols. (1) and (2) is log(hourly earnings). The dependent variable in cols. (3) to (5) is
log(constructed hourly earnings), where constructed hourly earnings is (weekly earnings/usual weekly hours). The dependent variable in cols. (6)
to (8) is log(hourly wage). Part-time dummy is 1 for those working less than 35 hours per week. Pharmacist dummy is 1 for those employed as
pharmacists. All regressions include the following controls: age and age squared, educational attainment dummies (advanced degree indicators in
cols. 1 to 5 and a full set of dummies for CPS years of schooling and degree categories in cols. 6 to 8), race and ethnicity dummies, and year
dummies. Cols. (1) and (2) also include dummy variables for ownership or management of a pharmacy, and pharmacy sector (e.g., hospital,
independent). Cols. (4) and (7) include a full set of detailed (three-digit) CPS occupation dummies. The CPS regression samples in cols. (3) to (8)
are restricted to those with hourly earnings (or hourly wage) greater than one-half the federal minimum wage and less than $140 an hour; CPS topcoded weekly earnings are multiplied by 1.4. Regressions in cols. (3) to (8) are weighted using the CPS earnings weights.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -37-

Table 5: Earnings Premium and Gender Earnings Gap for Pharmacy Bachelor’s Degree Holders and Pharmacists Relative to Other
College Graduates (College Graduate, Full-Time Full-Year Workers, 25 to 64 Years Old)

Female
Pharmacy BS
Female  pharmacy BS
Pharmacist

OLS
(1)

Median
(2)

OLS
(3)

OLS
(4)

OLS
(5)

Median
(6)

OLS
(7)

-0.281
(0.00149)
0.247
(0.0132)
0.094
(0.0196)

-0.281
(0.00161)
0.336
(0.0135)
0.136
(0.0205)

-0.210
(0.00160)

-0.281
(0.00149)
0.140
(0.0169)
-0.0491
(0.0251)
0.187
(0.0184)
0.215
(0.0257)
no
0.189
690,366

-0.281
(0.0149)
0.282
(0.0142)

-0.282
(0.0156)

-0.181
(0.00148)

0.282
(0.0174)
0.174
(0.0200)
no
0.189
690,366

0.337
(0.0140)
0.204
(0.0200)
no
0.110
690,366

0.086
(0.0178)
yes
0.368
690,366

0.0489
(0.0188)

Female  pharmacist
Occupation dummies
R2
Number of observations

no
0.188
690,366

no
0.101
690,366

yes
0.234
690,366

Source: American Community Surveys (ACS), 2009 and 2010.
Notes: The dependent variable is log(annual earnings) where annual earnings is the sum of wage and salary and self-employment
(business, farm, and professional practice) income. All regressions include controls for a quartic in potential experience, graduate
degree dummies (MA, professional, and PhD degrees), race and ethnicity dummies, and a year dummy for 2010. The number of
observations with a pharmacy bachelor’s degree is 4,016 and the number of pharmacists is 3,843 in all the regressions. Pharmacy BS
= 1 for those with a bachelor’s degree in pharmacy. Pharmacist = 1 for those currently employed as a pharmacist. Occupation
dummies are a full set of detailed (3-digit) ACS occupation dummies. The pseudo R2 for the median regressions are reported as the R2
in cols. (2) and (7). Full-time, full-year workers are those who worked 35 or more hours per week and 40 or more weeks. The
regression samples are restricted to individuals with implied hourly earnings (annual earnings/[usual hours  weeks worked]) greater
than one-half the federal minimum wage. All regressions are weighted using IPUMS person weights.
Most Egalitarian of All Professions -38-

Data Appendix: Pharmacist Workforce Surveys27
The National Pharmacist Workforce Surveys were collected in three years: 2000, 2004,
and 2009. The surveys were commissioned by the Pharmacy Manpower Project (PMP), now
called the Pharmacy Workforce Center. The PMP is comprised of the major pharmacy
associations (including the AACP, discussed in the text). The Midwest Pharmacy Workforce
Research Consortium conducted the surveys and designed the project. The Consortium contains
six principal investigators from five universities.
The primary purpose of the surveys was to collect reliable information on demographic
and work characteristics of the pharmacist workforce in the United States. The project obtained
information from a nationally representative sample of pharmacists. The principals developed a
survey questionnaire covering employment status and situation (working or not, setting, position,
years employed and in current position), compensation and hours worked, work environment
(hours the prescription department is staffed, time spent in professional activities, number of
staff working, workload, and perceptions of workload and workload impact), future work plans
(leave or stay with current employment and reasons therefore), and individual demographic
background information.
The survey methodology and size of the project for each year is as follows. In each year
the data were collected via mailed survey using KM Lists, Inc., a national medical marketing
data warehouse that maintains a list of about 250,000 licensed pharmacists in the United States.
2000: Data for 2000 were collected from a random sample of 5,000 licensed pharmacists. The
overall response rate (subtracting surveys that were undeliverable) was 46 percent (2,250/4,895)
and the net useable response rate was 43 percent (2,092/4,895).
2004: Data for 2004 were collected from a random sample of 6,000 pharmacists. The principals
randomly chose 5,000 from this list and retained a hold-back sample of 1,000. To compensate
for initial bad addresses, a replacement sample of 435 pharmacists was randomly chosen from
the hold-back group. Usable forms were received from about 1,500 for a response rate of about
34 percent. The survey design was almost identical to that in 2000.
2009: Questions comprising each section of the 2009 survey were taken from previous
workforce surveys and most of the items used for the 2009 survey also were used in 2000 and
2004. The initial size of the group was smaller in 2009 than in previous years but better methods
were employed to obtain a higher response rate. A randomly selected sample of 3,000 names
yielded about 2,667 with usable addresses. Surveys from almost 1,400 pharmacists were
returned or about a 51 percent response rate.
27

Some of the wording in this Appendix closely follows the description of the surveys in the sources
listed at the end.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -39-

The 2009 survey has fewer young pharmacists than the other two surveys, possibly
because of the increase in the fraction with PharmD degrees. Because of the lower fraction in
the twenties, few have very young children relative to the previous years.
The three surveys were analyzed separately by the principals in a series of publications.
Around 2010 one of the principals, Jon Schommer at the University of Minnesota, and a
graduate student merged the three surveys and created a data set with largely consistent
variables. Some variables changed over the years but most remained the same. In 2011
Schommer made the data available to us and we then cleaned it further.
The merged data set has the following number of respondents by year and distributions
by sex and age:

Age group
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44
45-49
50-54
55-59
60-64
> 64

2000
0.751
0.629
0.633
0.566
0.324
0.261
0.171
0.143
0.0996

Totals with sex,
age by year

2,197

Fraction Female
2004
0.751
0.629
0.633
0.566
0.324
0.261
0.171
0.143
0.137
1,542

2009
0.714
0.713
0.701
0.572
0.532
0.336
0.280
0.191
0.140

2000
0.0999
0.129
0.137
0.147
0.144
0.0971
0.0805
0.0520
0.115

1,386

2,185

Fraction by Age Group
2004
2009
0.0509
0.0146
0.110
0.0838
0.110
0.106
0.110
0.119
0.144
0.110
0.139
0.160
0.104
0.141
0.0760
0.109
0.156
0.156
1,515

1,372

Appendix References
Midwest Pharmacy Workforce Research Consortium. 2000. Final Report of the 2000 National
Pharmacist Workforce Survey: 2000. Pharmacy Manpower Project, Inc.
Midwest Pharmacy Workforce Research Consortium. 2005. Final Report of the 2004 National
Sample Survey of the Pharmacist Workforce to Determine Contemporary Demographic and
Practice Characteristics. Pharmacy Manpower Project, Inc.
Midwest Pharmacy Workforce Research Consortium. 2010. Final Report of the 2009 National
Pharmacist Workforce Survey to Determine Contemporary Demographic and Practice
Characteristics. Pharmacy Manpower Project, Inc.

Most Egalitarian of All Professions -40-

