NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PRODUCTION OF HUMAN CAPITAL:
ENDOWMENTS, INVESTMENTS AND FERTILITY
Anna Aizer
Flávio Cunha
Working Paper 18429
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18429

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

Funding was generously provided by NSF grant # NSF- SES 0752755 and the National Institutes of
Health - National Institute of Aging (P30 AG12836), the Boettner Center for Pensions and Retirement
Security, and the NICHD R24 HD-0044964. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Anna Aizer and Flávio Cunha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Production of Human Capital: Endowments, Investments and Fertility
Anna Aizer and Flávio Cunha
NBER Working Paper No. 18429
September 2012
JEL No. I24,J13,J24
ABSTRACT
We study how endowments, investments and fertility interact to produce human capital in childhood.
We begin by providing empirical support for two key features of existing models of human capital:
that investments and existing human capital are complements in the production of later human capital
(dynamic complementarity) and that parents invest more in children with higher endowments due
to the complementarity between endowments and investments (static complementarity). For the former,
we exploit an exogenous source of investment, the launch of Head Start in 1966, and estimate greater
gains from preschool in the IQ of those with the highest stocks of early human capital, consistent with
dynamic complementarity. For the latter, we are able to overcome the potential endogeneity and measurement
error associated with traditional measures of endowment based on health at birth. When we do, we
find that parents invest more in highly endowed children. Moreover, we find that the degree of reinforcement
increases with family size. Thus, an increase in quantity leads not only to a decline in average quality
(the quantity-quality tradeoff) but to an increase in the variation in quality, due to both greater variation
in endowments (from more children) and greater reinforcing investments. These findings can be explained
by extending the quantity-quality trade-off model to include heterogeneous child endowments and
parental preferences that feature complementarity between quality and quantity and moderate aversion
to inequality in child human capital within the household.

Anna Aizer
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
anna_aizer@brown.edu
Flávio Cunha
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
fcunha@sas.upenn.edu

1

Introduction

Growing evidence points to the important role which conditions in early childhood play in determining adult human capital and earnings. Experimental evidence shows that enriching the early
environments of disadvantaged children has large social and economic benefits, both in the U.S.
context (see, e.g., Olds et al., 2002; Campbell et al., 2008; Heckman et al., 2010, Conti et. al, 2012)
as well as in the context of developing countries (Grantham-McGregor et al., 1994; Behrman et al.,
2009). Measures of human capital at ages 6-8 can explain 12 (20) percent of the variation in adult
educational attainment (wages) (Currie and Thomas, 1999; McLeod and Kaiser, 2004).
Why would early conditions matter so much? Existing models of the production of human
capital provide some explanation. In a seminal paper, Becker and Tomes (1986) present a model
of the intergenerational transmission of human and financial capital. In their model, childhood
lasts one period and the production function of human capital exhibits complementarity between
parental investments and the child’s endowment. This is referred to as “static complementarity”
and generates an incentive for parents to invest more in the highly endowed (referred to as “reinforcing investment”). More recently, Cunha and Heckman (2007) develop a multi-period model of
human capital formation, central to which is the notion that investments during diﬀerent periods
of childhood are complements in the production of human capital. This is referred to as dynamic
complementarity and implies that existing stocks of human capital of children complement parental
investments (and also that the earlier the investment, the greater the potential returns.) While the
notions of static and dynamic complementarity are widely accepted in the literature, it is diﬃcult to
establish direct empirical support for them due to challenging identification issues. In this paper we
examine the production of human capital in early childhood. In so doing, we both provide empirical
support for these two key features of existing models of human capital production and extend the
analysis to incorporate fertility, which has largely been treated separately.
We first provide evidence of dynamic complementarity. Identification in this context is diﬃcult
due to the endogeneity of investments and the lack of data on human capital at multiple points
over childhood. We are able to exploit exogenous variation in investment in the form of preschool
enrollment across children in the same household for identification. Specifically, our data consist
of a low income sample of siblings that includes multiple measures of human capital over several
periods of childhood and spans the launch of Head Start in 1966. We use this exogenous increase
in preschool availability (our measure of investment) to identify the impact of investment on child
IQ and cognitive achievement as well as any complementarities with stocks of human capital in a
family fixed eﬀect/sibling comparison framework. We find that preschool enrollment has a positive
and significant impact on four-year IQ for all, but that the impact is largest for those with higher
early stocks of cognitive human capital as measured by cognitive development at eight months of
age. By seven years, the eﬀect of preschool on IQ and achievement has faded for all but highly
developed infants for whom the impact persists.

2

We then test for static complementarity not directly, but by testing for the implication of static
complementarity: reinforcing investment. When the production function exhibits static complementarity, an exogenous increase in the endowment of a child increases the marginal returns to
investing in that child’s human capital, generating an incentive for parents to invest more in highly
endowed children. Thus, if parental investments are an increasing function of endowments, then it
must be the case that the production function exhibits static complementarity.
To examine this empirically, we introduce two innovations to the analysis. The first addresses the
endogeneity and measurement error that often plague empirical analyses of the relationship between
endowments and parental investments that rely on a single measure of newborn health as the
measure of endowment. The endogeneity of endowment as measured by newborn health arises from
the fact that newborn health is comprised of both the true endowment and prenatal investments, the
latter of which are typically unobserved and likely correlated with postnatal investments, generating
a significant source of omitted variable bias. In our analysis, we can control for prenatal investments,
thereby eliminating this source of bias. To address measurement error, we factor analyze the
orthogonal components to prenatal investments of multiple measures of health at birth. The second
innovation is our introduction of a new measure of parental investment that is an assessment of
the quality of the interaction of the mother and child as rated by a psychologist. We present
evidence that parents invest more in children with higher endowments, consistent with strong static
complementarity in the production of human capital.
Having provided empirical support for two key features of existing models, we then extend the
analysis to consider how fertility aﬀects the relationship between endowments and investments.
We find that investments are more reinforcing in large families. This finding, in combination with
our previous findings with respect to complementarity in the production function, implies that the
variability of child quality (within family) increases in large families. This is exactly what we find.
More specifically, our data show that the highest quality child in a large family is comparable to
the highest quality child in a small family. In contrast, the lowest quality child in a large family
has much lower human capital than the lowest quality child in a small family. Importantly, these
relationships cannot be explained by birth order, though we do find birth order eﬀects, and are
found in other datasets as well.
Finally, we show that our finding that higher fertility is realted to greater reinforcing investment
and an increase in the variation in child quality within a family can be rationalized by a quantityquality model as in Becker and Lewis (1973), which features heterogeneity in endowments as in
Becker and Tomes (1976) and parental aversion to inequality as in Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman
(1982). For the model to be able to qualitatively replicate our findings, it is necessary for parental
preferences to exhibit (1) complementarity between the quantity and quality of children and (2) a
moderate aversion to inequality. Complementarity explains the divergent profile of maximum and
minimum human capital as a function of fertility: as fertility increases, it is cheaper to increase
quality by investing more in children with higher endowments. The moderate aversion to inequality
3

represents a compromise between two forces working in opposite directions. On the one hand, if
parents have great aversion to inequality, then parental preferences would overcome the complementarities in the production function and parental investments would compensate, not reinforce,
diﬀerences in human capital and endowments. On the other hand, if parents have no concerns about
inequality (or are inequality loving), then the combination of complementarities in the technology
of skill formation and in the utility function would lead maximum human capital stock to increase
strongly as fertility increases.
Our theoretical and empirical results have important implications for our understanding of the
production of human capital in childhood and how initial levels of human capital, investments and
fertility interact to aﬀect not only average levels of human capital but its distribution within a
family. In addition, by providing new estimates of the impact of Head Start on multiple measures
of cognitive ability and achievement that exploit the exogenous variation in Head Start availability
within the family, our results also contribute to the growing literature on the impact of Head Start
and other high-quality interventions in early childhood (e.g., Currie and Thomas, 1995; Garces,
Currie and Thomas, 2002; Ludwig and Miller, 2007; Behrman et. al., 2009, Heckman et. al, 2010).
The rest of the paper is organized in five sections. In Section II, we empirically test the key
features of the models of human capital production, establishing that preschool investments and
early human capital are complements in the production of late human capital (dynamic complementarity). In Section III, we investigate the nature of the relationship between parental investments
and endowments and find that they are reinforcing (static complementarity). We then estimate
the extent to which fertility influences the allocation of investments and human capital within a
household. In Section IV, we present a simple model of fertility and investments in children and
derive suﬃcient conditions to replicate the qualitative features of the data. In the last section, we
conclude.

2

Are Investments and Early Human Capital Complements
in the Production of Later Human Capital?

2.1

Background

Let  denote the human capital of child  at age . Let  represent parental investment in
child ’s human capital at age . The variable  is the child’s endowment that, unlike  , is time
invariant and unnaﬀected by parental investments. For example,  captures the child’s genes while
 is the expression of genes (see, e.g., Caspi et al., 2002). Consider the following production of
human capital:
 =  (−1     )

4

where  is increasing, concave, and twice diﬀerentiable in each of its arguments. By static com2
plementarity, we mean that   0 for all . This is the nature of the complementarity in
2

Becker and Tomes (1986). By dynamic complementarity, we mean that −1  0. As noted
by Cunha and Heckman (2007), dynamic complementarity, unlike static complementarity, implies
that investments in one period increase the marginal productivity of investments in a later period:
 2  −1
2
 2 
=
0⇔
 0.
 −1
 −1 −1
 −1
There is very little work showing direct evidence in favor of dynamic complementarity. Cunha,
Heckman, and Schennach (2010), who use the CNLSY/79 data, find estimates for the elasticity of
substitution between cognitive skills and investments that range between 0.562 and 0.847, consistent
with complementarity between early human capital and investments. Heckman et al. (2010) find
that the Perry Preschool Program had the largest eﬀects on cognitive achievement among those at
the top of the distribution. They argue that the stronger eﬀects at the top of the distribution are
consistent with complementarity of early human capital and investments.
The present study diﬀers from previous work in that we have measures of early and late human
capital and we exploit a plausibly exogenous measure of investment — preschool enrollment as
aﬀected by the creation of Head Start, a fully subsidized preschool program established in 1965-66
for low-income children. Simply by virtue of being born after 1962, some of the children in our
sample had access to a fully subsidized preschool program, while their siblings, by virtue of being
born prior to 1962, did not. Moreover, we have multiple measures of human capital taken for each
child at birth, eight months, four years and seven years.

2.2

Data

The National Collaborative Perinatal Project (NCPP) contains comprehensive information on maternal and paternal characteristics, prenatal conditions, birth outcomes and follow-up information
through age seven for a cohort of roughly 59,000 births between 1959 and 1965 (of which 17,000 are
siblings) in 12 sites (located in 11 central cities) throughout the US. Mothers were recruited for participation in the NCPP primarily through public clinics associated with academic medical centers.
As such, they are characterized by greater poverty and less education than the general population
at the time. Sample characteristics are presented in Appendix Table 1. Follow-up information on
the children was collected at ages eight months, one year, four years and seven years and includes
the results of extensive physical, pathological, psychological, and neurological examinations.
At birth, the measures of human capital available in the data include birth weight, head circumference, body length, weeks of gestation, and whether the doctor confirms or suspects a neurological
abnormality in the neonate.
At eight months of age, three measures of human capital are taken: the mental, motor, and

5

social Bayley scores of development. The eight-month mental development score is our preferred
measure of early human capital as it is the most closely related to our later measures of human
capital (IQ, math and reading test scores). To generate this score, the examiner presents a series of
test materials to the child and observes the child’s responses and behaviors and evaluates her along
three scales (mental, motor and social). 1 In our sample, the scores in the mental scale vary from 0
to 99, with an average of 79 and a standard deviation of 6. Within families, the average diﬀerence
is 4, or two-thirds of the cross-sectional standard deviation (Figure 1).
Later measures of child cognitive human capital are collected at ages four (IQ) and seven (IQ,
reading and math achievement). There is considerable variation in these measures, both across
and within families. For example, the average seven-year IQ is 96 with a standard deviation of 15.
Within families, the average diﬀerence between siblings is 12 points (Figure 2).
To support our use of the eight-month Bayley as a measure of early human capital, we compare
its ability to predict future cognitive ability/achievement with that of birth weight, which has
been used extensively in the literature as a measure of early human capital (e.g., Behrman and
Rosenzweig, 2004; Datar et al., 2010). We find that the eight-month mental scale is more predictive
of nearly every measure of cognitive human capital at later ages than is birth weight. In both OLS
and family-fixed eﬀect settings, the eight-month mental scale is either similar to or more predictive
of any cognitive delay at age one, speech delay at age three, IQ at ages four and seven and math
achievement at age seven (Appendix Table 2). We attribute these findings to the fact that the
mental scale is a more precise measure of cognitive human capital than birth weight, which is a
more general measure of human capital.

2.3

Empirical Strategy

To test the hypothesis of dynamic complementarity, we estimate the following production function:
2 =  1 1 2 +  2 2 +  3 1 +  4  +  +  
where late human capital of child  in family  (2 ) is measured as IQ at age four, or IQ, reading
and math achievement at age seven; investment (2 ) is preschool enrollment at age four, and child
early human capital (1 ) is measured by the eight-month mental Bayley test score. The main
eﬀects of investment and early human capital are included, as is the interaction term 1 2  which
captures the presence, if any, of dynamic complementarity in early human capital and investments
in the production of late human capital. Also included are  , a family-specific fixed eﬀect, and  ,
a vector of characteristics that varies across siblings within a family and includes child gender, birth
1

The mental scale evaluates several types of abilities: sensory/perceptual acuities, discriminations, and response;
acquisition of object constancy; memory learning and problem solving; vocalization and beginning of verbal communication; basis of abstract thinking; habituation; mental mapping; complex language; and mathematical concept
formation (see Appendix A for the individual items). The motor development scale assesses muscle control (control
of the body) and large and fine motor coordination.

6

order, maternal age at birth, income at birth and marital status at time of birth. The inclusion
of the family fixed eﬀect allows us to control for any unobserved diﬀerences across families that
might be correlated with both children’s early human capital and investment (e.g., in our data,
more educated mothers are more likely to enroll their children in preschool and their children also
have higher IQs).
In general, it is not straightforward to obtain consistent estimates of  1 . Investment is likely
endogenous and may, for example, be correlated with parental characteristics as well as child-specific
characteristics that the parents observe about their children, but the psychologist and the researcher
do not. We argue that variation in our measure of investment (preschool enrollment at age four) is
likely exogenous as it appears to be driven by the launch of Head Start as an eight-week summer
program in 1965, which was then expanded in 1966 to a part-day nine-month program.2 In our
sample, preschool enrollment increases significantly and discontinuously among four year olds in
1966 and continues to increase slightly each year through 1970, the end of our study period (Figure
3). The sudden increase in preschool enrollment observed (from 7 to 12.5 percentage points, an
increase of 73 percent, between 1965 and 1966), combined with the fact that our sample is a lowincome urban sample, suggests that the arguably exogenous launch of Head Start in 1965/1966 is
largely responsible for this growth in preschool enrollment.3
Since our sample includes siblings born to the same family before and after 1962 (four years
before the start of full year Head Start in 1966), within a given family, some children had no access
to Head Start at age four, while others, by virtue of being born after 1962, did. This, we argue,
provides the exogenous variation in investment within family that we need for identification. To
control for the fact that access to Head Start increases with birth order, we control for birth order
and its interaction with preschool enrollment in the regression as well.

2.4
2.4.1

Results
Evidence of the Exogeneity of Preschool Enrollment

Before presenting the results of estimating equation (1), we present two pieces of evidence to support
our contention that preschool enrollment is exogenous in this sample. First, we link preschool
enrollment in our sample with local (county) levels of Head Start funding by regressing an indicator
for preschool enrollment at age four in each year (1963-1970) on county-level funding of Head Start
2

In 1960, there were 3.97 million four year olds (the primary age of those served by Head Start). By 1968 Head
Start served 733,000 children in its summer program and 212,000 children in its full-year program.
3
Moreover, evidence presented by Ludwig and Miller (2007) shows that although Head Start was launched in
1966, it continued to expand in the years after (owing largely to continual recruitment of providers in the early
years), which would explain why the trend in preschool enrollment observed in our data jumps discontinuously in
1966 but then continues to increase in the years immediately after. For example, in 1966, only $8 million was spent
on Head Start’s nine-month program (serving 20,000 children), but by 1968, $239 million had been allocated to serve
212,000 children.

7

in 1968, the only year with credible data (Table 1).4 We find that Head Start spending per poor
person in the county of residence in 1968 does not predict preschool enrollment in our sample in
1963, 64 or 65, but that it does predict preschool enrollment in 1966 — 1970 (Table 1, Panel A),
though many of the estimates are imprecise.5 However, the results are larger and more precise for
those most likely to be eligible for Head Start: when we restrict our sample to mothers with a high
school diploma or less (90% of our sample), the estimated relationship between local Head Start
spending and preschool enrollment increases and becomes significant (Table 1, Panel B). Finally,
we include maternal fixed eﬀects in a regression of preschool enrollment on a variable that is the
interaction between local Head Start spending (in 1968) and an indicator equal to one in all years
after Head Start was established.6 We continue to find a strong relationship between local Head
Start spending and the probability of preschool enrollment within families (Table 1, Panel C).
A second piece of evidence of the exogeneity of preschool enrollment is that preschool attendance
is uncorrelated with early human capital. In the cross section (Table 2, Panel A) and within family
(Table 2, Panel B), there is no significant relationship between preschool attendance and any of
our measures of early human capital (birth weight, gestation, eight-month mental Bayley score
and social development score, abnormal language reception or expression at age 3), consistent with
exogenous preschool enrollment resulting from the creation of Head Start.7
2.4.2

Preschool Attendance and Human Capital at Four Years

Estimates of equation 1 including maternal fixed eﬀects show that (1) preschool enrollment is highly
productive of four-year IQ ( 2  0) and that (2) preschool enrollment and early human capital are
indeed complements in the production of four-year IQ ( 1  0). Specifically, a child who attends
preschool has an IQ at age four that is 16 percent of a standard deviation higher than a sibling
within the same family who did not go to preschool (Table 3A). If that child also had a high level of
early human capital, then the eﬀect of preschool attendance on four-year IQ would be even larger.
4

These data on Head Start spending at the county level in 1968 were generously provided by Jens Ludwig and
Doug Miller. For the earliest years of the program, they found that only county funding levels for 1968 and 1972
were credible, which is why we use only the 1968 data (1972 is beyond our time frame). While Ludwig and Miller
calculate per capita Head Start funding for their analysis, because our sample is a low-income sample, we calculate
spending per poor person in the county.
5
Head Start funding in 1968 for these 11 cities ranges from $4 to $29 per poor person (in 1968 dollars) and
preschool enrollment in 1968 ranges from 6 to 15 percentage points among mothers with no more than a high school
diploma in our sample. The results from our analysis suggest that a doubling of Head Start funding (across cities)
increases the probability of enrollment in preschool by 50%. Ludwig and Miller (2007) find that doubling Head
Start funding in low-income counties increases Head Start enrollment by 100%. However, our results are not directly
comparable. Ludwig and Miller focus on diﬀerences across low-income counties, while our sample is drawn from
moderate-income urban counties where we might expect the impact to diﬀer.
6
In other words, this is equal to zero in all years prior to 1966 and equal to local Head Start spending in all years
after 1966. The main term of local Head Start spending in 1968 is subsumed by the maternal fixed eﬀect. We do
not include year dummies (which reduces precision), but rather a quadratic time trend.
7
Maternal characteristics (education in particular) are, however, correlated with preschool enrollment in the cross
section, necessitating the need to include a maternal fixed eﬀect. Without a maternal fixed eﬀect, there is a large
and significant impact of preschool enrollment on child IQ at age four for all children.

8

For example, evaluated at the average within family diﬀerence in eight-month Bayley scores, a
sibling with a higher Bayley score who attended preschool would have a four year IQ that was 33
percent of a standard deviation higher than his siblings with lower early human capital (about five
IQ points). Since birth order is also correlated with preschool enrollment in these data, we also
include an interaction between birth order and early human capital in these regressions, which has
no eﬀect on four-year IQ and which allows us to rule out the possibility that the interaction term
preschool*early human capital simply reflects a preschool*birth order eﬀect.
2.4.3

Preschool Enrollment and Human Capital at Seven Years (IQ and Achievement)

The estimated impact of preschool on human capital fades by age seven for all but those with the
highest levels of initial human capital. For seven-year IQ and math achievement, the main eﬀects
of preschool enrollment and early human capital decline considerably, but not their interaction,
which remains large. Thus, for those with higher early human capital, the impact of preschool lasts
significantly longer than for others.8
To explore other potential sources of heterogeneity in the eﬀect of preschool on seven-year IQ,
we interact preschool with birth weight, birth order, and gender and find no significant eﬀects (Table 3B). In results not presented here, we also find that the eﬀect of preschool does not vary with
maternal characteristics (education, age or income). We do, however, find a significant interaction
eﬀect for another measure of early human capital: advanced social/emotional development at eight
months of age which is both positively related to seven-year IQ and interacts positively and significantly with preschool enrollment in the production of seven-year IQ. When we include both terms
and their interaction with preschool (eight-month Bayley*preschool and advanced emotional development*preschool), the former is unchanged while the latter eﬀect declines slightly and is no longer
significant. Moreover, it should be noted that only 203 children are classified as socially/emotionally
advanced in these data, and the eight-month mental Bayley score and emotional development are
highly correlated, which is consistent with existing psychological research establishing that cognitive
and emotional development in infancy and early childhood are closely related. 9
We conclude that the estimated complementarity between early human capital and investments
made during the preschool period is empirically meaningful and has important implications because
it provides incentives for parents to invest in a reinforcing manner due to higher returns. Such
an investment strategy would exacerbate diﬀerences in human capital among siblings. However,
if parents have a preference for equality among oﬀspring (as posited by some existing theoretical
models), this would suggest that parents face a tradeoﬀ in their investment decisions: compensating
investments to achieve equality vs. reinforcing to increase their overall returns. In the next section,
we explore how parental investment decisions react to a child’s endowment.
8

Unfortunately, we cannot with these data estimate whether the eﬀect eventually fades for all, though existing
evidence suggests that IQ is stable by age 10, just three years after our measure of IQ.
9
literature, some argue that emotional development is a function of cognitive development and others that the
relationship is more mutual (e.g., Lazarus, 1984).

9

3
3.1

Endowments and the Allocation of Parental Investments
Background

Existing evidence with respect to the question of whether parents invest in a compensatory or
reinforcing manner is often limited by both lack of data on initial endowments and few measures
of parental investments that vary within household and do not reflect decisions made by the child.
Existing work based on data that do not include measures of initial endowments includes Hanushek
(1992) who finds that having a sibling with higher measured achievement is positively correlated
with own achievement (which he argues is inconsistent with reinforcing investment). Adhvaryu and
Nyshadham (2012) find that investments — as measured by vaccination and breastfeeding — are
higher for children who received iodine supplementation while in utero and interpret this finding
as evidence of reinforcing investments. Ashenfelter and Rouse (1998) and Behrman, Rosenzweig
and Taubman (1994) base their identification on diﬀerences in education and earnings of identical
twins relative to fraternal twins, arguing that (unobserved) endowments of identical twins are more
similar. They find that diﬀerences in earnings and schooling are greater for fraternal twins who
have more dissimilar endowments and interpret this as evidence of reinforcing investments. Datar,
Kilburn, and Loughran (2010) use birth weight as a measure of initial endowment and show that
parental investment increases with endowment. Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1988) rely upon a residual
in a human capital production function as a proxy for endowment — a procedure that we refine
below — and find that children with better health endowments are more likely to be breastfed. Pitt,
Rosenzweig, and Hassan (1990) follow a similar procedure and find that the more highly endowed
receive more nutrition in a developing country setting.
There are three main innovations of our analysis of whether parental investments compensate
or reinforce initial endowments. First, we develop an alternative measure of parental investment
that captures the quality of the mother-child interaction as evaluated by a psychologist. This builds
on existing work in economics that has focused less on parental time and more on the quality of
time as measured by parenting skills (Paxson and Schady, 2007; Todd and Wolpin, 2007; Cunha,
Heckman, and Schennach, 2010). Second, we address the possibility that traditional measures of
human capital at birth (i.e., birth weight) are both measured with error and potentially endogenous
because they already reflect prenatal investments. Third, we explore how the investment decision
interacts with the fertility decision. We discuss each innovation below.

3.2

A New Measure of Investment: Parenting

In this subsection we describe our measure of parental investment. Because it diﬀers from more
traditional measures of investment (e.g., time), we follow with arguments to justify this measure.

10

3.2.1

Construction of the Measure of Parental Investment from the NCPP Data

Our specific measure of investment is derived from a psychologist’s rating of the interaction between
mother and child at eight months of age along the following six dimensions: maternal expression
of aﬀection (negative to extravagant), handling of the child (rough to very gentle), management of
the child (no facilitation to over-directing), responsiveness to the needs of the child (unresponsive
to absorbed), her focus during the child’s examination (self to child), and her own evaluation of the
child (critical to eﬀusive). A final, 7th dimension is the child’s appearance (unkempt to overdressed).
We assume that these variables are error-ridden measures of investment. More formally, let
 denote the  error-ridden measure of investment on child  in family . We assume that
 is linked to actual investment on child ,  , by the following equation:
 =   +  ,  = 1   

(1)

In our data,  = 7. The parameters  are the factor loadings and the variables  constitute
the measurement error in   As usual in factor analysis, we assume that  is independent
from  ,  6=  , and  is independent from  .

To produce an estimator of  , we factor analyze  = { }
=1 (Table 4). This produces
estimates of the factor loadings  as well as the variance of  . We use this information to
compute the relative importance of each of the  = 7 dimensions of parenting quality. We find
that responsiveness and aﬀection toward the child are the measures with the highest share of true
to total variance, while appearance and handling are the ones with the lowest share.
To produce an estimate of  , we use the Bartlett Method (Bartlett, 1938). More precisely, let
 = (1    )0 and define the vectors  and  accordingly. Let Θ =   ( ). The
Bartlett factor score, ̂
 , is defined as:
−1

0
̂
 = ( Θ  )

0 Θ 

For the single measure of investment generated in this fashion, which varies from -11.2 to 11.3
in the sibling subsample, (with a higher value indicating greater investment), 68% of the sample
receive the same score (.089) corresponding to average or normal values for all seven measures,
but there is still variance. Figure 4 displays the distribution of this measure of investment in the
cross section in the first graph and within family diﬀerences in the second graph. Within family, for
exactly half the sample, there is no diﬀerence in parenting across siblings. But for those families that
exhibit diﬀerent parenting across siblings, the diﬀerences can be quite large. This is consistent with
existing work that has shown that in one-third to two-thirds of families, parents “diﬀerentiate in
terms of closeness, support and comfort” beginning in early childhood (Suitor et al., 2008, page 334).
Throughout the text and tables, we refer to this measure of investment as “quality of parenting,”
though it can also be thought of as a measure of favoritism.

11

3.2.2

Justification

We argue that the above measure of investment is preferable to more traditional measures such
as parental time, nutrition or education. With respect to parental time, not only is time spent
with a specific child in a household diﬃcult to measure, but much of the variation in parental
time between siblings is driven by birth order and/or maternal work, both of which likely exert
independent eﬀects on child outcomes (Price, 2009). In contrast, evidence suggests that between
one-third and two-thirds of parents exhibit preferential treatment toward one sibling and that this
does not vary systematically with birth order (Suitor et al, 2008). With respect to nutrition,
variation within households exists and has been measured in developing countries, but in the US,
there is less evidence of nutritional variation within households due in part to insuﬃcient data.
Finally, variation in educational attainment suﬀers from the fact that children are also involved
in the decision (and even the financing, at higher levels), so that it does not just reflect parental
investments.
A second argument for using “parenting” as a measure of investment comes from extensive research in developmental psychology and neurobiology showing that the quality of maternal-child
attachments in the first years of life is an important determinant of a child’s development, especially cognitive development. The theoretical foundation of this research derives from “attachment
theory,” which stipulates that a strong bond between the child and primary the care-giver serves
to provide a secure base from which an infant can explore the world. More specifically, having
a secure base enables the infant to “engage in a variety of adult-supervised learning experiences
[including] exploratory interactions with objects and social partners that lead to eventual mastery
of these domains” (Seifer and Schiller, 1995). Key to the establishment of this “secure base” is a
high degree of maternal sensitivity and responsiveness to infant signals. In a review of the empirical
research on the relationship between early maternal-infant attachment and later child outcomes,
Ranson and Urichuk (2008) conclude that the evidence strongly supports a strong relationship between maternal-infant attachment in infancy with later cognitive outcomes (e.g., IQ, reading and
GPA), though establishing a causal relationship is more diﬃcult. 10
More recently, neurobiologists have posited that strong attachment in infancy fosters brain
growth and development, providing a biological basis for a widely accepted psychological theory
of “attachment” (Schore, 2001). The experimental research in neurobiology generally supports a
strong role for early attachment in the neurobiology of brain development. 11
A third and final justification of our use of parenting as a measure of parental investment is our
finding that it is correlated with two other more traditional measures of investment — parental time
and the Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment (HOME) score, collected as part
10

The research also supports a strong relationship between attachment and social-emotional and mental health
outcomes.
11
See the book by the National Research Council and the Institute of Medicine (2000) for a review.

12

of the PSID Child Development Supplement (CDS).12 The CDS does not include the exact same
measure of parenting that we use, but it does include the parental warmth scale which is based on
interviewer observations as to whether the parent shows verbal, physical, and emotional aﬀection
toward the child and whether the parent interacts by joking, playing, participating in activities
with the child or showing interest in the child’s activities. We argue that this measure of warmth
is suﬃciently similar to our measure of parenting and that by showing its positive correlation with
the two other more traditional measures of parental investment, HOME score and time, both across
and within families in the PSID (Appendix Table 3), we provide further justification of our use of
parenting as a measure of parental investment.

3.3

Measures of Endowments That Address Measurement Error and
Endogeneity

Our second innovation is to construct an alternative measure of endowment that addresses both
measurement error and potential endogeneity associated with more commonly used measures of
endowment such as birth weight. Endogeneity may arise from the fact that typical measures of
human capital at birth (e.g., birth weight) might reflect not only endowment but also prenatal
investments. If so, correlation between human capital at birth and post-natal investments might
simply reflect serial correlation in investments. In fact, in our data, prenatal investments including
nutrition (as measured by weight gain) and smoking abstinance during pregnancy are positively
correlated with our measure of investment (parenting) during the postnatal period, even when
maternal fixed eﬀects are included.
To address this concern, we construct a measure of human capital at birth that we argue is
plausibly net of maternal investments during the prenatal period. To do so, we follow Rosenzweig
and Wolpin (1988) and consider a production function for human capital at birth that includes the
following inputs: the initial endowment of the child, maternal prenatal investments (nutrition and
smoking), whether the mother was trying to conceive (a measure of the “wantedness” of the child),
a family-specific term (to capture, for example, genetics) and an idiosyncratic child-specific error
term. Because we have measures of maternal prenatal investments that diﬀer for children within
the same family, we can estimate the above production function and calculate the residual, which
we argue consists of the child’s endowment and an idiosyncratic child specific error term.
More formally, let  denote the birth outcome  (birth weight, head circumference, body
length and gestation) of child  born in family . Let  denote a quadratic in the number of
cigarettes that mother  smoked while pregnant with child . Let  denote the weight of mother 
when she became pregnant with child  and  denote the weight gain while pregnant with child .
Let   reflect whether the mother reports she was trying to conceive child . Let   denote
12

Among the many items that constitute the HOME score are the number of books available to the child, how
often the child goes to museums, how often the child goes to the theater, and how often the mother reads to or with
the child.

13

the maternal fixed eﬀect. The term  denotes the endowment of child . Let  denote the
idiosyncratic component of birth outcome . Assume that:
 =  0 +  1  +  2  +  3  +  4   +   +   + 
Our goal is to obtain an estimate of  , the child endowment. A simple fixed-eﬀect procedure
allows us to obtain  0 ,  1 ,  2 ,  3 , and  4 . The estimated coeﬃcients for each of the four measures of conditions at birth in the data are presented in Table 5. Once we know these components,
we can predict the residual term  for each birth outcome :
 =   + 
As argued by Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1988), each predicted residual term approximates the
endowment of the child net of the presumably most important maternal prenatal investments (smoking and nutrition). On the other hand, the residual term suﬀers from measurement error  . In
our data, we can exploit the fact that we have multiple measures of health at birth (birth weight,
gestation, head circumference and body length) to conduct a factor analysis of  to extract the
single common underlying endowment  . Table 5 presents the estimates of the newborn health
production function, and Table 6 shows the estimated factor loadings,  , and the variance of the
uniquenesses  . The factor explains 67% of the cross-sectional variance of birth weight, about
50% of the variance in head circumference and body length, and 26% of the variance in weeks of
gestation. The inverse ordering is true for the variance of measurement error: weeks of gestation
has the largest amount of measurement error (which is unsurprising given that it is approximated),
followed by body length and head circumference. Birth weight has the least amount of measurement
error.
Let  = (1    )0 and define the vectors  and  in similar fashion. Let Θ =
  ( ) and 2 =   ( ). We estimate  from the factor scores using the Regression method
(Thurnstone, 1934), ̂

¡ 2 0
¢−1
2 0
̂

 =   β β  β + Θ

In the next subsection, we explain the reason why parental investment,  , is predicted using
the Bartlett score ̂
 while the child endowment,  , is predicted using the score produced by the
Regression method, ̂
 .

3.4

Factor Score Fixed Eﬀect Regression

To test whether children with a higher initial endowment,  , receive greater investments,  , we
estimate models of the following form:
 =  +  +   
14

(2)

where  indexes each child within family . To focus on the important ideas, we abstract from
observed control variables that are included in our empirical investigation of (2).
Assumption A1: Let  = { }=1 denote the vector of endowments in family . We assume
that   = {  }=1 satisfies the following orthogonality condition:  (  |    ) = 0.
Our goal is to obtain consistent estimators of . If we observed the vectors  and  directly,
then under Assumption A1 we could employ the usual fixed-eﬀect estimator of :

̂   =

" 
X

0

#−1

( )

=1


X

0 ( )

=1

where  is the symmetric and idempotent matrix:
⎡

⎢
⎢
=⎢
⎢
⎣

1 − 1 − 1 · · · − 1
− 1 1 − 1 · · · − 1
..
..
..
...
.
.
.
1
1
−
−  · · · 1 − 1

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

Unfortunately, we don’t observe  or  directly. Instead, we observe  and  error-ridden
measures of parental investment ( ) and endowment ( ), respectively. As discussed above,

we used these measures to produce estimates ̂
 and ̂ . We now show that the estimator that

replaces  with ̂
 and  with ̂ produces a consistent estimator of . To do so, let  =
(1  2    )0 and define the vectors  and   analogously.
Assumption A2a:  ( |  ) = 0.
Assumption A2b:  (  |  ) = 0.
Assumption A2a rules out correlation between the measurement error in  and measurement
error in  . If Assumption A2a does not hold, then the dependence between between  and 
cannot separately identify the dependence between  and  from the dependence between 
and  .
Assumption A2b ensures that the measurement error in  is not correlated with the residuals
in (2). Assumption A2b does not hold, for example, if there are multiple dimensions of investments
and that some of these dimensions are correlated with unobserved inputs captured in   .

Theorem 1 Let ̂
 denote the estimate of  produced by the Bartlett method. Let ̂ denote the
estimate of  produced by the Regression method. If Assumptions A2a and A2b hold, then

" 
#−1 
X ¡ ¢0 ¡
X ¡ ¢0 ¡
¢
¢

lim
̂
̂
̂
̂
 = .




→∞

=1

=1

Proof. See appendix B.
The main result of Theorem 1 is that when that when the regressand in (2) is replaced by
15


̂
 and the regressor is replaced by ̂ , then the fixed-eﬀect estimator that uses these predicted
values is consistent. In other words, the choice of which scores to use actually matter for  to be

consistently estimated. If we had replaced  with 
 or  with  , then the resulting estimator
for  would not be consistent. A similar Theorem has been proved by Skrondal and Laake (2001)
in the context of OLS regressions. We simply extend it to the fixed-eﬀect framework and we rely
on it to provide a formal explanation for our choices of factor scores for parenting and endowments.

3.5

Results: Endowments and the Allocation of Investments within
Families

To estimate how parental investments respond to child endowments within family, we regress our
measure of investment, (the quality of parenting at eight months of age), on diﬀerent measures of
endowment, as constructed above, and including maternal fixed eﬀects. The first measure of endowment is birth weight. Within family, the child with higher birth weight receives more investment in
the form of higher-quality parenting. The results suggest that a one-standard-deviation diﬀerence
in birth weight between siblings can explain 10% percent of the average diﬀerence in investment
between siblings within families.
When we consider that birth weight may be endogenous because it already reflects maternal
prenatal investments and use instead the residual from a birth weight production function that
includes maternal smoking, pre-pregnancy weight and weight gain as regressors (Table 5), we find
that the relationship still holds, though it is somewhat attenuated (Table 7, column 2). In columns
3-8 we present estimates based on diﬀerent measures of health at birth (gestation, body length,
head circumference) and their corresponding residual measures and the same pattern emerges. In
the last two columns we present estimates for a measure of endowment based on factor scores of
multiple measures of health at birth (birth weight, head circumference, body length, gestation),
and factor scores based on the four residuals from the newborn health production function. The
results based on factor scores of the four measures of health at birth (column 9) are similar, though
slightly smaller than the birth weight result in column 1, and the results based on factor scores of
the four residuals is still positive and significant, but only 30% of the original estimate based on
birth weight.
The results suggest that postnatal investments are greater for more highly endowed children —
consistent with reinforcing investments. However, some but not all of this relationship captures
serial correlation in prenatal and postnatal investments.

16

3.6

How Fertility Aﬀects the Distribution of Investments Within a
Family

We follow with an exploration of whether and how this reinforcing investment behavior varies with
fertility. To do so, we estimate the ability of initial endowment to predict both parental investments
at eight months and future human capital (seven-year IQ) within family, stratified by fertility. We
find that the relationship between initial endowments and postnatal investments within family is
stronger for larger families (Table 8, Panel A). This is true for each of the four measures of initial
endowment that we use, though we only present the results for the residual birth weight used in
Table 7. We interpret this finding as evidence that investments tend to be more reinforcing the
larger the family.
One testable implication of this interpretation is that the relationship between a child’s initial
endowment and later human capital should be stronger in large families.13 We test this empirically
by examining how the relationship between endowment and later human capital (measured by sevenyear IQ) varies with fertility. We find that the positive correlation between a child’s endowment
and his/her later human capital increases with family size (Table 8, Panel B).14
A second testable implication is that the spread in child human capital should likewise increase
with family size. We show this in Figure 5, where we present the maximum and minimum IQ
at age seven by family size.15 One can clearly see that the diﬀerence between minimum IQ and
maximum IQ within a family increases with family size. For a two-child family, this diﬀerence is
40% of a standard deviation; for a four-child family, the diﬀerence increases to 100% of a standard
deviation. Interestingly, this increase in the diﬀerence is driven entirely by declines in the minimum.
The maximum human capital of children in large families is the same as the maximum in small
families, but the minimum is much lower. It has been well documented that average human capital
is lower in large families and the same is true in these data. However, the results here show that
this diﬀerence is driven by diﬀerences at the bottom of the distribution of child human capital, not
the top. This pattern can be explained by two forces: 1) the fact that the variance in endowment
increases with family size (Figure 5, second panel), and 2) greater reinforcing investments in large
families (Figure 5, third panel, and Table 8).
We corroborate these findings with another data source - the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of the Youth 1979 (CNLSY-79). The CNLSY-79 includes data on birth weight and
child human capital (PPVT and math scores). We see the same pattern in the NLSY (Figure 6A
13

Previous work examining whether investments are compensatory or reinforcing has relied on this strategy (e.g.,
Behrman, Rosenzweig, and Taubman, 1994). Previous work did not have measures of endowment, but rather assumed
endowments were more similar between identical twins than fraternal twins and examined whether sibling diﬀerences
in outcomes were greater among fraternal twins relative to identical twins.
14
While this evidence is consistent with greater reinforcing investment in large families, it could also be consistent
with diﬀerent production functions based on family size, which we cannot rule out.
15
We limit this analysis to families in which all births are observed in the data. We show, however, that our
findings are replicated in the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (1979) data.

17

and 6B): both the spread in endowments and child human capital increase with family size, with the
increase driven by declines at the bottom of the distribution. We also use the NLSY data to explore
whether birth order can explain the patterns observed (Figure 6C). While we observe significant
birth order eﬀects, they only explain a third of the diﬀerence between the maximum and minimum
child human capital within family.
Next, we describe a simple model that allows us to interpret these findings.

4

Model

In what follows, we show that a very simple quality-quantity trade-oﬀ model as in Becker and
Lewis (1973), with heterogeneity in endowments and static complementarity as in Becker and
Tomes (1986), together with parental preferences as in Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman (1982) can
reproduce the qualitative features of our findings. This is true as long as parental utility features (i)
complementarity between quantity and average quality (human capital) of children and (ii) some,
but not extreme, aversion to inequality among children.16 As we show below, complementarity
explains why the expected maximum human capital and expected minimum human capital move in
opposite directions as quantity increases. The moderate inequality aversion is a compromise between
two forces that go in opposite directions. First, investments reinforce diﬀerences in endowments,
which is not possible if parents have an elevated aversion to inequality. Second, expected maximum
human capital does not increase by much with fertility, which — given complementarity in preferences
and production function — could not be rationalized if parents had no aversion to inequality.
The Production Function of Human Capital. Let  denote the endowment of child  and
 the parental investment on child 0 s human capital,  . The technology of skill formation is:
 =   

(3)

In particular, note that technology (3) exhibits static complementarity.
Preferences. We assume that parental preferences are described by the following utility function:
Ã 
!
!
!
#
Ã 
" 
Ã 
¢2
4 1 X 2
6 1 X ¡
2 2
1X
1X

 −
 + 5 
 −
 − ̄
 =  + 1  −  + 3
2
 =1
2  =1 
 =1
2  =1
The preferences are linear in consumption () and quadratic in fertility () and human capital
of child . The parameter 4 describes how fast the marginal utility decreases as  increases.
The parameter 5 represents the complementarity or substitutability between quantity and average
16

It is possible to extend the model to multiple periods and introduce dynamic complementarity in the production
function of human capital as in Cunha and Heckman (2007). We choose not to do so to keep the analysis as simple
as possible.

18

¢2
P ¡
quality in the utility function. The term 1 =1  − ̄ is the variance of human capital within
the household. In this sense, the parameter 6 ≥ 0 captures parental aversion to inequality in the
spirit of Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman (1982). The higher 6 , the higher the psychic cost of
inequality.
If there is no heterogeneity among children so that  =  for all  (as in Becker and Lewis,
1973), then the utility function collapses to:
 =  + 1  −

2 2
4
 + 3  − 2 + 5 
2
2

Budget Constraint. Let  denote household income. Let  denote the cost of fertility and 
the price of the investment good. The budget constraint is:
 +  + 


X

 = 

(4)

=1

Our budget constraint is slighlty diﬀerent from Becker and Lewis (1973). If  6=  , then  6= 
because parents will act on this heterogeneity by choosing investments that either reinforce or
compensate diﬀerences in endowments.
Solving the Problem of the Parent. From (3), it is clear that  =  . We can use this
relationship to replace  in the budget constraint:
 +  +


X

 ( )  = 

=1

where  ( ) =




which is clearly decreasing in  . The first-order condition for  is:
− ( ) +

¢
3 4
6 ¡
−  + 5 −
 − ̄ = 0




We now discuss three diﬀerent cases. First, we focus on the case in which children are homogeneous
(Becker and Lewis, 1973). We then show that such a model is not consistent with our findings.
Second, we allow for children to be heterogeneous, but parents have no aversion to inequality. The
heterogeneity helps us understand why dispersion of human capital and investments increases with
fertility, but does not reproduce the distinct profile of expected maximum and minimum quality with
respect to quantity. Finally, we discuss the case in which children are heterogeneous and parents
are averse to inequality which can explain the relationship between quantity and mamimum and
minimum quality among children in a household that we observe in our data.
Case 2 Assume that  =  for all  so that children are homogeneous. Then, the relationship

19

between human capital  and fertility  is given by:
 =  =

3 5 − 
+
 for  = 1  .
4
4

If household children are homogeneous, then an exogenous increase in  either increases the quality
of all children (if 5 −   0), decreases the quality of all children (if 5 −   0), or quality does
not change (if 5 −  = 0).
When children are homogeneous, an increase in the quantity of children aﬀects the quality of
all children in exactly the same way. Furthermore, the model is clearly unable to answer how the
distribution of quality (and not only its first moment) is aﬀected by quantity. Interestingly, it is not
possible to separately identify 5 from . This means that one cannot test the Becker and Lewis
(1973) model because one cannot test the hypothesis that  = 0 This non-identifiability result is
not a product of our simple model. A general proposition was established by Rosenzweig and Wolpin
(1980), but the intution is clear: If there is no variation in , then it is not possible to separate
the interaction between quantity and quality in the utility function (5 ) from the interaction in the
budget constraint (). One can, however, test whether quantity reduces the average human capital
of children in the household. This amounts to testing whether 5 −   0 or 5 −  ≥ 0.
Case 3 Assume that children are heterogeneous within the household, but 6 = 0 so that parents
don’t have aversion to inequality. Then, the relationship between the human capital of child  and
fertility is:
3 5 −  ( )
+
 for  = 1  .
(5)
 =
4
4
If household children are heterogeneous and parents have no aversion to inequality, an exogenous increase in  increases the quality of all children with endowments such that  ( )  5 and decreases
the quality of all children with endowments such that  ( )  5 .
We now discuss the conditions under which Case 2 can generate the fact that the dispersion of
human capital in the household increases as fertility increases. Define 1: = min {1    } and
: = max {1    }, that is, 1: and : are, respectively, the minimum and maximum human
 −( )
capital in a family with  children. Clearly, it follows that : = 34 + 5 4 :  for  = 1  ;
where 1: and : are the extreme order statistics for endowment in a family with  children.
Assume that ln  ∼  (0 1) so that  is also log-normally distributed with mean  and variance
³ ´

=  (1: ) =  [ (: )]. Then, it follows that:
one. This is helpful because  :
 (1: ) =

3 5 −  [ (1: )]
+

4
4

(6)

 (: ) =

3 5 −  [ (: )]
+

4
4

(7)

20

An increase in  changes two components in equations (6) and (7). First, it changes  itself.
Second, it also changes the expected values  (1: ) and  (: ). Importantly, note that  (1:+1 ) ≤
 (1: ) for any  ∈ N. At the same time,  (+1:+1 ) ≥  (: ). This property of extreme order
statistics generates the increase in dispersion that we document in our data, but not necessarily in
the same way. As we show in Figures 5 and 6,  (: ) moves very little (or hardly at all) and  (1: )
decreases sharply as  increases. Because the maximum human capital is a non-decreasing function
of fertility, to match the pattern that we see in the data, we need to rule out 5   [ (: )]. If
endowments are strictly positive random variables, then we conclude that 5 ≥  [ (: )]  0.
This implies that quantity and quality are complements in the parental utility function. If so, then
our findings are consistent with recent evidence of small eﬀects of quantity on average quality of
children (Black, Deveraux, and Salvanes, 2005, 2007; Angrist, Lavy, and Schlosser, 2010).17 At the
same time, because the minimum human capital is a decreasing function of fertility, it must be the
case that 5   [ (1: )] for any  ≥ 2. Given that we observe family sizes up to  = 6, we
conclude that  [ (5:5 )] ≤ 5   [ (1: )] 
Unless specific distributional assumptions are imposed (i.e., a distribution for endowments such
that the expected extreme order statistics satisfy both  (+1:+1 ) ≈  (: ) and  (1:+1 ) 
 (1: )), the model above predicts that maximum human capital increases with fertility. One way
to weaken this conclusion is to allow for parents to have aversion to inequality, which we discuss
next.
Case 4 Assume that children are heterogeneous within the household and parents are averse to
inequality among children, so that 6  0. Then, the relationship between  and  is:
¶ µ
¶
 µ
5 −  ( )
3 6 X 5 −  ( )
 =
+

+
4 4 =1
6 + 4
6 + 4

(8)

Again, assume that ln  ∼  (0 1). The expression above shows that when parents are averse to
inequality, the endowments of all children in the household aﬀect the parental choice of investment
in child  and, ultimately, the human capital of child , for  6= . The impact is larger the larger
the size of 6 . In particular:
¸
 ∙
3 X 5 −  ( )
lim  =
for all ,
+
6 →∞
4 =1
4
and investments perfectly oﬀset diﬀerences in endowments, contrary to what we find in our empirical
17

Rosenzweig and Zhang (2009) argue that the procedure used by Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2005) and
Angrist, Lavy, and Schlosser (2010) — twinning at higher parities on the outcomes of older children — do not identify
the eﬀect of quantity on the quality of children because twins tend to have worse endowments and as close spacing
as possible. They show that it is possible to bound the eﬀects of quantity and quality by investigating twinning at
diﬀerent parities while holding constant the twin’s endowments. Rosenzweig and Zhang (2009) find that an extra
child decreases the schooling progress, the expected college enrolment, grades in school and the assessed health of all
children in the family.

21

analysis. On the other hand, when 6 = 0, (8) becomes identical to (5).
We now investigate the behavior of  (1: ) and  (: ) as fertility increases from  to  + 1
when 6 ∈ (0 ∞). Note that a change in  involves changes in several terms of equation (8). It is
easy to derive the following equality:

6 X  [ (: )] −  [ (:+1 )]  [ (1: )] −  [ (1:+1 )]
+
 (9)
 (1:+1 ) −  (1: ) =
4 =1
6 + 4
6 + 4
|
{z
} |
{z
}
≤0

≤0

∙
¸ ∙
¸
5 −  [ (1:+1 )]
6 5 −  [ (+1:+1 )]
+

4
6 + 4
6 + 4
{z
} |
{z
}
|
≥0

≤0

The first term on the right-hand side of (9) is non-positive because, for log-normal random variables,
 (: ) ≥  (:+1 )  which implies that  [ (: )] ≤  [ (:+1 )]. The same reasoning explains
why the second term is also non-positive. Following the previous discussion, 5 ≥  [ (+1:+1 )]
and 5   [ (1:+1 )]. These restrictions imply that the third term is positive while the fourth
term is negative. In any event, for the model to replicate the empirical patterns, it is necessary for
the third term not to be “too large” so that  (1:+1 ) −  (1: )  0.
A similar expression can be derived for the diﬀerence between  (+1:+1 ) and  (: ) :

6 X  [ (: )] −  [ (:+1 )]  [ (: )] −  [ (+1:+1 )]
 (+1:+1 ) −  (: ) =
+

4 =1
6 + 4
6 + 4
|
{z
} |
{z
}
≤0

≥0

5 −  [ (+1:+1 )]

+
6 + 4
|
{z
}
≥0

As discussed above, the first term is non-positive because of the assumption of log-normality of
endowments. The second term is non-negative for any distribution. Finally, the third term is also
positive. As a result, whether the right-hand side is positive or negative depends on how large 6
is. Note that:
lim  (+1:+1 ) −  (: ) =

6 →∞


X
 [ (: )] −  [ (:+1 )]
=1

4

 0

On the other hand,
lim  (+1:+1 ) −  (: ) =

6 →0

 [ (: )] −  [ (+1:+1 )]
5 −  [ (+1:+1 )]
+
 0
4
4
22

Our findings that  (: ) increases little or not at all with  suggests that 6  0, which indicates
that parents are sensitive to inequality among their children. However, we can rule out extreme
inequality aversion because we also know that parents devote higher investments to children with
higher endowments.
Thus, we are able to explain our empirical finding that reinforcing investment increases with
fertility by simply modifying the quantity-quality trade-oﬀ model to allow 1) heterogeneity in endowments and static complementarity and 2) parental preferences that feature complementarity
between quantity and average quality and some aversion to inequality among children.

5

Conclusions

This paper studies how endowments, investments, fertility, and parental preferences interact to
produce human capital in childhood. We begin by providing empirical support for two key features
of existing models of human capital. The first is that of dynamic complementarity: investments
and existing human capital are complements in the production of later human capital. For this, we
exploit an exogenous source of investment, the launch of Head Start in 1966, and estimate greater
gains from preschool in the IQ of those with the highest stocks of early human capital, consistent
with dynamic complementarity.
The second feature we examine empirically is that of static complementarity: parental investments and endowments are complements. We do not test this directly, but rather empirically
examine a direct implication of this feature, that parents allocate greater investments to children
with higher initial endowments. Unlike previous studies, our data enable us to overcome the potential endogeneity and measurement error associated with traditional measures of endowment based
on health at birth. We find that parents invest more in highly endowed children.
We also find that the degree of reinforcement increases with family size. Thus, an increase
in quantity leads not only to a decline in average quality (the quantity-quality tradeoﬀ) but to
an increase in the variation in quality, due to both greater variation in endowments (from more
children) and greater reinforcing investments.
Finally, we show that our findings can be explained by extending the quantity-quality trade-oﬀ
model to include heterogeneous child endowments and parental preferences that feature complementarity between quality and quantity and moderate aversion to inequality in child human capital
within the household. The complementarity in preferences explains why the expected maximum
human capital and expected minimum human capital move in opposite directions as quantity increases: parents can increase “average” quality by investing more in the children with the highest
endowments. Complementarity also explains the findings in the literature that document small, if
any, relationship between quality and quantity of children. The moderate inequality aversion arises
because if parents had high aversion to inequality, then investments would not be reinforcing. On
the other hand, if parents had no aversion to inequality, then expected maximum human capital
23

would increase much more with fertility than what we find in our datasets.
Our theoretical and empirical results have important implications for our understanding of the
production of human capital in childhood and how initial levels of human capital, investments,
fertility, and parental preferences interact to aﬀect not only average levels of human capital but its
distribution within a family. In addition, by providing new estimates of the impact of Head Start
on multiple measures of cognitive ability and achievement that exploit the exogenous variation in
Head Start availability within the family, our results also contribute to the growing literature on
the impact of Head Start and other high-quality interventions in early childhood.

24

A

Individual Items of Bayley Scale of Mental Development
at Age 8 Months

1. Social smiles.
2. Visually recognizes mother.
3. Eyes follow pencil.
4. Reacts to paper on face.
5. Searches with eyes for sound.
6. Vocalizes to social stimulus.
7. Manipulates ring.
8. Vocalizes two syllables.
9. Regards cube.
10. Glances from one object to another.
11. Makes anticipatory adjustment to lifting.
12. Reacts to dissapearance of face.
13. Reaches for ring.
14. Plays with rattle.
15. Fingers hand in play.
16/18. Follows vanishing ring/spoon
17. Is aware of strange situation.
19. Eyes follow ball across table.
20. Carries ring to mouth.
21. Manipulates table edge slightly.
22. Inspects own hands.
23. Closes on dangling ring.
24/25. Turns head to sound of bell/rattle.
26/30. Reaches for/Picks up cube.
27. Actively manipulates table.
28. Regards pellet.
29. Approaches mirror image.
31. Engages in exploitive paper play.
32. Retains two cubes.
33. Discriminates between strangers.

34. Vocalizes attitudes.
35. Recovers rattle in crib or playpen.
36. Reaches persistently.
37. Turns head after dropped objective.
38. Lifts cup.
39. Reaches for second cube.
40. Enjoys frolic play.
41. Transfers objects hand to hand.
42. Sustains inspection of ring.
43. Plays with string.
44. Picks up cube directly and easily.
45. Pulls string, secures ring.
46. Enjoys sound production.
47. Lifts cup by handle.
48. Retains two cubes.
49. Attends to scribbling.
50. Looks for dropped object.
51. Manipulates bell, shows interest in details.
52. Responds playfully to mirror.
53. Vocalizes four diﬀerent syllables.
54. Pulls string purposefully to secure ring.
55/58. Responds to social play/name.
56. Attempts to secure three cubes.
57. Rings bell imitatively.
59. Says Da-Da or equivalent.
60. Uncovers toy.
61. Adjusts to words.
62. Fingers holes in peg board.
63. Puts cube in cup.
64. Looks for content of box.

25

B

Proof of Theorem 1

Let Σ =   ( ), Σ =   ( ) and Σ =   (  ). We observe  and  error-ridden measures
of parental investment ( ) and endowment ( ), respectively. Assume that:
 = α  +  ,  = 1   

(10)

 = β   +  ,  = 1   
Note that  = (1    )0 , that is, the measurement system is defined at the level of the family.
The vectors  ,  ,  , and  are defined analogously. The matrices of factor loadings,
α and β , are diagonal matrices of dimension ( × ):
⎡

⎢
⎢
α = ⎢
⎢
⎣

 0 · · · 0
0  · · · 0
.. . .
.
..
. ..
.
.
0 0 · · · 

⎤

⎡

⎥
⎢
⎥
⎢
⎥ and β = ⎢
⎥
⎢
⎦
⎣

 0 · · · 0
0  · · · 0
.. . .
.
..
. ..
.
.
0 0 · · · 

⎤

⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

Now, let Z = (1    )0 and define Z , ² , ² , α, and β in the same way. We can
write the system as:
Z = α + ²
Z = β + ²
Let Θ =   ( ) and Θ =   ( )  Our approach proceeds in three steps. In the first
step, we factor analyze system (10) to obtain estimates of the factor loadings α, β, and variance
matrices Θ and Θ . In the second step, we compute the factor scores ̂
 by the Bartlett Method

(Bartlett, 1938) and the factor scores ̂ by the Regression Method (Thurnstone, 1935). These
factor scores are computed in the following way:
−1

=  Z  where  = (α0 Θ α)
̂


α0 Θ 
−1

=   Z  where   = Σ β0 (βΣ β 0 + Θ )
̂





In the third step, we replace  with ̂
 as well as  with ̂ and estimate  by a fixed-eﬀect

26

regression. This is the factor score fixed-eﬀect regression estimator,     :
   

" 
#−1 " 
#
X ¡ ¢0 ¡
X ¡ ¢0 ¡
¢
¢
=
̂
̂
̂
̂
,




=1

=1

Now, let’s focus on:

X
¡

̂


=1


X
¢0 ¡  ¢
¡  ¢0 ¡ 
¢
̂
=
̂
 Z
=1


X
¤
¡  ¢0 £ 
=
̂
 (α + ² )
=1

=


i
X
¡  ¢0 h
−1
 (α0 Θ α) α0 Θ (α + ² )
̂
=1



i
X
X
¡  ¢0
¡  ¢0 h
−1
 (α0 Θ α) α0 Θ ²
̂  +
̂
=
=1

=1



i
X
X
¡  ¢0
¡  ¢0 h
−1 0
0
 (α Θ α) α Θ ²
=
̂  ( +  +   ) +
̂
=1

= 

=1


X
=1

Now, consider the term

P

¡  ¢0
̂ ( ) +

=1

¡

̂



X
=1

¢0 ¡  ¢
̂


i
X
¡  ¢0
¡  ¢0 h
−1
 (α0 Θ α) α0 Θ ²
̂   +
̂
=1



X
X
¡  ¢0 ¡  ¢
¡ 
¢0 ¡
¢
̂
̂
=
 Z   Z
=1

=1

=


X
¤0 £
¤
£ 
 (β + ² )   (β + ² )
=1

Under Assumptions A2a and A2b, the following equalities hold:

1 X ¡  ¢0
̂   = 0
→∞ 
=1

lim


i
1 X ¡  ¢0 h
−1
 (α0 Θ α) α0 Θ ² = 0
̂
lim
→∞ 
=1

27

Furthermore,

¡
¢
1 X ¡  ¢0
̂ ( ) =  ̂
lim
   
→∞ 
=1


¤0 £
¤
¡
¢
1 X£ 
 (β + ² )   (β + ² ) =    (β + ² )    (β + ² )
→∞ 
=1

lim

As a result,
£
¡
¢¤−1
¡
¢
lim     =     (β + ² )    (β + ² )
 ̂
   

→∞

and we now show that

£
¡
¢¤−1
¡
¢
   (β + ² )    (β + ² )
 ̂
   = 1

Consider:

¡
¢
¡
¢
¡
¢
 ̂
=    Z   =    (β + ² )   =
  
=   β  ( )  =   βΣ 
−1

= Σ β 0 (βΣ β0 + Θ )

βΣ 

Next, note that:
¡
¢
¡ ¢0
   (β + ² )    (β + ² ) =     (β + ² )   
−1

= Σ β0 (βΣ β0 + Θ )

βΣ 

Therefore:
£
¡
¢¤−1
¡
¢
lim     =     (β + ² )    (β + ² )
 ̂
  

→∞

i−1 h
i
h
−1
−1
Σ β0 (βΣ β0 + Θ ) βΣ 
=  Σ β0 (βΣ β 0 + Θ ) βΣ 

= 

28

References
[1] Adhvaryu, Achyuta R. and Anant Nyshadham (2012): “Endowments and Investments within
the Household: Evidence from Iodine Supplementation in Tanzania,” Yale University Working
Paper.
[2] Angrist, Josh, Victor Lavy, and Analia Schlosser (2010): “Multiple Experiments for the Causal
Link between the Quantity and Quality of Children,” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(4):773823.
[3] Ashenfelter, Orley and Cecilia Rouse (1998): “Income, Schooling, and Ability: Evidence from
a New Sample of Identical Twins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1):253—284.
[4] Bartlett, Maurice S. (1938). “Methods of Estimating Mental Factors,” Nature, 141(3570):609610.
[5] Becker, Gary (1981): “A Treatise on the Family,” Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
[6] Becker, Gary and H. Gregg Lewis (1973): “On the Interaction between the Quantity and
Quality of Children”, Journal of Political Economy, 81(2, Part 2):S279-S288.
[7] Becker, Gary and Nigel Tomes (1976): “Child endowments and the quantity and quality of
children,” Journal of Political Economy, 84(4):S143—S162.
[8] Becker, Gary and Nigel Tomes (1986): “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3): S1-39.
[9] Behrman, Jere R., Maria Cecilia Calderon, Samuel Preston, John Hoddinott, Reynaldo Martorell and Aryeh D. Stein, 2009, “Nutritional Supplementation of Girls Influences the Growth
of their Children: Prospective Study in Guatemala,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
90(5):1372-1379.
[10] Behrman, Jere, Paul Taubman, and Robert Pollak (1982): “Parental Preferences and Provision
for Progeny," Journal of Political Economy, 90(1): 52-73.
[11] Behrman, Jere and Mark Rosenzweig. 2004. “Returns to Birthweight,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 86(2): 586-601.
[12] Behrman, Jere, Mark Rosenzweig and Paul Taubman (1994): “Endowments and the allocation
of schooling in the family and in the marriage market: The twins experiment,” Journal of
Political Economy, 102(6):1131—1174.
[13] Black, Sandra, Paul Devereaux and Kjell Salvanes (2005): “The More the Merrier? The Eﬀect
of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
120(2): 669-700.
29

[14] Black, Sandra, Paul Devereaux and Kjell Salvanes (2007): “Small Family, Smart Family?
Family Size and the IQ Scores of Young Men,” Journal of Human Resources, 45(1):33-58.
[15] Caldwell, Bettye and Robert Bradley (1984): “Home Observation for Measurement of the
Environment (HOME) - Revised Edition,” University of Arkansas Press, Little Rock.
[16] Campbell, Frances A., Barbara H. Wasik, Elizabeth Pungello, Margaret Burchinal, Oscar Barbarin, Kirsten Kainz, Joseph J. Sparling, and Craig T. Ramey (2008): “Young adult outcomes
of the Abecedarian and CARE early childhood educational interventions,” Early Childhood
Research Quarterly, 23(4):452-466.
[17] Caspi, Avshalom, Joseph McClay, Terrie E. Moﬃtt, Jonathan Mill, Judy Martin, Ian W.
Craig, Alan Taylor, and Richie Poulton (2002): “Role of Genotype in the Cycle of Violence in
Maltreated Children,” Science, 297(5582):851-854.
[18] Conti, Gabriella, Christopher Hansman, James J. Heckman, Matthew F. X. Novak, Angela
Ruggiero, Stephen J. Suomi (2012): “Primate Evidence on the Late Health Eﬀects of Early
Life Adversity,” NBER Working Paper 18002.
[19] Cunha, Flavio and James Heckman (2007). “The Technology of Skill Formation,” American
Economic Review, 97(2):31—47.
[20] Cunha, Flavio, James Heckman, and Susanne Schennach (2010): “Estimating the Technology
of Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skill Formation,” Econometrica, 78(3):883-931.
[21] Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas (1995): “Does Head Start Make a Diﬀerence?” American
Economic Review, 85(3):341—364.
[22] Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas (1999): “Early Test Scores, Socioeconomic Status and
Future Outcomes,” NBER Working Paper No. 6943.
[23] Datar, Ashlesha, M. Rebecca Kilburn, and David S. Loughran (2010): “Endowments and
Parental Investments in Infancy and Early Childhood,” Demography, 47(1):145-162.
[24] Garces, Eliana, Janet Currie, and Duncan Thomas (2002): “Longer-term Eﬀects of Head
Start,” American Economic Review, 92(4):999—1012.
[25] Grantham-McGregor Sally M., Christine Powell, Susan Walker, Susan Chang and Patricia
Fletcher (1994): “The Long Term Follow-up of Severely Malnourished Children Who Participated in an Intervention Programme,” Child Development, 65(2):428-439.
[26] Hanushek, Eric (1992): “The Trade-Oﬀ Between Child Quantity and Quality,” Journal of
Political Economy, 100(1): 84-117.

30

[27] Heckman, James, Lena Malofeeva, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev (2010): “Understanding the Mechanisms Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult
Outcomes,” University of Chicago Working Paper.
[28] Heckman, James, Seong Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz (2010): “Analyzing Social Experiments as Implemented: a Reexamination of the Evidence from the HighScope Perry Preschool Program,” Journal of Quantitative Economics, 1(1):1-46.
[29] Hsin, Amy (2009): “Parental Investments and Child Endowments: Do Families Compensate
or Reinforce Diﬀerences among Siblings?”, University of Michigan Working Paper.
[30] Lazarus, R. S. (1984): “On the Primacy of Cognition,” American Psychologist, 39(2):124-129.
[31] Ludwig, Jens and Douglas L. Miller (2007): “Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life
Chances? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
488(1):159—208.
[32] Matzkin, Rosa (1992): “Nonparametric and Distribution-Free Estimation of the Binary Threshold Crossing and the Binary Choice Models,” Econometrica, 60(2):239-270.
[33] McLeod, Jane and Karen Kaiser (2004): “Childhood Emotional and Behavioral Problems and
Educational Attainment,” American Sociological Review, 69(5):636—658.
[34] National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2000): “From Neurons to Neighborhoods:
The Science of Early Childhood Development,” The National Academies Press, Washington,
DC.
[35] O’Connor, Thomas G., Michael Rutter, Celia Beckett, Lisa Keaveney, Jana M. Kreppner, and
the English and Romanian Adoptees Study Team (2000): “The Eﬀects of Global Severe Privation on Cognitive Competence: Extension and Longitudinal Follow-Up,” Child Development,
71(2):376—390.
[36] Olds, David L., JoAnn Robinson, Ruth O’Brien, Dennis W. Luckey, Lisa M. Pettitt, Charles
R. Henderson, Rosanna K. Ng, Karen L. Sheﬀ, Jon Korfmacher, Susan Hiatt, and Aylet Talmi
(2002): “Home Visiting by Paraprofessionals and by Nurses: A Randomized, Controlled Trial,”
Pediatrics, 110(3):486-496.
[37] Paxson, Christina and Norbert Schady (2007): “Cognitive Development Among Young Children in Ecuador: The Roles of Wealth, Health and Parenting,” Journal of Human Resources,
52(1):49-84.
[38] Pitt, Mark, Mark Rosenzweig and Nazmul Hassan (1990): “Productivity, Health, and Inequality in the Intrahousehold Distribution of Food in Low-Income Countries,” American Economic
Review, 80(5):1139—1156.
31

[39] Price, Joseph (2009): “Parent-Child Quality Time: Does Birth Order Matter?,” Journal of
Human Resources, 43(1):240-265.
[40] Ranson, Kenna and Liana Urichuk (2008): “The Eﬀect of Parent-Child Attachment Relationships on Child Biopsychosocial Outcomes: A Review,” Early Child Development and Care,
178(2):129-152.
[41] Rosenzweig, Mark and Kenneth Wolpin (1980): “Testing the Quantity-Quality Fertility Model:
the Use of Twins as a natural Experiment,” Econometrica, 48(1):227-240.
[42] Rosenzweig, Mark and Kenneth Wolpin (1988): “Heterogeneity, Intrafamily Distribution, and
Child Health,” Journal of Human Resources, 23(4):437-461.
[43] Rosenzweig, Mark and Junsen Zhang (2009): “Do Population Control Policies Induce More
Human Capital Investment? Twins, Birth Weight and China’s ‘One-Child’ Policy,” Review of
Economic Studies 76(3):1149-1174.
[44] Schore, Allan (2001): “Eﬀects of a Secure Attachment Relationship on Right Brain Development, Aﬀect Regulation and Infant Mental Health,” Infant Mental Health Journal, 22(1-2):7-66.
[45] Seifer, Ronald and Masha Schiller (1995): “The Role of Parenting Sensitivity, Infant Temperament, and Dyadic Interaction in Attachment Theory and Assessment,” In E. Waters, B. E.
Vaughn, G. Posada, & K. Kondo-Ikemura (Eds.),“Caregiving, Cultural, and Cognitive Perspectives on Secure-Base Behavior and Working Models: New Growing Points of Attachment
Theory and Research," Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 60(244):
146-174.
[46] Skrondal, Anders and Petter Laake (2001): “Regression Among Factor Scores,” Psychometrica
66(4):563-576.
[47] Suitor, Jill, Sechrist, Jori, Mikuhn, Mari, Pardo, Seth and Karl Pilemer (2008): “WithinFamily Diﬀerences in Parent-Child Relations Across the Life Course,” Current Directions in
Psychological Sciences, 17(5):334-338.
[48] Todd, Petra E. and Kenneth I. Wolpin (2007): “The Production of Cognitive Achievement in
Children: Home, School and Racial Test Score Gaps”, Journal of Human Capital, 1(1):91-136.
[49] Thurstone, Louis L. (1935). “The Vectors of Mind,”: Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

32

Table 1
Correlation between Local Head Start Spending Per Poor Person 1968 and Preschool Enrollment
Panel A: Full Sample

Local HS spending per poor person in 1968

Observations
R‐squared
Robust standard errors in brackets

1963‐1964

1965

1966

1967

1968

1969

1970

0.000309
[0.000982]

0.0006
[0.00113]

0.00452
[0.00180]

0.00308
[0.00177]

0.00361
[0.00224]

0.00157
[0.00185]

0.00132
[0.00175]

6122
0.012

5099
0.021

5442
0.021

5571
0.019

6178
0.017

5616
0.034

1627
0.048

1965

1966

1967

1968

1969

1970

0.000158
[0.000754]

0.000692
[0.00102]

0.00525
[0.00176]

0.00392
[0.00162]

0.0044
[0.00187]

0.00342
[0.00162]

0.00463
[0.00169]

5637
0.008

4642
0.013

4875
0.023

4990
0.022

5538
0.016

4872
0.022

1308
0.047

ALL

<=HS

0.00183
[0.000978]

0.00251
[0.00101]

0.894
12938

0.882
11670

Panel B: Limiting to Mothers with no More than a High School Degree
1963‐1964
Local HS spending per poor person in 1968

Observations
R‐squared

Panel C: Include Mother FE

Local HS Spending (=0 in years prior to 1966)

Observations
R‐squared
Robust standard errors in brackets.

OLS results in panels A and B of a regression of an indicator for preschool enrollment on a measure of local Head Start Spending includes controls for offspring
gender, birth order dummies, maternal race, maternal education, maternal age, marital status and family income at birth. FE Regressions in panel C include
controls for gender, birth order, maternal age, marital status, family income at birth and a quadratic in year of birth. Local (county) Head Start spending per
poor person in 1968 ranges from $3 to $29.

Table 2
Determinants of Investment Across Families: Dependent Variable= Preschool
Panel A: OLS Regressions
Standardized Birth Weight

(1)
‐0.00247
[0.00402]

Low Birth Weight

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)
‐0.00297
[0.00419]

0.000834
[0.00354]

0.00158
[0.00369]

0.00392
[0.000820]
0.00027
[0.000762]
0.000216
[0.000286]
‐0.0071
[0.00987]
0.0207
[0.0479]
‐0.102
[0.0472]
‐0.0611
[0.0543]
‐0.0129
[0.00663]
0.0368
[0.0132]
0.0347
[0.0112]
0.0111
[0.00958]
10156
0.047

0.00111
[0.0107]

Weeks of Gestation at Birth

‐0.000938
[0.00112]

Premature birth

0.0151
[0.0113]

Any abnormal language expression or reception ‐ 3 years

‐0.0175
[0.00981]

Standardized 8‐Month Mental Bayley

0.00392
[0.000820]
0.000277
[0.000762]
0.000216
[0.000286]
‐0.00713
[0.00987]
0.0208
[0.0479]
‐0.102
[0.0472]
‐0.0611
[0.0543]
‐0.013
[0.00662]
0.0373
[0.0132]
0.0349
[0.0112]
0.0112
[0.00958]

0.00391
[0.000820]
0.00027
[0.000762]
0.000212
[0.000286]
‐0.00722
[0.00987]
0.0208
[0.0479]
‐0.102
[0.0472]
‐0.0614
[0.0543]
‐0.0134
[0.00659]
0.0377
[0.0132]
0.0352
[0.0112]
0.0114
[0.00957]

0.00386
[0.000819]
0.000236
[0.000762]
0.000203
[0.000286]
‐0.00859
[0.00987]
0.0197
[0.0478]
‐0.103
[0.0472]
‐0.0617
[0.0542]
‐0.0135
[0.00658]
0.0369
[0.0132]
0.0348
[0.0112]
0.0105
[0.00957]

0.00387
[0.000819]
0.00026
[0.000762]
0.000202
[0.000286]
‐0.00848
[0.00987]
0.0196
[0.0478]
‐0.103
[0.0472]
‐0.0618
[0.0542]
‐0.0134
[0.00658]
0.037
[0.0132]
0.035
[0.0112]
0.0107
[0.00958]

0.00546
[0.00140]
0.00124
[0.00108]
0.00129
[0.000382]
‐0.01
[0.0130]
0.0461
[0.0586]
‐0.0775
[0.0578]
‐0.0178
[0.0679]
‐0.00798
[0.00902]
0.0555
[0.0184]
0.0522
[0.0158]
0.0202
[0.0135]

0.00391
[0.000819]
0.00024
[0.000761]
0.000211
[0.000286]
‐0.00754
[0.00985]
0.0202
[0.0478]
‐0.103
[0.0472]
‐0.0616
[0.0542]
‐0.0134
[0.00657]
0.0373
[0.0132]
0.0349
[0.0112]
0.0112
[0.00957]

0.00384
[0.00448]
‐0.00517
[0.00423]
0.00391
[0.000819]
0.000245
[0.000762]
0.000204
[0.000286]
‐0.0073
[0.00986]
0.0211
[0.0478]
‐0.103
[0.0472]
‐0.0613
[0.0542]
‐0.0136
[0.00658]
0.0391
[0.0132]
0.0355
[0.0112]
0.0114
[0.00957]

10156
0.047

10156
0.047

10132
0.048

10132
0.048

4885
0.055

10167
0.047

10160
0.047

Standardized 8‐Month Motor Bayley
Maternal Education at Birth
Maternal Age at Birth
Family income (real) at pregnancy in $1000
Married
Black
White
Hispanic
Male
First Birth
Second Birth
Third or Fourth Birth

Observations
R‐squared

Panel B: Maternal FE Regressions
Standardized Birth Weight

0.00039
[0.00857]

Low Birth Weight

0.00151
[0.00880]
‐0.00928
[0.0191]

Weeks of Gestation at Birth

‐0.00209
[0.00190]

Premature birth

0.00789
[0.0187]

Any abnormal language expression or reception ‐ 3 years

‐0.00583
[0.0173]

Standardized 8‐Month Motor Bayley
Standardized 8‐Month Mental Bayley
Observations
R‐squared

10157
0.739

10157
0.739

10133
0.739

10133
0.739

4886
0.758

‐0.00309
[0.00569]
10168
0.738

‐0.00298
[0.00680]
‐0.00147
[0.00679]
10161
0.738

‐0.00327
[0.00584]
10157
0.739

Standard errors in brackets. AMC FE and year of birth indicators included in top panel. Maternal FE and year of birth indicators included in bottom panel. Note that abnormal
language at age 3 is missing for half the sample for reasons unknown

Table 3A
Are Investments and Endowments Complements in the Production of Child Human Capital?

Investment(preschool)*8‐Month Bayley
Standardized 8‐Month Mental Bayley
Investment(Preschool)
BO*8‐Month Bayley
Maternal Age at Birth
Family income (real) at pregnancy in $1000
Married
Male
First Birth
Second Birth
Third or Fourth Birth

IQ 4
0.165
[0.0420]
0.152
[0.0298]
0.163
[0.0382]
‐0.00707
[0.00709]
‐0.0074
[0.0224]
0.000584
[0.00117]
‐0.0391
[0.0494]
‐0.111
[0.0214]
‐0.202
[0.101]
‐0.0788
[0.0789]
‐0.0199
[0.0539]

IQ 7
0.104
[0.0415]
0.164
[0.0293]
0.0196
[0.0395]
‐0.0103
[0.00711]
‐0.0224
[0.0226]
0.00101
[0.00120]
‐0.0175
[0.0503]
0.0282
[0.0219]
‐0.0144
[0.0852]
‐0.00775
[0.0691]
0.00099
[0.0501]

Read
0.0298
[0.0473]
0.0199
[0.0315]
‐0.0287
[0.0411]
0.00393
[0.00763]
‐0.00563
[0.0235]
‐0.00134
[0.00125]
‐0.0477
[0.0522]
‐0.17
[0.0227]
‐0.0598
[0.0886]
‐0.0385
[0.0717]
0.013
[0.0519]

Observations
9956
9229
9204
R‐squared
0.844
0.845
0.815
Standard errors in brackets. Maternal FE and all controls from previous table included in all regressions.

Math
0.16
[0.0507]
0.0381
[0.0337]
0.00878
[0.0440]
0.00798
[0.00817]
0.0177
[0.0252]
8.57E‐05
[0.00134]
‐0.101
[0.0558]
‐0.0746
[0.0243]
‐0.133
[0.0948]
‐0.00745
[0.0767]
0.0223
[0.0556]
9205
0.787

Table 3B
Heterogeneity in Impact of Preschool on 7 Year IQ
OLS
0.193
[0.0257]
Preschool*Standardized Birth Weight

Preschool

FE
0.01
[0.0393]

OLS
0.197
[0.0256]
‐0.0331
[0.0303]

FE
0.0102
[0.0391]
‐0.00195
[0.0455]

Preschool*Birth Order

OLS
0.221
[0.0492]

FE
‐0.0476
[0.0770]

‐0.0107
[0.0132]

0.0158
[0.0192]

Preschool*Male

OLS
0.182
[0.0353]

FE
‐0.00642
[0.0498]

0.0217
[0.0502]

0.0366
[0.0681]

Preschool*8‐Month Bayley

OLS
0.19
[0.0251]

FE
0.0223
[0.0388]

0.0679
[0.0301]

0.108
[0.0408]

Preschool*advanced social/emotional development
Preschool*normal social/emotional development

Standardized Birth Weight

0.127
[0.0109]

0.614
[0.329]
0.127
[0.125]

OLS
0.0596
[0.109]
‐0.0406
[0.0315]
‐0.0161
[0.0128]
0.0209
[0.0496]
0.0447
[0.0347]
0.648
[0.265]
0.18
[0.104]

FE
‐0.0265
[0.152]
‐0.0361
[0.0476]
0.0174
[0.0189]
0.0465
[0.0683]
0.114
[0.0484]
0.403
[0.337]
‐0.0392
[0.142]

0.65
[0.261]
0.195
[0.0960]

0.491
[0.0758]
0.265
[0.0324]

0.233
[0.0997]
0.0989
[0.0446]

0.0758
[0.0113]
0.168
[0.0111]
0.0926
[0.0781]
0.00523
[0.0353]

0.113
[0.0218]
0.121
[0.0167]
0.017
[0.102]
‐0.045
[0.0476]

9325
0.298

9326
0.84

9205
0.327

9206
0.848

0.186
0.127
[0.00959] [0.0148]

Advanced Social/Emotional Development
Normal Social/Emotional Development

9339
0.289

FE
‐0.112
[0.121]

0.146
[0.0211]

Standardized 8‐Month Mental Bayley

Observations
R‐squared

OLS
0.00722
[0.0925]

9340
0.839

9330
0.3

9331
0.842

9228
0.289

9229
0.84

9339
0.289

9340
0.839

9339
0.322

9340
0.844

Standard errors in brackets. Regressions include controls listed previously. All OLS regressions include controls for maternal characteristics (education, age, race, family income), offspring characteristics (birth order,
gender, year of birth and AMC indicators). All FE regressions include controls for maternal age, family income, birth order, gender and year of birth indicators. Note: only 208 observations with advanced
social/emotional development at 8 months of age.

Table 4
A Measure of Parental Investment: Factor Analysis
Variable
Appearance of Child
Responsivenes of Mother
Affection
Focus on Child
Management of Child
Attention to Child
Handling of Child
Number of observations = 31538

Factor Loadings

Uniqueness

Fraction of Variance
Explained by Factor

Scoring Coefficients
(Bartlett Method)

0.1751
0.5889
0.6213
0.4744
0.3324
0.3056
0.4941

0.9693
0.6532
0.6140
0.7750
0.8895
0.9066
0.7558

0.0378
0.3973
0.4384
0.2650
0.1336
0.1134
0.2863

0.0622
0.2860
0.3146
0.1997
0.1253
0.1143
0.2076

Table 5
Estimating Endowments from a Newborn Health Production Function

Pre pregnancy weight
Pre‐pregnancy weight squared
Weight gain during pregnancy
Weight gain squared
Cigarettes per day
Cigarettes per day squared
Trying to get pregnant
Maternal age at birth
Family income (real) at pregnancy in $1000
Married

Observations
R‐squared

Birth Weight
OLS
FE
0.0165
0.0457
[0.00170] [0.00438]
‐2.50E‐05 ‐4.68E‐05
[5.62e‐06] [1.34e‐05]
0.0532
0.0689
[0.00185] [0.00249]
‐0.000454 ‐0.000445
[3.23e‐05] [4.06e‐05]
‐0.0264 ‐0.000747
[0.00176] [0.00371]
0.000407 7.43E‐05
[5.59e‐05] [9.42e‐05]
‐0.0576
0.0644
[0.0200] [0.0243]
‐0.0024
‐0.0668
[0.00163] [0.0148]
0.00117 ‐0.000324
[0.000594] [0.000792]
‐0.00464
‐0.0926
[0.0204] [0.0321]
15803
0.221

15804
0.777

Head Circumference
OLS
FE
0.0178
0.0358
[0.00179] [0.00482]
‐3.35E‐05 ‐4.63E‐05
[5.93e‐06] [1.48e‐05]
0.0335
0.0413
[0.00197] [0.00286]
‐0.000242 ‐0.000204
[3.40e‐05] [4.51e‐05]
‐0.0197
0.00294
[0.00185] [0.00406]
0.000266 ‐8.84E‐05
[5.86e‐05] [0.000103]
‐0.0335
0.0532
[0.0210] [0.0269]
0.00238
‐0.0451
[0.00172] [0.0163]
0.00231
0.00062
[0.000624] [0.000873]
‐0.0327
‐0.0467
[0.0214] [0.0354]
15185
0.183

15186
0.757

Body Length
OLS
FE
0.0185
0.0366
[0.00173] [0.00499]
‐3.67E‐05 ‐5.27E‐05
[5.73e‐06] [1.53e‐05]
0.0318
0.0382
[0.00191] [0.00296]
‐0.000252 ‐0.000195
[3.29e‐05] [4.66e‐05]
‐0.0235 0.000388
[0.00179] [0.00420]
0.000388 7.14E‐05
[5.67e‐05] [0.000107]
‐0.0382
0.0427
[0.0203] [0.0279]
0.000861 ‐0.0554
[0.00166] [0.0168]
0.000627 ‐0.000567
[0.000603] [0.000906]
‐0.0207
‐0.0895
[0.0207] [0.0367]
15118
0.171

15119
0.718

Gestational Length
OLS
FE
0.000169
0.0288
[0.00121] [0.00353]
8.14E‐06 ‐2.48E‐05
[4.03e‐06] [1.09e‐05]
0.0422
0.0595
[0.00128] [0.00192]
‐0.000508 ‐0.000509
[2.25e‐05] [3.22e‐05]
‐0.00203 0.00704
[0.00125] [0.00300]
3.62E‐05 ‐6.80E‐05
[3.97e‐05] [7.64e‐05]
‐0.0242
0.0577
[0.0141] [0.0194]
‐0.00286
‐0.08
[0.00116] [0.0120]
‐0.000139 0.000565
[0.000420] [0.000638]
‐0.000872 ‐0.0329
[0.0145] [0.0260]
15913
0.115

15914
0.669

Standard errors in brackets. All Regressions include child gender, birth order indicators and year of birth indicators. OLS regressions also include city of birth FE and
controls for maternal education.

Table 6
Factor Loadings and Variances of Uniqueness

Variable
Residual of Birth Weight
Residual of Head Circumference at Birth
Residual of Body Length at Birth
Residual of Weeks of Gestation
Number of Observations = 13147

Factor Loadings
0.805
0.701
0.645
0.353

Fraction of Total
Variance of Uniqueness Variance Explained by
the Factor
0.351
0.665
0.509
0.544
0.585
0.489
0.876
0.259

Scoring Coefficients
(Regression Method)
0.46611
0.28024
0.22828
0.09346

Table 7
How Endowments Affect Postnatal Investments (High‐Quality Parenting) Within Family

Standardized Birth Weight

(1)
0.0954
[0.0295]

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(11)

0.0275
[0.0106]

Standardized Birth Weight Residual Endowment

0.066
[0.0198]

Standardized Gestational Length

0.0259
[0.0106]

Standardized Gestational Length Residual Endowment

0.0358
[0.0213]

Standardized Body Length

0.0171
[0.0106]

Standardized Body Length Residual Endowment

0.0427
[0.0239]

Standardized Head Circumference

0.0171
[0.0107]

Standardized Head Circumference Residual Endowment
Standardized Factor Scores of Birth Weight, Gestational Length, Body Length,
and Head Circumference

0.072
[0.0250]

Standardized Factor scores from Endowment Residuals of Birth Weight,
Gestational Length, Body Length, and Head Circumference residual
Observations
R‐squared

(12)

0.0265
[0.0107]
12611
0.664

11526
0.677

12582
0.664

11496
0.677

12469
0.668

11402
0.682

12515
0.665

11444
0.679

12420
0.67

11354
0.683

Standard errors in brackets. Also included are maternal fixed effect, indicators for child birth order, indicators for year of birth, controls for offspring gender, income and marital status at time
of birth.

Table 8
How Do Reinforcing Investments Vary with Fertility?
Panel A: Outcome = Postnatal Investments
Birth Weight Residual Endowment

Observations
R‐squared

Panel B: Outcome = 7 Year IQ
Birth Weight Residual Endowment

2 kids
0.05
[0.0255]

>2 kids
0.0823
[0.0459]

>3 kids
0.138
[0.158]

9589
0.73

1937
0.448

262
0.475

2 kids
0.118
[0.0246]

>2 kids
0.215
[0.0424]

>3 kids
0.444
[0.123]

Observations
8250
1776
251
R‐squared
0.866
0.696
0.633
Standard errors in brackets. All regressions include full controls and maternal FE.

Appendix Table 1
Sample Means
Overall

Std Dev. Within Family

Mean Difference Within Family
Raw
Standardized
mean
Std Dev
mean
Std Dev

Maternal Characteristics
Maternal Age
Maternal Education
Socioeconomic Index (Duncan)
Married
Black
White
Hispanic
First Birth
Second Birth
Third or Fourth Birth
Male

mean
25.68
11.11
50.44
0.86
0.42
0.54
0.03
0.13
0.23
0.35
0.50

Std Dev
5.09
4.59
21.25

Investments
Maternal Investment
Preschool Attendance

‐0.07
0.13

0.83

0.48

0.54
0.15

0.9

Cognitive Measures
8 Month Bayley Score
4 year IQ
7 Year IQ

79.32
98.77
96.31

6.04
16.70
14.80

3.30
7.00
6.10

4.6
11.9
10.7

5.8
9.7
8.8

0.75
0.72
0.7

0.93
0.58
0.58

Newborn Health
Birth Weight (kg)
Gestation at Birth (weeks)
Lbw
Premature
Head Circumference
Body Length
Endowment Factor (standardized measures of newborn health)
Endowment Factor (residuals from newborn health production function)

3.18
39.23
0.11
0.10
33.68
50.02
0.00
0.00

0.57
3.00

0.23
1.70

0.44
3.2
0.14
0.17

0.49
5.2

0.66

0.73

1.59
2.75
0.93
0.87

0.75
1.40
0.41
0.87

Standardized: distribution relocated to mean zero and rescaled to variance one.

Appendix Table 2
Predictive Abilities of 8 Month Bayley and Birth Weight‐ OLS and FE Results
OLS
8 Month Mental Bayley ‐ Standardized
Birth Weight ‐ Standardized

Observations
R‐squared
test of equality of coefficients

Any Cognitive delay ‐ 1 year
‐0.157
‐0.154
[0.00231]
[0.00237]
‐0.0603
‐0.0189
[0.00309] [0.00273]

Abnormal Language Reception ‐ 3 year
‐0.0461
‐0.0407
[0.00695]
[0.00714]
‐0.034
‐0.0239
[0.00751]
[0.00770]

11851
11851
5375
5366
0.042
0.293
0.079
0.074
F (1, 22841) = 1124
(p=0.000)
Maternal race, education, income, marital status, age, child gender, birth order, AMC and year of birth also included

Maternal FE
8 Month Mental Bayley ‐ Standardized
Birth Weight ‐ Standardized

11863
0.29

Any Cognitive delay ‐ 1 year
‐0.148
‐0.143
[0.00389]
[0.00398]
‐0.0801
‐0.03
[0.00689] [0.00624]

11852
0.736
F(1,4659) = 196
(p=0.000)
Maternal age, marital status, income, child gender, birth order and year of birth also included
Standard errors in brackets

Observations
R‐squared
test of equality of coefficients

11864
0.735

11852
0.662

5366
0.08
F (1,5351) = 2.1
(p=0.1476)

Abnormal Language Reception ‐ 3 year
‐0.0284
‐0.0286
[0.0121]
[0.0124]
‐0.00947
‐0.000858
[0.0176]
[0.0180]
5376
0.761

5367
0.76

5367
0.761
F (1,1719) = 1.36
(p=0.2437)

Abnormal Language Expression ‐ 3 Year
‐0.0508
‐0.0474
[0.00691]
[0.00709]
‐0.0263
‐0.0148
[0.00753]
[0.00769]
5336
0.047

5327
0.04

5327
0.048
F (1,5312) = 2.1
(p=0.0047)

Abnormal Language Expression ‐ 3 Year
‐0.0233
‐0.0183
[0.0121]
[0.0124]
‐0.0413
‐0.0356
[0.0181]
[0.0185]
5337
0.75

5328
0.75

5328
0.75
F (1,1694) = 0.51
(p=0.4752)

IQ ‐ 4 year
0.205
[0.00940]

10303
0.264

IQ ‐ 7 year

0.184
[0.00977]
0.135
0.0782
[0.0105] [0.0107]
10292
10292
0.242
0.267
F (1,10280) = 42.31
(p=0.0000)

0.191
[0.00857]

10936
0.293

IQ ‐ 4 year
0.128
[0.0138]
0.11
[0.0197]
10304
0.839

0.174
[0.00888]
0.12
0.0667
[0.00979] [0.0100]
10925
10925
0.271
0.296
F (1,10915 ) = 51.57
(p=0.0000)

IQ ‐ 7 year
0.116
[0.0142]
0.0709
[0.0201]

10293
10293
0.837
0.84
F (1,3875 ) = 2.80
(p=0.0944)

0.14
[0.0124]
0.143
[0.0183]
10937
0.837

0.124
[0.0127]
0.1
[0.0186]

10926
10926
0.835
0.838
F (1,4223) = 0.98
(p=0.3219)

Reading ‐ 7 year
0.0851
0.0711
[0.00939]
[0.00976]
0.0767
0.0555
[0.0102] [0.0106]
10897
0.163

10886
10886
0.161
0.165
F (1, 10876) = 0.99
(p=0.3206)

Reading ‐ 7 year
0.0422
0.0295
[0.0138]
[0.0142]
0.0888
0.0789
[0.0195] [0.0201]
10898
0.801

10887
10887
0.802
0.802
F (1,4200 ) = 3.29
(p=0.0700)

Math ‐ 7 year
0.141
0.13
[0.00960]
[0.00998]
0.081
0.0421
[0.0105] [0.0109]
10896
0.111

10885
10885
0.099
0.113
F (1, 10875) = 28.07
(p=0.0000)

Math ‐ 7 year
0.0923
[0.0152]
0.116
[0.0215]
10897
0.757

0.0779
[0.0156]
0.0899
[0.0221]

10886
10886
0.757
0.759
F (1,4197 ) = 0.12
(p=0.7266)

Appendix Table 3
Parental Time, Parental Warmth and the Home Score ‐ Evidence from the PSID
Panel A: Correlation between Parental Time and Parental Warmth Scale
Dependent Variable= Standardized Parental Warmth Scale
Age Range
Standardized Parental Quality
Time
Standardized Parental Quality
Time (Weekday)
Standardized Parental Quality
Time (Weekend)
Observations
R‐squared

OLS
Fixed Effect
One to Eight Months
One to Twelve Months One to Sixteen Months One to Twenty Months
All Ages
0.161
0.13
0.119
0.0894
0.092
(0.087)
(0.060)
(0.045)
(0.041)
(0.036)
0.069
0.117
0.111
0.103
0.0654
(0.035)
(0.080)
(0.056)
(0.041)
(0.039)
0.062
0.0748
0.107
0.0776
0.0766
(0.031)
(0.088)
(0.066)
(0.053)
(0.043)
66
0.292

69
0.248

67
0.262

130
0.127

134
0.120

131
0.110

187
0.143

190
0.136

188
0.123

256
0.117

259
0.110

258
0.110

2663
0.136

2690
0.128

2703
0.130

Panel B: Correlation between Home Score and Parental Warmth Scale
Dependent Variable= Standardized Parental Warmth Scale
Age Range
Full HOME Score
HOME Cognitive Stimulation
Subscore
HOME Emotional Support
Subscore

OLS
Fixed Effect
One to Eight Months
One to Twelve Months One to Sixteen Months One to Twenty Months
All Ages
0.394
0.478
0.402
0.350
0.006
(0.257)
(0.186)
(0.152)
(0.121)
(0.0391)
0.521
0.469
0.465
0.453
0.0128
(0.221)
(0.169)
(0.145)
(0.116)
(0.026)
‐0.016
0.218
0.114
0.032
‐0.004
(0.204)
(0.155)
(0.117)
(0.089)
(0.035)

Observations
72
R‐squared
0.248
Robust standard errors in parentheses

72
0.294

72
0.201

140
0.148

140
0.149

140
0.099

200
0.146

200
0.168

200
0.102

274
0.122

274
0.162

274
0.079

3334
0.100

3334
0.104

3334
0.097

All regressions include controls for maternal characteristics (age, education, income, cognitive skills as measured by a reading test, and noncognitive skills as measured
by the Rosenberg Self‐Esteem Score and the Pearlin Self‐Efficacy Scale) and offspring characteristics (race, gender, birth order, and age in months). In the fixed‐effect
specification, we add a polynomial of fourth‐order in age as well as the interaction of age with marital status at birth, race of the child, and gender of the child.

0

0

.1

.2

.2

Density
.4

Density
.3

.6

.4

.5

.8

Figure 1: Histograms of 8 Month Bayley

−20

−10

0
10
Cross Sectional

20

−20

−10
0
10
Within Family Differences

20

Scores standardized mean 0, standard deviation 1
®

.5
.4
.3
Density
.2
.1
0

0

.1

.2

Density

.3

.4

.5

Figure 2: Histograms of 7 Year IQ

−5

0
Cross Sectional

5

−5

0
Within Family Differences

5

Scores standardized mean 0, standard deviation 1
®

Figure 3: Share in Preschool at Age 4
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
1963

1964

1965

1966

Full Sample

1967

1968

Sibling Subsample

1969

1970

Density
0

0

.2

.5

.4

Density

.6

1

.8

1

1.5

Figure 4: Histograms of Quality of Parenting

-10

-5

0
5
Cross Sectional

10

-10

-5
0
5
Within Family Differences

10

Fig 5A: Maximum & Minimum Birth Weight
by Family Size, NCPP
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Maximum

0
-0.2

2 children

3 children

4 children

Minimum

-0.4
-0.6
-0.8

Fig 5B: Maximum & Minimum Parental
Investment at 8 Months by Family Size,
NCPP
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

Maximum
2 children

3 children

4 children

Minimum

-0.4
-0.6

Fig 5C: Maximum & Minimum
IQ age 7 by Family Size, NCPP
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Maximum
Minimum

0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6

2 children

3 children

4 children

Figure 6A: Max and Min Birth Weight by
Fertility, CNLSY‐79
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Max BW

0
‐0.2

Two children

Three children

Four children

‐0.4

Five or more
children

Min BW

‐0.6
‐0.8
‐1

Figure 6B: Max and Min PPVT scores by
Fertility, CNLSY‐79
0.4
0.2
0
‐0.2

Two children

Three children

Four children

‐0.4

Five or more
children
Max PPVT

‐0.6

Min PPVT

‐0.8
‐1
‐1.2
‐1.4
‐1.6

Figure 6C: Birth Order, PPVT and Math
Scores within Family, CNLSY‐79
0
First Born
‐0.1

Second born

Third born

Fourth born Fifth born or
higher

‐0.2
‐0.3
‐0.4
‐0.5
‐0.6

PPVT
Math

