                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             HOW IS POWER SHARED IN AFRICA?

                                           Patrick Francois
                                              Ilia Rainer
                                           Francesco Trebbi

                                        Working Paper 18425
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18425


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




University of British Columbia, Department of Economics, patrick.francois@ubc.ca, George Mason
University, Department of Economics, irainer@gmu.edu; and University of British Columbia, Department
of Economics, and NBER, francesco.trebbi@ubc.ca, respectively. The authors would like to thank
Matilde Bombardini, Pedro Dal Bo, Raphael Frank, David Green, Thomas Lemieux, Vadim Marmer,
Paul Schrimpf, and seminar participants at SITE 2012 and UBC for useful comments and discussion.
Chad Kendall provided exceptional research assistance. We are grateful to the National Bureau of
Economic Research Africa Success Project and to the Initiative on Global Markets at Chicago Booth
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Patrick Francois, Ilia Rainer, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Is Power Shared In Africa?
Patrick Francois, Ilia Rainer, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 18425
September 2012
JEL No. H1,O38,O55

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper presents new evidence on the power sharing layout of national political elites in a panel
of African countries, most of them autocracies. We present a model of coalition formation across ethnic
groups and structurally estimate it employing data on the ethnicity of cabinet ministers since independence.
As opposed to the view of a single ethnic elite monolithically controlling power, we show that African
ruling coalitions are large and that political power is allocated proportionally to population shares
across ethnic groups. This holds true even restricting the analysis to the subsample of the most powerful
ministerial posts. We argue that the likelihood of revolutions from outsiders and the threat of coups
from insiders are major forces explaining such allocations. Further, over-representation of the ruling
ethnic group is quantitatively substantial, but not different from standard formateur premia in parliamentary
democracies. We explore theoretically how proportional allocation for the elites of each group may
still result in misallocations in the non-elite population.


Patrick Francois                                      Francesco Trebbi
Department of Economics                               University of British Columbia
University of British Columbia                        1873 East Mall
Room 997-1873 East Mall                               Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z1
Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6T 1Z1                        Canada
francois@interchange.ubc.ca                           and NBER
                                                      ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca
Ilia Rainer
Department of Economics, MSN 3G4
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030-4444
irainer@gmu.edu
1         Introduction

        This paper addresses the question of how political power is shared across ethnic groups in
African autocracies. Analyzing how ruling elites evolve, organize, and respond to particular
shocks is paramount in understanding the patterns of political, economic, and social devel-
opment of both established and establishing democracies. For autocratic or institutionally
weak countries, many of them in Africa, it is plausible that such understanding is even more
critical (Bueno de Mesquita, Smith, Siverson, and Morrow (2003), Acemoglu and Robinson
(2001b, 2005), Aghion, Alesina, and Trebbi (2004), Besley and Kudamatsu (2008), Wintrobe
(1990, 1998)).
        Scarcity and opacity of information about the inner workings of ruling autocratic elites
are pervasive. Notwithstanding the well-established theoretical importance of intra-elite
bargaining (Acemoglu and Robinson (2005), Bueno de Mesquita et al. (2003)), systematic
research beyond the occasional case study is rare1 . This is not surprising. Institutionally
weak countries usually display low (or null) democratic responsiveness and hence lack reliable
electoral or polling data2 . This makes it hard to precisely gauge the relative strength of
the various factions and political currents aﬃliated with diﬀerent groups. Tullock’s (1987)
considerations on the paucity of data employable in the study of the inner workings of
autocracy are, in large part, still valid.
        This paper presents new data on the ethnic composition of African political elites, specif-
ically focusing on the cabinet of ministers, helpful in furthering our understanding of the
dynamics of power sharing within institutionally weak political settings. Our choice of fo-
cusing on ethnic divisions and on the executive branch are both based on their relevance
    1
     Posner (2005) oﬀers an exception with regard to Zambian politics. Other recent studies relevant to the
analysis of the inner workings of autocracies include Geddes (2003) and Magaloni (2010), who investigate
the role of parties within autocracies, and Gandhi and Przeworski (2006), who consider how a legislature
can be employed as a power-sharing tool by the leader. For a discussion also see Gandhi (2008) and Haber,
(2006).
   2
     Posner and Young (2007) report that in the 1960s and 1970s the 46 sub-Saharan African countries
averaged 28 elections per decade, less than one election per country per decade, 36 in the 1980s, 65 in the
1990s, and 41 elections in the 2000-05 period.



                                                    1
within African politics and their proven importance for a vast range of socioeconomic out-
comes. First, the importance of ethnic cleavages for political and economic outcomes in
Africa cannot be understated3 . Second, it is well understood in the African comparative
politics literature that positions of political leadership reside with the executive branch,
usually the president and cabinet4 . Legislative bodies, on the other hand, have often been
relegated to lesser roles and to rubber-stamping decisions of the executive branch5 . Arriola
(2009) encapsulates the link between ethnic divisions and cabinet composition: “All African
leaders have used ministerial appointments to the cabinet as an instrument for managing
elite relations.”
    We begin by developing a model of allocation of patronage sources, i.e. the cabinet
seats, across various ethnic groups by the country’s leader. We then estimate the model
structurally. Our model, diﬀerently from the large literature following the classic Baron and
Farejohn (1989) legislative bargaining setting, revolves around nonlegislative incentives6 .
This makes sense given the focus on African polities. However, similarly to Baron and Fer-
ejohn, we maintain a purely noncooperative approach. We assume leaders wish to avoid
revolutions7 or coups, and enjoy the benefits of power. The leader decides the size of his rul-
ing coalition to avoid revolutions staged by groups left outside the government and allocates
cabinet posts in order to dissuade insiders from staging a palace coup. To a first approxima-
tion, one can think of the revolution threat as pinning down the size of the ruling coalition
    3
      The literature is too vast to be properly summarized here. Among the many, see Bates (1981), Berman
(1998), Bienen et al. (1995), and Easterly and Levine (1997), Posner (2004).
    4
      Africanists often oﬀer detailed analysis of cabinet ethnic compositions in their commentaries. See
Khapoya (1980) for the Moi transition in Kenya, Osaghae (1989) for Nigeria, Posner (2005) for Zambia.
Arriola (2009) considers cabinet expansion as a tool of patronage and shows cabinet expansion’s relevance
for leader’s survival in Africa.
    5
      See Barkan (2009, p.2).
    6
      The literature on bargaining over resource allocation in non-legislative settings is also vast. See Acemoglu,
Egorov, and Sonin (2008) for a model of coalition formation in autocracies that relies on self-enforcing
coalitions and the literature cited therein for additional examples. Our model shares with most of this
literature a non-cooperative approach, but diﬀers in its emphasis on the role of leaders, threats faced by the
ruling coalition, and payoﬀ structure for insiders and outsiders.
    7
      Throughout the paper we use the term “revolution” to indicate any type of conflict instance that pegs
insiders to the national government against excluded groups. Civil wars or paramilitary infighting are typical
examples.



                                                        2
(by excluding fewer groups the leader can make a revolution’s success less likely) and the
coup threat as pinning down the shares of patronage accruing to each group (by making an
elite member indiﬀerent between supporting the current leader and attempting to become
a leader himself). The empirical variation in size of the ruling coalition and post allocation
allows us to recover the structural parameters of the revolution and coup technologies for
each country, which in turn we employ in a set of new counterfactuals.
       Contrary to a view of African ethnic divisions as generating wide disproportionality
in access to power, African autocracies function through an unexpectedly high degree of
proportionality in the assignment of power positions, even top ministerial posts, across ethnic
groups. While the leader’s ethnic group receives a substantial premium in terms of cabinet
posts relative to its size (measured as the share of the population belonging to that group),
such premia are comparable to formateur advantages in parliamentary democracies. Rarely
are large ethnic minorities left out of government in Africa, and their size does matter in
predicting the share of posts they control, even when they do not coincide with the leader’s
ethnic group8 . We show how these findings are consistent with large overhanging coup
threats and large private gains from leadership. Large ruling coalitions (often more than
80 percent of the population are ethnically represented in the cabinet) also suggest looming
threats of revolutions for African leaders. We also formally reject alternative models not
relying on such mechanisms.
       We do not take these findings to imply that proportionality in government reflects equality
of political benefits trickling down to common members of all ethnic groups. African societies
are hugely unequal and usually deeply fragmented. Our findings imply that a certain fraction
of each ethnic group’s upper echelon is able to systematically gain access to political power
   8
    While these results are new, this observation has been occasionally made in the literature. Contrasting
precisely the degree of perceived ethnic favoritism for the Bemba group in Zambia and the ethnic composition
of Zambian cabinets, Posner (2005, p.127) reports “...the average proportions of cabinet ministers that are
Bemba by tribe are well below the percentages of Bemba tribespeople in the country as a whole, and the
proportion of Bemba-speakers in the cabinet is fairly close to this group’s share in the national population.
Part of the reason for this is that President Kaunda, whose cabinets comprise twelve of the seventeen in the
sample, took great care to balance his cabinet appointments across ethnic groups.”



                                                     3
and the benefits that follow. The level of proportionality in ethnic representation seems to
suggest that the support of critical members of a large set of ethnic groups is sought by
the leader. There is no guarantee, however, that such groups’ non-elite members receive
significant benefits stemming from this patronage, and they often do not. Padro-i-Miquel
(2007) explains theoretically how ethnic loyalties by followers may be cultivated at extremely
low cost by ethnic leaders in power. We also explore this theme theoretically.
       This last point highlights an important consideration. There is overwhelming empirical
evidence in support of the view of a negative eﬀect of ethnic divisions on economic and
political outcomes in Africa9 . The question is whether at the core of these political and
economic failures lays a conflict between ethnic groups in their quest for control, or it is the
result of internal struggles between elites and non-elites that arise within ethnic enclaves. Our
data show that almost all ethnic groups have access to a certain measure of political power
at the elite level. This finding provides indirect evidence that frictions within ethnic groups
may be playing a larger role than previously assessed vis-à-vis frictions between groups.
       Finally, by emphasizing the presence of non trivial intra-elite heterogeneity and redistri-
bution, our findings support fundamental assumptions made in the theory of the selectorate
(Bueno de Mesquita, et al. (2003)), the contestable political market hypothesis10 , and in
theories of autocratic ineﬃciency (Wittman (1995)).
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model of coalition
formation and ministerial allocations and Section 3 presents our econometric setup. Section 4
describes the data. Section 5 reports the main empirical evidence on the allocation of cabinet
posts at the group level. Section 6 presents our counterfactuals. Section 7 compares our
model to alternative modes of power sharing. Section 8 discusses some relevant theoretical
extensions and Section 9 presents our conclusions.
   9
    See Easterly and Levine (1997), Posner (2004), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2011).
  10
    Mulligan and Tsui, (2005) in an adaptation of the original idea in product markets by Baumol et al.
(1982).




                                                  4
2        Model

       Consider an infinite horizon, discrete time economy, with per period discount rate .
There are  ethnicities in the population. Denote the set of ethnicities N = {1  }.
Each ethnicity is comprised of two types of individuals: elites, denoted by , and non-elites,
denoted by . Ethnic group  has a corresponding elite size  and non-elite size  , with
 =  and  ∈ (0 1). The population of non-elites is of size  , so that Σ
                                                                              =1  =  .

Let N = {1   }. Without loss of generality we order ethnicities from largest to smallest
1  2    −1    Elites decide whether non-elites support a government or not.
Each elite decides support of  non-elite from its own ethnicity.
       At time 0 a leader from ethnic group  ∈ N is selected with probability proportional to
group size

                                                       exp( )
(1)                                       (N) =                  .
                                                    Σ
                                                     =1 exp( )

Let  ∈ N indicate the ethnic identity of the selected leader and O the set of subsets of N .
The leader chooses how to allocate leadership posts (i.e., cabinet positions or ministries),
which generate patronage to post holders, across the elites of the various ethnic groups.
Let us indicate by Ω the set of ethnic groups in the cabinet other than the leader’s group,
                                                    ¡      ¢
implying the country is ruled by an ethnic coalition Ω ∪  ∈ O. Elite members included in
the cabinet are supporters of the leader. This means that, in the event of a revolution against
the leader, the  non-elite controlled by each one of these ‘insiders’ necessarily supports the
leader against the revolutionaries.
       Let the per-member amount of patronage value the leader transfers to elite from group
 in his governing coalition be denoted  11 . The total value of all posts is normalized
to 1 per period, and these are infinitely divisible, so total patronage transferred to elite
  11
    This notation implicitly assumes elite from the same ethnicity receive an equal patronage allocation if
they are included in the government. This is for notational simplicity and not a restriction of the model. In
principle we allow leaders to oﬀer elites from the same ethnicity diﬀering allocations; an option that we shall
demonstrate is never optimally taken.


                                                      5
                                                                  ¡ ¢
, if all of ’s elite are in government is   ∈ [0 1]. Let  Ω denote the value of
being in the government coalition to an elite from ethnicity , conditional on the leader
being from ethnicity . Note that, by suppressing time subscripts, our notation imposes
stationarity in the definition of the value function  , as our focus will be on stationary
equilibria throughout. Importantly, the assumption of stationarity, a common restriction,
can be empirically assessed, a task we undertake in Section 4.
      Leaders are also able to split ethnic groups in their oﬀers of patronage and hence gov-
ernment inclusion, that is:
      Assumption 1: Leaders can split ethnic groups in their oﬀers of patronage. Specifically,
leaders can oﬀer patronage to a subset 0   of group  and exclude the remaining  − 0
from their governing coalition A leader cannot exclude elites from his own ethnicity.
      Ethnic ties bind leaders. Though leaders can pick and choose cabinet ministers from
across the ethnic spectrum, they cannot exclude the elite from their own ethnic group from
a share of the patronage that remains. Moreover, they must share this patronage equally
with their co-ethnic elites. We view the necessity of such sharing between leaders and elites
from their own ethnicity as a minimum cohesion requirement for an ethnic group. The leader
can split and break any group, but he is bound to defer to his own. Of course, their own
elite, like all other insiders, will also support the leader’s side in a revolution.
      Cabinet positions not allocated to other ethnicities remain with the leader’s ethnic group,
and, due to such non-exclusion are shared equally amongst  . Specifically, we indicate


(2)                                 ̄ = (1 − Σ∈Ω  0 ())  


where 0 () ≤  is the numer of elite from group  chosen by a leader of ethnicity  in his
optimal governing coalition.
      The leader also obtains a non-transferrable personal premium to holding oﬃce, denoted
by amount  .  may be interpreted as capturing the personalistic nature of autocratic rents.



                                                    6
Let ̄ (Ω) denote the value of being in the government coalition to an elite member from
ethnicity  conditional on the leader being from ethnicity  (and the member not being the
leader himself).
       Leaders lose power or are deposed for diﬀerent reasons. Leaders can lose power due to
events partially outside their control (e.g. they may die or a friendly superpower may change
its regional policy). We will refer to these events as ‘exogenous’ transitions. Alternatively,
leaders can be deposed by government insiders via a coup d’état or by outsiders via a rev-
olution; which are both events we consider endogenous to the model. In particular we will
search for an equilibrium in which a leader constructs a stable government by providing
patronage to elites from other ethnicities in order to head-oﬀ such endogenous challenges.12
Two factors guide the allocation of patronage by the leader: 1. The leader must bring in
enough insiders to ensure his government dissuades revolution attempts by any subset of
outsiders. 2. He must allocate enough patronage to insiders to ensure they will not stage a
coup against him.


2.1       Revolutions

       Revolutions are value reducing. They lower the patronage value of the machine of gov-
ernment, but can yield material improvements to revolutionaries if they succeed in deposing
the leader. The probability of revolution success depends on the relative sizes of government
supporters versus revolutionaries fighting against them. With  insiders supporting the
government and, for example,  =  −  outsiders fighting the revolution, the revolution-
                                       
aries succeed with probability        +
                                            .   A successful revolution deposes the current leader. A
new leader is then drawn according to the same process used at time 0, i.e., according to
(1), and this leader then chooses his optimal governing coalition. Losing a revolution leads
to no change in the status of the government. Revolutionary conflicts drive away investors,
  12
    As will be seen, coups and revolutions are extremely rare events, so that we focus on equilibrium coalitions
where leaders are optimally at a ‘corner’ where these do not occur endogenously, i.e., along the equilibrium
path. The parametric restrictions necessary for this are explored in greater detail in the appendix.



                                                       7
lower economic activity, and reduce government coﬀers independently of their final outcome.
Consequently, the total value of all posts — normalized to 1 already — is permanently reduced
to the amount   1 after a revolution.
   Let 0 denote the value function for an elite of ethnicity  who is excluded from the
current government’s stream of patronage rents, and  denote the net present value
of elite  in the transition state; i.e., before a new leader has been chosen according to (1).
A group of potential elite revolutionaries who are excluded from the patronage benefits of
the current government has incentive to incite the non-elite they control to revolt and cause
a civil war if this is value increasing for them. Specifically an excluded elite of ethnicity 
has incentive to instigate a revolution if and only if:

                                            µ           ¶
                                      
                                         + 1−           0 ≥ 0 
                       +                    + 

   Leaders allocate patronage to insiders to buy their loyalty and hence reduce the impetus
for outsiders to foment revolution. In deciding on whether to start a revolution, elites act
non-cooperatively using Nash conjectures. That is, when an elite from an outsider group
triggers a revolution, he uses Nash conjectures to determine the number of other elites that
will join in (and hence the total revolutionary force and the probability of success) in the
ensuing civil war. Under these conjectures, once a revolution is started and all valuations
are reduced 1 −  proportionately, it follows immediately that all outsiders will also have
incentive to join the revolution. If the revolution succeeds, outsiders receive 
which strictly exceeds 0 when the leader’s group wins. In short, outsiders can do no worse
than suﬀering exclusion from the government, their current fate, by joining a revolution once
already started.
   Thus, for a revolution to not ensue, necessarily, each outsider must find it not worthwhile




                                               8
to trigger a revolution. Since  +  ≡  , it is necessary that:

                                       µ  µ      ¶ ¶
                                  
(3)                                ≤ 1− 1−                 Ω 
                                                   0  ∀ ∈
                                             


It is immediate to see that this condition is easier to satisfy the greater is the size of the
ruling coalition13 .
      We assume that the leader suﬀers  ≤ 0 after a revolution attempt. We shall assume
throughout that  is large enough to always make it optimal for leaders to want to dissuade
revolutions. This assumption aims at capturing the extremely high cost of revolution for the
rulers, in a fashion similar to Acemoglu and Robinson (2001, 2005) and will make it optimal
for a leader to completely avoid revolutions.
      We finally allow a similar unilateral deviation by a group of insiders from a single ethnic
elite to trigger a revolution from within the governing coalition. A group of insiders from
a single ethnicity can choose to leave the cabinet and mount a revolution with their own
non-elite against the government. Again, the group make their decisicion under Nash con-
jectures, with the group deviating from the ruling government unilaterally. However, as in
all revolutions, they know that in the revolution sub-game triggered by their deviation they
will be joined by all excluded outsiders against the leader. For a leader to ensure no such
insider deviations from any of the included ethnicities, , yields an additional condition:

                                     µ           ¶
                  +         +             ¡ ¢
(4)                              + 1−           0 ≤  Ω  ∀ ∈ Ω 
                                          

                                                              ¡ ¢
That is, a group that is currently an insider and receiving  Ω (the right hand side of the
expression) does not want to join a revolution with the remaining outsiders that succeeds
                      +
with probability      and precipitates a transition of leader yielding  (the left
                       
                                                                         ³             ´
                                                                                 +
hand side of the expression). If the revolution fails, with probability 1 −            , the
  13
     Provided that  0  1 and this ratio is unaﬀected by the size of the ruling coalition, which
we shall demonstrate subsequently.


                                                       9
previously insider group is banished and receives 0 .
       We can now define the leader’s utility from coalition Ω:


                                 (Ω) =  ∗ <(Ω)

                                              + (Ω) ∗ (1 − <(Ω))


and the revolution indicator is defined as:
                                     ⎧
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎨ 0 if both (3) and (4) hold,
(5)                           <(Ω) =
                                     ⎪
                                     ⎩         1 otherwise.


<(Ω) takes value 1 if either the opposition is large enough to gain in expectation from
a revolution or there exists at least one group from within that would want to trigger a
revolution by joining with the outsiders. Let  (Ω) denote the value of being the leader,
if from ethnicity  and absent revolutions on the equilibrium path.14 The optimal coalition
selected by a leader with ethnic aﬃliation  is then:


(6)                                    Ω = arg max { (Ω)} .
                                                 (Ω∪)∈O



In the appendix we derive a suﬃcient condition on the size of  so that leaders do not
risk revolutions along the equilibrium path. Under this condition, we will characterize an
equilibrium that admits a unique optimal coalition for leaders from any ethnicity . Moreover,
we will also show this equilibrium is unique.
  14
    The coalition Ω will deterministically trigger a revolution or not. If the choice of Ω does not trigger a
revolution in one period, it never will.




                                                     10
2.2       Transitions and Coups

2.2.1      Exogenous Transitions

       Suppose that with probability  something exogenous to the model happens to the leader,
meaning that he cannot lead any more. We can think of any one of a number of events
happening, including a negative health shock or an arrest mandate from the International
Criminal Court. This will also lead to a ‘transition’ state, with value function  as
defined previously. As at time 0, not all ethnicities are necessarily equal in such a transition
state as the probability having the next leader is given by  (N). The value of being in the
transition state is

                                  ¡       ¢        X
                                                   
                                                                   £ ¡      ¢ ¡ ¢ ¡       ¡      ¢¢ ¤
(7)        =  (N) ̄ Ω 
                                              +               (N)   ∈ Ω  Ω + 1 −   ∈ Ω 0 ,
                                                  =16=



where () is the indicator function denoting a member of  being in leader ’s optimal
coalition.15 Notice that we ignore here the small probability event that individual  actually
becomes the leader after a transition. It can be included without eﬀect. The interpretation
of equation (7) is that after an exogenous shock terminating the current leader,  can either
become a member of the ruling coalition of a co-ethnic of his, with probability  (N)  or
                                           ¡ ¢
with probability  (N) he obtains value  Ω under leader of ethnicity .


2.2.2      Coups

       Coups do not destroy patronage value, and the success chance of a coup is independent
of the size of the group of insiders (i.e. anyone can have the opportunity of slipping cyanide
in the leader’s cup). Assume — in the spirit of Baron and Ferejohn’s (1989) proposer power —
that each period one member of the ruling coalition has the opportunity to attempt a coup
and the coup is costless. If the coup is attempted, it succeeds with probability , and the
  15
     We slightly abuse notation by not considering that individuals of group  could potentially suﬀer a
diﬀerent destiny in case the group were split. We precisely characterize this when we explicitly represent
 below.


                                                                11
coup leader becomes the new leader. If challenger  loses, he suﬀers permanent exclusion
from this specific leader’s patronage allocation 0 . That is:

                                        ¡                           ¢
                             0 = 0 +  (1 − ) 0 +  .


      Leaders transfer suﬃcient patronage to the elite they include from group  to ensure that
these included elite will not exercise a coup opportunity. Since the returns from a coup are
the gains from future leadership, a successful coup leader of ethnicity  also knows he must
pay an  to each included elite  ∈ Ω , were he to win power and become the next leader.
Here, we impose sub-game perfection. This ensures that the conjectured alternative leader
is also computing an optimal set of patronage transfers to his optimally chosen coalition.
In computing his optimal  this coup leader also must dissuade his own coalition members
from mounting coups against him, and so on. This leads to a recursive problem, which is
relatively simple because of our focus on stationary outcomes. The current leader’s optimal
transfers  will be the same as the optimal transfers that a coup leader would also make to
an elite member of group  if he were to become leader and try to avoid coups. Hence, to
ensure no coups arise, for each insider of ethnicity , necessarily:

                                ¡          ¡ ¢               ¢
(8)                       +  (1 − )  Ω +  ≥
                           ¡          ¡                ¡ ¢                 ¢¢
                          ̄ +  +  (1 − )  Ω + 
                                  ¡      ¡                          ¢¢
                         + (1 − ) 0 +  (1 − ) 0 +  .


The left hand side of (8) is straightforward. As part of the ruling government an elite stays
in power as before with probability 1 − . With probability  a transition occurs and then
its fate is governed by equation (7). The first term on the right hand side of (8) indicates
the value of a successful coup. The coup succeeds with probability , paying the new leader
a flow value ̄ +  plus the continuation value of being in the leadership position next
period, as long as nothing unforeseen realizes, which may happen with probability . If an 

                                                12
shock hits, the newly minted leader moves into the transition state too. The second term on
the right hand side of (8) indicates the value of an unsuccessful coup. The coup fails with
probability 1 − . In that case the coup plotter gets zero forever conditional on the same
leader staying in power. He will likely be in jail or dead (if elites are dead, then this must
be a dynastic valuation). However, the unsuccessful coup instigator may still get lucky, as
the old leader may turn over with  probability, hence moving into the transition state. In
order to minimize payments to coalition members, the leader will make sure (8) binds. (8)
simplifies to:

                                         ¡ ¢
(9)                      +  (1 − )  Ω
                          ¡            ¡              ¡ ¢¢¢
                      =  ̄ +  +  (1 − )  Ω   + (1 − )  (1 − ) 0 .

                                                                            ¡ ¢
To see the form of this expression we need to explicitly derive the terms  Ω and
 (Ω ):
                                 ¡ ¢         ¡          ¡ ¢                ¢
                                Ω =  +  (1 − )  Ω +  

and
                              ¡ ¢              ¡                ¡ ¢                ¢
                       Ω = ̄ +  +  (1 − )  Ω +  .

                                                  ¡ ¢                          +
By exploiting stationarity, we can be explicit:  Ω =                           1−(1−)
                                                                                                 ,    (Ω ) =
̄ + +                 
       1−(1−)
                       ,   and 0 =     1−(1−)
                                                      .   Substituting these three expressions into equation
(9) yields the binding (and hence optimal) patronage allocation for group :


(10)                                                 =  ( +  ) 


where  is that level of per-person patronage that a leader from ethnicity  6=  must grant
to the elite of group  to just dissuade each member of  0  elite from mounting a coup if the
opportunity arises, and  was defined in (2). Notice that this amount depends upon the
member of  0  optimally chosen coalition, Ω  to be determined in the next section, but is


                                                             13
independent of the leader’s ethnicity . Any leader wanting to enlist an elite member from
group  needs to pay him at least  , or risk a coup from a non- ethnicity member of his
cabinet. Additionally, the leader must have suﬃcient residual remaining to share with his
own co-ethnics, so that none of them pursues a coup against him. Specifically, it must be
the case that  ≤ ̄ where  is computed using (10).


2.3     The optimal coalition

   Equation (6) defines the optimal coalition Ω for a leader from group  In this section we
demonstrate the existence and uniqueness of such an optimal coalition for each ethnicity.


2.3.1    Optimal Size

                                               
   From equation (3), substituting for 0 =     1−(1−)
                                                                and rearranging, we have:

                                              (1 − )
                                       ≤              .
                                               [1 − ]

This implies that there exists a maximal number of individuals excluded from the government
such that these outsiders are just indiﬀerent to undertaking a revolution, that is  =
(1−)
 [1−]
        .   Define ∗ as the minimal size of the forces mustered by the governing coalition,
i.e.  +  , such that a revolution will not be triggered:

                                            (1 − )
                                  ∗ ≡  −            
                                             [1 − ]
                                         µ                ¶
                                                (1 − )
                                     =  1−                 
                                                 [1 − ]

∗ is the smallest number of individuals supporting the government such that the remaining
 − ∗ do not find it worthwhile to undertake a revolution. Note that ∗ is independent of
the leader’s ethnicity. Also let ∗ ≡ ∗ . ∗ is the corresponding smallest number of elite (in
control of ∗ non-elite) such that with these ∗ loyal to the government, the remaining elite


                                               14
will not find it worthwhile to mount a revolution.
       There are many diﬀerent combinations of ethnic elites that could be combined to ensure
at least ∗ government supporters. For what follows it proves useful to define notation for
the set of groups required to sum up to ∗ if larger groups are included in that set ahead of
smaller ones. To do this, use the ordering of groups by size to define  ∗ as:

                                ∗ −1                              ∗
                               X                     (1 − ) X
(11)                                       1 −                   .
                                =1
                                                      [1 − ]   =1


With all ethnicities up to and including the  ∗ largest included in a leader’s governing group,
the remaining ethnicities would not find it worthwhile to mount a revolution.16
       As stated earlier, we shall look for optimal leadership coalitions suﬃciently large to
dissuade revolution attempts. Under this assumption, the lowest cost means for a leader to
construct his governing coalition is to do so by including the smallest number of elite, ∗ .
Since ethnic groups can be split in oﬀers of patronage, it is always possible for a leader to
exactly meet the constraint ∗ .


2.3.2      Optimal Composition

       We proceed by noting that every leader faces a similar problem. That is, how to ensure
the loyalty of at least ∗ elite, thus dissuading revolution attempts, in the cheapest way
possible. Since he cannot exclude his own co-ethnic elite, these  individuals for a leader
of ethnicity , are already on board. The remaining ∗ −  have their loyalty bought by
patronage, and equation (10) tells us how much has to be paid in patronage for an elite of
each ethnicity in order to dissuade them from attempting a coup. Clearly, in any equilibrium,
these patronage allocations will bind. Paying more to an elite members brings with it no
  16
    Note that in order to rule out revolutions we have only considered the constraint coming from dissuading
outsiders, i.e., equation (3). However since the constraint arising from dissuading revolutions triggered by
defecting insiders, equation (4) is not necessarily weaker, and generally yields a diﬀerent optimal size, it
cannot be ignored. We do so here for brevity of exposition. The insider constraint is fully considered in the
algorithm implementing our structural estimation, and turns out to be always weaker than the outsider one.
We do not waste space considering its implications further.



                                                      15
greater support in the event of a revolution, and is more than suﬃcient to ensure he will not
mount a coup.
   Since each leader will choose the ‘cheapest’ elite for whom loyalty can be assured, and
since the patronage allocations required to ensure no coups are independent of the identity of
the leader, these cheapest co-governing elite will be common across all leaders, unless there
are a large number of elite receiving the same patronage transfers in an equilibrium. The
following lemma shows that this cannot be the case, and the core set of included elite is in
fact common across leaders.

Lemma 1. In any equilibrium in which there are no coups, there exists a ‘core’ set of
governing elite which every leader includes in their governing coalition. If they are not
from the leader’s own group, the leader transfers patronage according to (10). That is, ∃
C ⊆ N :  ∈ Ω ∀  ∈ C and ∀ 

   The core group are the ethnicities who are ‘cheapest’ to buy loyalty from. Since the
transfers required to ensure loyalty are independent of the leader’s identity in any equilibrium,
it then follows that leaders of all ethnicities will, in general, fill their government with the
same ‘core’ set of ethnicities. An implication of this lemma is that, with a single exception,
ethnic elites will be included en masse in each leader’s governing coalition. That is, if a
member of elite  is in this cheapest set of size ∗ −  from leader , then all other members
of elite  will also be in this cheapest set. A leader will, at most, split the elite of a single
ethnic group, and that being the ethnic group that is the most expensive (per elite) of those
he chooses to include. Thus elite from this ‘marginal’ (i.e., 0  most expensive included)
group will be the only ones not included wholly and hence denoted by a prime (0 ). The
notation 0 () without a subscript identifying the ethnicity of the group, thus refers to the
number from the marginal group included by  and the payments to 0  marginal group can
similarly be denoted 0 ()
   The allocations determined in (10) thus describe a system of equations that determine a
set of equilibrium ‘prices’. The core governing elite are paid these prices whenever a leader

                                               16
is not from their own group. The non-core governing elite may be paid this price if they are
included in the government of a particular leader, and if not, then equation (10) determines
a shadow price that would have to be paid by the leader if he did want to include them and
ensure their loyalty.
   We now show that it is possible to order groups by the patronage required to ensure
ethnic elites will not mount coups.

Lemma 2. Larger groups in the core receive less patronage per member than smaller ones:
for        ∀  ∈ C.

Proof. In appendix.

   Lemma 2 demonstrates that larger groups in the core group of governing elite are paid
less, per-elite member, than smaller ones. Intuitively, members of larger groups are ‘cheaper’
to buy oﬀ than members of smaller ones because members of larger groups have less to gain
from mounting a coup. The leader of a larger group must share the residual leadership spoils
(i.e., the patronage left after suﬃciently many other groups have been bought oﬀ to dissuade
a revolution) amongst more co-ethnic elite. Consequently, smaller patronage transfers are
suﬃcient to dissuade elites from larger groups from mounting coups.
   Since the payments to an elite from  are given by  =  ( +  ). These  depend
only on the composition of  0  optimal leadership group, Ω and the payments  makes to
 ∈ Ω   . But neither Ω nor  depend on whether any leader  is including group  in his
optimal coalition. The payments required to ensure elites of any group  do not undertake
a coup are independent of whether group  is in the core group of elite. Moreover, these
‘incentive compatible’ payments are independent of whether the ethnic group would be split
by a leader or not because, as a leader, he must govern with his whole ethnic group. This
implies that equation (10) can be used to compute minimal payments required for incentive
compatibility of each ethnicity independently of whether they are in the conjectured core
group, and independently of whether the ethnic elites are included as a whole by any leader.


                                             17
These  conditions are:


                                      1 =  (1 +  )
                                               ..
                                                .

                                       =  ( +  )
                                               ..
                                                .

(12)                                   =  ( +  ) 


     We now characterize the solution to this system:

Proposition 1. In any equilibrium without coups, i.e. with patronage transfers satisfying
conditions (10), if a leader includes any elite of ethnicity  in his governing coaltion, then
all elite of ethnicity    are included as well.

     The proposition implies that in any equilibrium satisfying the no coup condition (10),
leaders construct governing coalitions to comprise elites from larger ethnicities ahead of
smaller ones. Since a leader of any ethnicity  finds it optimal to satisfy the same no coup
condition for any admitted ethnic group, given by  satisfying (10) and they first fill their
government with elites from larger ethnicities, and since each one has to buy oﬀ ∗ −  elite
from other ethnicities we have:

Lemma 3. The core group of ethnicities is C ≡ {1   ∗ − 2} included whole in the optimal
governing coalition of any leader  ∈ N 

Proof. In appendix.
                                                         P ∗ −2
     It now remains to characterize the remaining ∗ −     =2      −  ethnicities for each leader
.




                                                18
Proposition 2. The optimal governing coalition for leader of ethnicity , Ω is as follows:
                                ⎧
                                ⎪
                                ⎪  1 6=   ∗ −1  0 ∗ for  ≤  ∗ − 1
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎨
                        ∈ Ω ≡   1  ∗ −2  0∗−1 ()         for  ∈ [ ∗   + ]
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎩ 1  ∗ −1  0 ∗ ()         for    +
                                                   


                                  P ∗ −1                     P∗
where  +   if ∃ + : ∗  =1           +  + and ∗  =1−1  +  + +1  otherwise  + = ;
                         P∗                                      P ∗ −2
and where 0 ∗ = ∗ − =1−1  of group  ∗ , 0∗−1 () = ∗ − =1     −  of group  ∗ − 1, and
                P∗
0 ∗ () = ∗ − =1−1  −  of group  ∗ .

Proof. In appendix.

   Intuitively, all leaders agree on the composition of their core coalition of members, but
sometimes diﬀer in how they choose to round oﬀ the remainder of their cabinet. Diﬀerences
stem from the size of their own ethnic group. A leader from a small group will generally
need to choose a larger split than a leader from a large group since the core members added
to his own co-ethnics sum to a smaller number, leaving him to include more insiders in order
to make his coalition sum up to ∗ . The proposition defines the optimal coalition, Ω , for
any  as defined in (6).
   The nature of payments accruing under optimal coalitions also has the following general
features:

Proposition 3. 1. Larger ethnicities receive more total patronage than smaller ones. That
is, for          . 2. The leadership premium accruing to the elite of a leader’s
own ethnic group, if in the core, is independent of that group’s size.

Proof. In appendix.

   Point 1 of the proposition and Lemma 1 jointly imply that patronage increases with
group size, but less than proportionately.
   We have so far described features of the optimal payments and optimal coalitions that
necessarily must hold in any equilibrium satisfying stationarity, no coups, and no revolutions.

                                                       19
We now show that, if the patronage value of government is suﬃciently high, an equilibrium
with these features exists, and moreover generates a unique patronage transfer.

Proposition 4. Provided the patronage value of government is suﬃciently high, the patron-
age transfers just suﬃcient to dissuade members of each ethnic elite from mounting a coup;
i.e.  for  ∈ [1 ∗ − 1] are:

                                       h                                           i
                                       1 − ∗ 0∗ −           
                                                                    Σ∗ −1 
                                                                1− =1                    
                              =                                                    +        
                                                    1 + (∗ − 2)                          1−

where
            ⎛                             0∗ −1
                                                      ⎞−1
                   0∗    2 (∗ − 2 +   ∗ −1
                                                  )
∗ 0∗ = ⎝1 −                                       ⎠     ∗
                   ∗      1 + (∗ − 2)
              ⎛⎛                                     h                         i                            ⎞            ⎞
                                      0∗ −1        1−     
                                                                Σ∗ −1 
                                                            1− =1                   ¡ ∗ −2           ¢ 0
             ⎝⎝1 − (∗ − 2 +                   )                                  −      Σ=1  + 0∗ −1 ⎠ ∗ + 0∗  ⎠ 
                                      ∗ −1           1 + (∗ − 2)                 1−                      ∗


and
                                                Ã                ∗ −2
                                                                                                  !
                                                                 X
                              0∗ =                1−−                   − ∗ −1 
                                                                  =1
                                                Ã                ∗ −2
                                                                                              !
                                                                 X
                            0∗ −1 =               1−−                   − ∗          
                                                                     =1


   These leaders’ coalitions, and supporting transfers are the unique sub-game perfect sta-
tionary equilibrium of the model in which there are no endogenous coups or revolutions.

Proof. In appendix.

   With the optimal coalitions now defined, we can explicitly specify the value function
 defined in section 2.2. Recall that this value function depends on the probability
of an elite in  being selected into a governing coalition by a new leader which we can, using
Proposition 2, now define.

                                                                20
   Specifically, from equation (7) we have

                               ¡ ¢ X
                                    
                                            £ ¡      ¢ ¡ ¢ ¡       ¡      ¢¢ ¤
       =  (N) ̄ Ω +    (N)   ∈ Ω  Ω + 1 −   ∈ Ω 0 .
                                          =16=


This value varies depending on whether an ethnicity is in the core group of larger ethnicities
(and thus always included in leader’s optimal coalitions), or a smaller group (whose inclusion
in government only arises when one of their own is the leader), or one of the groups  ∗ and
 ∗ − 1 (whose inclusion in government depends on the size of the particular leader’s ethnicity
at the time). Specifically, from Proposition 2 it follows that:
For    ∗ − 1 :
                                                   ¡ ¢                  ¡ ¢
                           =  (N) ̄ Ω + (1 −  (N))  Ω 

For  =  ∗ − 1 :

                                                 ¡ ∗ ¢              X
                                                                    
                                                                                                  ¡ ¢
           
             ∗ −1          =  ∗ −1 (N) ̄ ∗ −1 Ω −1 +                            (N)  ∗ −1 Ω +
                                                               =16=[ ∗  + ]
                                 
                                 X
                                   +        µ                          µ                ¶        ¶
                                              0 ∗ −1 ()        ¡ ¢     0 ∗ −1 ()     0
                                        (N)               ∗ −1 Ω + 1 −                 ∗ −1 .
                                 = ∗
                                                   ∗ −1                       ∗ −1



For  =  ∗ :

                                                  ∗ −1        µ 0                  µ          ¶ ¶
                                     ¡  ∗ ¢ X                 ∗       ¡ ¢          0 ∗
     
       ∗             =  ∗ (N) ̄ ∗ Ω +               (N)        ∗ Ω + 1 −                0∗ +
                                                  =1
                                                                ∗                       ∗


                       X            µ                       µ                ¶     ¶    +
                                                                                         −1
                                                                                         X
                                       0 ∗ ()     ¡ ¢           0 ∗ ()     0
                              (N)               ∗ Ω + 1 −                    ∗ +           (N) 0∗ .
                           +
                                           ∗                          ∗            = ∗ +1
                          =


For    ∗ :
                                                         ¡ ¢
                                 =  (N) ̄ Ω + (1 −  (N)) 0 .

   The characterization of the uniquely optimal coalition for each leader, and of the patron-
age shares, are both features extremely valuable to the structural estimation of the model,


                                                        21
to which we proceed below.



3      Econometric Specification and Estimation

    To operationalize the solution in Proposition 4 additional assumptions are necessary. We
assume that the allocated shares of patronage are only partially observable due to a group-
specific error   . We imperfectly observe {  }∈Ω , the vector of the shares of patronage
allocated to ethnic groups in the ruling coalition (and consequently we also imperfectly
observe the leader group’s share 1 − Σ∈Ω   ). Every player in the game observes such
                                                                        Ω and  6=  we
shares exactly, but not us (the econometrician). For excluded groups  ∈
also assume the possibility of error to occur. For instance, consider the case of erroneously
assigning a minister to an ethnic group that is actually excluded from the ruling coalition.
    At time , let us indicate ̂ =  if  ∈ Ω and ̂ = 0 if  ∈
                                                                      Ω and  6= . Note that
the time dimension in ̂ arises from the identity of the leader  shifting over time due to
transitions. We define the latent variable ∗ = ̂ 0 +   and specify:

                                          ⎧
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎨  ∗ if  ∗ ≥ 0
                                                  
(13)                                 =
                                          ⎪
                                          ⎩ 0 if ∗  0


where  indicates the realized cabinet post shares to group  ∈ N , hence  ∈ [0 1] with
allocation vector X = {1   }. Note that (13) ignores right-censoring for ∗ ≥ 1, as
 = 1 never occurs in the data.
    The error term  is assumed mean zero and identically distributed across time and ethnic
groups. The distribution of  with density function () and cumulative function () is lim-
ited to a bounded support [−1 1] and  ∼  (−1 1  ) with identical shape parameters
, a particularly suited distribution function17 .
    As noted in Adachi and Watanabe (2007), the condition Σ∈N  = 1 can induce  to be
  17
     For a discussion see Merlo (1997), Diermeier, Eraslan, and Merlo (2003), and Adachi and Watanabe
(2007).


                                                 22
not independently distributed across groups. Generally, independence of the vector { }∈N
is preserved since Σ∈N  = 1 6= Σ∈N ∗ due to censoring, but not for all realizations of the
random shock vector {  }∈N . To see this, notice that if all the observations happen to be
uncensored, then Σ∈N  = Σ∈N ∗ = 1, implying that Σ   = 0, which would give to the
vector {  }∈N a correlation of −1. In this instance we would only have  − 1 independent
draws of  but  equations. A solution to this problem is to systematically employ only
 − 1 independent equations for each observed cabinet. Conservatively we always exclude
the smallest group’s share equation from estimation.
    Absent any information on , the model can still be estimated and one is able to identify
the product   (but not  and  separately). We follow this approach, set in the estimation
 = 1, and rescale  when we discuss our results18 . We also calibrate  = 95.
    Given the vector of model parameters  = (     ), conditional on the vector of
exogenous characteristics Z = (N  ) and leader’s identity , coalition Ω can be computed
by the econometrician. This implies that we can partition the set of ethnic groups in a
country in four groups for given vector X : the set of predicted coalition members that
                           ¡                 ¢
receive cabinet seats 1 =  ∈ Ω ∧   0 ; the set of predicted coalition members that
                                    ¡                 ¢
do not receive cabinet seats 2 =  ∈ Ω ∧  = 0 ; the set of outsider groups that are
                         ¡                 ¢
misallocated posts 3 =  ∈  Ω ∧   0 ; the set of outsider groups that receive no post
      ¡                ¢
4 =  ∈  Ω ∧  = 0 . We call a partition of N \   = {1  2  3  4 } a regime. Given
Z and , the likelihood contribution of the observed cabinet allocation is X in regime  is

                                      Y
                                      
                  L (X |Z; ) =          ( − ̂  )(∈1 3 ) (−̂  )(∈2 4 ) ,
                                      6=



where () is the indicator function. Notice that this likelihood contribution is similar in spirit
  18
     Although systematic studies of African elites are rare, survey evidence in Kotzé and Steyn (2003) in-
dicates  to be possibly approximated by population shares of individuals with tertiary education in the
country. Any bias introduced by employing tertiary education shares as proxies for  can be, in theory,
assessed by comparing estimates of the other parameters of interest relative to our baseline which operates
without any assumption on the size of . For space limitations we do not explore this avenue here.




                                                         23
to a type I Tobit model and the estimator shares its consistency and asymptotic eﬃciency
properties.
    Define for time period  an indicator function for  () taking value 1 if observed alloca-
tion X and optimal coalition Ω fall in regime  and 0 otherwise. Define a leadership spell as
the period a country is ruled by a specific leader  of ethnicity  starting to rule at year  and
ending at  . Define for each country the sequence Y = {1  1  1 ;      ; ;      }.
Given Z and the sequence of coalitions observed in a country {X } the sample likelihood
function under a leadership  with a leadership spell of duration  is

                        ³                   ´ Y
                                                  Y
                              
                       L {X } = |Z ;  =      [L (X |Z ; )] () .
                                                     =   



The likelihood function for each country in our sample is

            ³                   ´ Y                        h ³                   ´i
                                                   −          
           L Y {X } =1 |Z;  =    (N) (1 − )        L {X } = |Z ;  .
                                        =1



In principle, each country in our sample can be employed to estimate a vector (     )
independently from other countries. However, the identification of the parameters ( )
relies on variations of leaders within countries, which are rare in some political systems (e.g.
Kenya, Cameroon, etc.). The maximum likelihood estimation we employ will therefore allow
for country-specific coup, revolution, and measurement parameters (   ), but employ
the full sample of countries to estimate a single vector ( ). The identification of the model
is further assessed through several rounds of Montecarlo simulations. For given parameter
values, we made sure the estimation based on the simulated data converged on the given
structural values.
    Given the parsimony of our model, the likelihood function depends on a relatively small
number of parameters. This allows for a fairly extensive search for global optima over the
parametric space. In particular, we first employ a genetic algorithm (GA) global optimizer



                                                     24
with a large initial population of 10 000 values and then employ a simplex search method
using the GA values as initial values for the local optimizer. This approach combines the
global properties of the GA optimizer with the proven theoretical convergence properties of
the simplex method. Repeating the optimization procedure consistently delivers identical
global optima.



4     Data and Descriptive Statistics

    In order to operationalize the allocation of patronage shares we rely on data on the eth-
nicity of each cabinet member for our sample of fifteen African countries at yearly frequency
from independence to 2004. The full data description and the construction of ethnicity and
ministerial data, as long as evidence in support of the importance of this executive branch
data, is available in Rainer and Trebbi (2011). Here we will illustrate briefly the process of
data collection for each country. We devised a protocol involving four stages.
    First, we recorded the names and positions of all the members of government that appear
in the annual publications of Africa South of the Sahara or The Europa World Year Book
between 1960 and 2004. Although their oﬃcial titles vary, for simplicity we refer to all the
cabinet members as “ministers” in what follows.
    Second, for each minister on our list, we searched the World Biographical Information
System (WBIS) database for explicit information on his/her ethnicity. Whenever we could
not find explicit information on the minister’s ethnicity, we recorded his or her place of birth
and any additional information that could shed light on his/her ethnic or regional origin (e.g.,
the cities or regions in which he or she was politically active, ethnic or regional organizations
he/she was a member of, languages spoken, ethnic groups he/she wrote about, etc.).
    Third, for each minister whose ethnicity was not found in the WBIS database, we con-
ducted an online search in Google.com, Google books, and Google Scholar. Again, we pri-
marily looked for explicit information on the minister’s ethnicity, but also collected data on



                                               25
his/her place of birth and other information that may indicate ethnic aﬃliation. In addition
to the online searching, we sometimes also employed country-specific library materials, local
experts (mostly former African politicians and journalists with political expertise), and the
LexisNexis online database as alternative data sources.
       Fourth, we created a complete list of the country’s ethnic groups based on ethnic cat-
egories listed by Alesina, et al. (2003) and Fearon (2003), and attempted to assign every
minister to one of these groups using the data collected in the second and third stages. When
our sources explicitly mentioned the minister’s ethnicity, we simply matched that ethnicity
to one of the ethnic groups on our list. Even when the explicit information on the minister’s
ethnicity was missing, we could often assign the minister to an ethnic group based on his or
her place of birth or other available information. Whenever we lacked suﬃcient evidence to
determine the minister’s ethnic group after this procedure, we coded it as “missing”. The
exact ethnic mappings are available in Rainer and Trebbi (2011).
       This paper employs completed data since independence from colonization on Benin,
Cameroon, Cote d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia,
Nigeria, Republic of Congo, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Togo, Kenya, and Uganda. In these
countries we were able to identify the ethnic group of more than 90 percent of the ministers
between 1960 and 2004. Our cross-sectional sample size exceeds that of most studies in
government coalition bargaining for parliamentary democracies.19
       Table 1 presents the basic summary statistics by country for our sample, while Table 2
presents summary statistics further disaggregated at the ethnic group level.


4.1       Stylized Facts

       An informative descriptive statistic is the share of the population not represented in
the cabinet for our African sample. Figure 1 reports the share of the population belonging
to ethnic groups for which there is no minister of that ethnicity in government that year.
  19
    See for instance Diermeier,Eraslan, and Merlo (2003), Ansolabehere, Snyder, Strauss, and Ting (2005)
and Snyder, Ting and Ansolabehere (2005).

                                                  26
Table 3 reports country averages. African ruling coalitions are often in the 80 percent range.
Just as comparison, in parliamentary democracies typically only 50 percent of the voters
find their party represented in the cabinet due to simple majoritarian incentives (arguably
not the relevant dimension for African autocracies). Given no ethnic group in our sample
represents more than 39 percent of the population, and in no country in our sample does
any leader’s group represent more than 30 percent of the population, Figure 1 implies that
at least some members of non-leader ethnic groups are always brought in the cabinet.
   To further illustrate this feature, Table 4 reports a reduced-form specification with 
indicating a specific country,  the ethnic group, and  the year of the likelihood of inclusion
in a coalition:
                                                     
                                = 
                                       1       +            
                                                   +   +  
                                           

and with  indicator for ethnicity  at time  belonging to the cabinet. In a Probit
specification in Column (1), the marginal eﬀect on the ethnic group share of the population,

 1 , is positive and statistically significant. An extra 1 percent increase in the share of the

population of a group increases its likelihood of inclusion by 66%. This underlines a strong
relationship between size and inclusion in government. It is easy to see why. 945% of all
group-year observations representing 10% of the population or more hold at least a position.
837% of those with 5% population or more hold at least a position. Column (2) adds a
control for the party/group being the largest in terms of size, in order to capture additional
nonlinearities, with similar results. Repeating the same exercise, but with respect to the
likelihood of a group holding the leadership, reveals an important role for size as well. Table
4 Column (3) reports a marginal eﬀect on the likelihood of leadership of 54 percent per extra
1 percent increase in the share of the population of a group. This stylized fact supports our
assumption in (1).
   We can also assess the overall degree of proportionality of African cabinets. The issue
of disproportionality is the subject of a substantial literature in political economics and



                                               27
political science as a feature of electoral rules20 . Some Africanists have discussed the issue
of cabinet disproportionality in detail (Posner, 2005), emphasizing how for countries with
few reliable elections, cabinet disproportionality might be a revealing statistic. Recalling
that  indicates the realized cabinet post shares to group , a first operational concept is
the degree of proportionality of the cabinet. A perfectly proportionally apportioned cabinet
is one for which for every  ∈ N ,   =  . Governments, particularly in autocracies,
are considered to operate under substantial overweighting (    ) of certain factions
and underweighting (    ) of other ethnic groups. As discussed in Gallagher (1991),
deviations from proportionality can be diﬀerentially weighted, with more weight given to
large deviations than small ones or employing measures focused on relative versus absolute
deviations. Following Gallagher’s discussion of diﬀerent measures, we focus on his preferred
measure of disproportionality:

Definition 1. The least squares degree of government disproportionality at time  is given
         q P
by   = 12 
     
               =1 (100 ∗ ( −   ))
                                         2



       We report the time series for   for each country in Figure 2. The average levels of
disproportionality for the elites in each country are reported in Table 5, with larger values
indicating less proportionality and an average level of 1672. As a reference, using party vote
shares and party cabinet post shares in the sample of democracies of Ansolabehere et al.
(2005)   = 3397 on average. Notice that   captures well-known features of the data,
for example, the political monopoly of the Liberian-American minority in Liberia until the
1980’s. Overall, African cabinet allocations tend to closely match population shares with
cabinet seat shares and disproportionality is low.
       To further illustrate this feature of the data Table 6 reports a straightforward reduced-
  20
    In particular seat-votes diﬀerences. Gallagher (1991) explores the issue in detail and Carey and Hix
(2011) oﬀer a recent discussion.




                                                  28
form regression of cabinet shares on population shares:

                                                           
                           = 
                                  1       +                      
                                             2  +   +   +  
                                      

with  an indicator function for the country leader belonging to ethnicity  at time .
 captures the straightforward nonlinearity stemming from leadership premia. Column
(1) in Table 6 shows two striking features. First, the coeﬃcient on the ethnic group share
of the population 
                   1 is positive and statistically significant, indicating a non trivial degree

of proportionality between population shares and cabinet allocations, around 77. This
rejects clearly the hypothesis of cabinet posts being allocated independently of the population
strength of a group and at the whim of the leader. Second, the leader’s seat premium in
the cabinet is precisely estimated, positive, but not excessively large: around 11 percent.
Given an average cabinet size of 25 posts in our African sample, the leadership premium
can be assessed as an additional 175 = 25 ∗ (11 − 125) ministerial positions on top of
the leadership itself. Column (2) adds the square of the group size and a control for the
largest ethnicity in terms of size in order to capture additional nonlinearities, with similar
results. Incidentally, the negative coeﬃcient on the squared group size is significant at the
10 percent confidence level and is significant at 5 percent when removing the dummy for
largest group. This reduced-form finding supports the view of large groups being relatively
less well represented than small ones, a specific type of nonlinearity implied by Lemma 1.
   The allocation of top positions in African cabinets is explored in Column (3). We include
as top ministerial posts: the Presidency/Premiership, Defense, Budget, Commerce, Finance,
Treasury, Economy, Agriculture, Justice, Foreign Aﬀairs. Both size and leadership status are
positive and significant. Quantitatively, it is surprising that 
                                                                 1 remains sizable in Column

(3), close to what estimated in Column (1). Notice also how the eﬀect of leadership increases
for top ministerial appointments, this is however the result of the leader representing a larger
share of a smaller set of posts. Given an average top cabinet size of 9 posts, the leadership



                                               29
premium can be assessed as an additional 87 = 9 ∗ (208 − 19) ministerial positions on top
of the leadership itself.
       Not only do African cabinet allocations tend to mirror population shares closely, but they
do so consistently over time. As an illustration, we report the time series of ( −   )
across all ethnic groups in Guinea (Figure 3) and in Kenya (Figure 4)21 . All the time series
hover around zero, unless the leader is from that specific ethnicity (in which case there is a
positive gap). As predicated by our model there appear to be leadership premia. In Guinea
the shift in power between Malinke and Susu in 1984 at the death of Ahmed Sékou Touré,
a Malinke, produced a visible drop in overweighting of that group and a jump for the Susu,
the new leader’s group. Similar dynamics are evident under Moi in Kenya. Overall these
stylized facts strongly justify our focus on stationary equilibria.



5        Results

5.1        MLE Results

    Table 7 presents our maximum likelihood estimates of the model. We report the full vector
                                                                         ¡                          ¢
of model parameters θ = (  γ F r ξ) where we use the notation γ =           ,
     ¡                         ¢
F =           , and so on, for country-specific parameters.
       Beginning from the common parameters governing the leadership transitions, we find im-
mediate support for the view that larger groups are more likely to produce leaders, i.e.   0.
In addition,  is precisely estimated at 115  exp(1), implying that large groups are sub-
stantially overweighted relative to small groups. This finding highlights increasing returns to
scale in terms of likelihood of leadership appointment for ethnic groups, an important incen-
tive in favor of ethnic cohesion, as two diﬀerent ethnic groups can gain in terms of likelihood
of generating a leader by merging. Regarding the likelihood of exogenous breakdowns in
power, inclusive of uninsurable coups or other shocks, we estimate an  around 115%, again
  21
       Similar patterns recur across the other countries.


                                                        30
very statistically significant22 . This indicates a fairly high likelihood of per-period breakdown
and translates into an eﬀective per period discount rate23 of (1 − ) = 95 ∗ 905 = 84%.
       Concerning the country-specific parameters, let us begin from the revolution technology
parameter  where 1− is the share of value destroyed by the revolution. For virtually every
country,  is precisely estimated. In a fashion completely consistent with the large ruling
coalitions highlighted in Figure 1, Table 7 reports values of  generally above 80%. Larger
values of  imply cheap, less destructive revolutions. Cheap revolutions, in turn, imply larger
threats to the leader from outsiders, pushing him toward more inclusive governments. It is
not surprising, then, that we estimate  = 99 for Guinea, a country with average observed
coalitions around 92% of the population (the highest of all 15 countries). There are only 9
ethnicities in Guinea and the top 7 by size all have nontrivial observed cabinet shares, while
the bottom two groups are only 1% each. So, one could imagine the estimator trying to
include at least the top 7.
       The precision parameter  governing the Beta distribution of the error terms is generally
quite high. Larger values of  imply tighter distributions of the ’s in (13) and underline
a good fit of the model (further explored below). The country with the lowest precision is
Liberia, with a fit  = 245.
       Indeed Liberia requires a short diversion. One can recall that the stylized facts reported in
Figure 2 present a clear outlier, Liberia during the 1960-1980 period, a period of American-
Liberian rule. During the Americo-Liberian era, the country was essentially ruled by a
small minority of freed American slaves who had repatriated to this particular area since
the 1820s under the auspices of the United States government. On average the Americo-
Liberian regime concentrated around 50% of cabinet seats into a 4% population minority.
The international economic and political support for the Americo-Liberians sustained their
  22
      Note also that our assumption about i.i.d.  transitions is valid. A diagnostic Breusch and Pagan
(1980) LM test for cross-country dependence of  cannot reject independence with a p-value of 84 and an
Arellano-Bond panel model of a leader transition on its lag cannot reject serial independence with a p-value
of 95.
   23
      It should also be clear from this calculation why we calibrate  = 95 as it cannot be separately identified
from .


                                                       31
central rule, but waned over time. A coup in 1980 ended the regime. The Americo-Liberian
period clearly clashes with our model’s assumptions and one could readily see how Liberia
should be considered in much of the discussion below a falsification case. Liberia is a clear
instance where our model does not fit the data as we are omitting important dimensions
of the problem (the vast military-economic advantage and international support with which
the Americo-Liberians were endowed).
   The coup technology parameter, i.e. the likelihood of coup success , and the private
returns to leadership  (expressed as share of total transferable patronage) are of particular
interest for understanding the allocation of seats. Increasing  for given  makes coups more
threatening for a leader because of their higher success rate, and induces a more proportional
allocation of seats. Increasing  for given  makes coups more threatening for a leader as
well, because of the higher value of taking over if the coup is successful, and this again
induces a more proportional allocation of seats in order to avoid coups. Both parameters are
generally precisely estimated in Table 7. For Benin, Cameroon, and Gabon the model does
not pin down  and  precisely, pushing  toward a corner of 0 and  toward very large
valuations. Uganda instead displays an imprecise, low . As we will show below, the fit
for these countries is not particularly poor. Simply the estimates do not appear suﬃciently
precise to assess the role of  and  independently. Only Liberia, and for the reasons stated
before, seems to reject the model.
   Averaging the estimates of  in the ten countries for which we have interior estimates and
excluding Liberia, one can notice the importance of the coup threat in driving the allocation
of cabinet posts. The average likelihood of coup success  is fairly large, about 35%. This
is a very realistic estimate. Using data on actual coups from SystemicPeace.org for the
countries and periods in our sample the success rate of coups appears very close: 319%.
The quantitative interpretation of the reported  , which averages at 25, is harder. First of
all, we need to scale by  the estimates of  reported in Table 7. This delivers private rents
to the leader as a share of total value of patronage in the country. Using as benchmark for the


                                              32
elite share of the population 11000 gives us a scaling factor 1 = (001 ∗  )−1 . Averaging
the estimates of the rescaled  , implies that yearly private rents as share of total patronage
allocated in a country of 20 million people are around 25(001 ∗ 20), probably not an
unrealistic figure when multiplied by total value of government patronage in the country24 .
       Table 8 reports two additional statistics and their standard errors. First we compute the
structural slope of cabinet allocations as function of size of the ethnic group (1 − ).
These estimates are positive and statistically significant with the exception of Liberia, which
is negative, implying over-representation of small groups (an unsurprising fact given the
pre-1980 era). Positive slopes imply that a larger group size predicts a larger share of posts
(and patronage), as implied by point 1 of Proposition 3. For the ten countries for which
we have interior estimates of  and  and excluding Liberia, the slope is also statistically
smaller than 1 implying under-representation of non-leader groups and positive leadership
premia, which we verify in the second column of Table 8. For Benin, Cameroon, Gabon,
and Uganda point 1 of Proposition 3 is also verified, as the estimated slope is positive and
significant. Concerning the estimated leadership premia accruing to a member of the core
coalition, typically the estimates are precise and positive, consistently with our theoretical
setup. We find average leadership premia across our countries around 9 − 12 percent share
of the cabinet seats. Notice also that a leadership premium of about 12 percent is a figure
similar to that which was estimated in Section 3 in the reduced-form relationship.
       An important check comes from the analysis of top cabinet positions, like defense or
finances. Our results are not just an artifact of the leadership allocating minor cabinet roles
to ethnicities diﬀerent from the leader’s own, while reserving the central nodes of power to the
leader’s co-ethnics. The results hold true even when restricting the analysis to the subsample
of the most powerful ministerial posts. In Tables 9-10 we report ML estimates for a model
  24
    As an hypothetical benchmark one can consider a country with a GDP of $30 Billion and government
spending/GDP of 30% (similar to current Kenya or Cameroon in our sample). This would deliver yearly
private rents from oﬃce around $14 million. Such estimates, however, have to be considered with extreme
caution, as it is particularly complex to exactly quantify the absolute size of both ethnic elites and government
patronage.



                                                       33
that gives weight 1 to the top posts and 0 to all other cabinet appointments. Proportionality
and leadership premia appear remarkably stable across the top position model and the full
sample model, although the estimated precision parameters  governing the Beta distribution
are now lower, a natural consequence of the coarser nature of the allocated top shares. Given
the precision of our ML estimates, we can typically reject equality of the estimates across the
two models, but quantitatively the magnitudes appear similar. Given the crucial strategic
role of some of these cabinet positions within autocratic regimes (e.g. ministry of defense),
it appears natural to infer that some real power is actually allocated from the leadership to
other ethnic factions.


5.2    In-Sample and Out-of-Sample Goodness of Fit

   Our model predicts that ruling coalitions should include first and foremost large groups,
that the share allocated to such groups should be stable over time, and that cabinet posts
should be allocated proportionally to group size. Failing to match any of these moments in
the data will deliver poor fit of the model. We now illustrate the goodness of fit of our model
by focusing on a set of characteristics of African coalitions.
   In Sample
   We begin by checking the in-sample fit over the entire 1960-2004 period using the esti-
mates of Table 7 and the implied optimal coalitions. Figure 5 reports the observed coalition
sizes in terms of share of population represented by each group in government. This means
that an observed average coalition of 7 in Ghana indicates that summing up the ethnic
shares of the population of every ethnicity with at least a minister covers 70% of the pop-
ulation on average each year over the 1960-2004 period. Our model predicts a very similar
coalition size, about 73%. With the exception of Liberia and Tanzania our model fares very
well in predicting the size of the coalitions as fractions of the population. On average we are
able to correctly predict around 80% of the population based on the assignment to govern-
ment insiders or outsiders, as reported in Figure 6. This means that our model accurately


                                              34
predicts the membership of the cabinet in terms of relevant groups in the population. Even
considering simple counts of groups correctly predicted in or out of government, i.e. equally
weighing very large and very tiny ethnicities, we observe a high success rate, often correctly
assigning more than 23 of the ethnic groups in our sample. Excluding Liberia, the observed
coalitions cover on average 794% of the population based on ministerial ethnic aﬃliations,
while our in-sample prediction is 844%.
      Concerning how we fit government shares, and not just government participation, it would
be cumbersome to report shares for every group across 15 countries. Instead, we focus on
two specific typologies of groups which are of paramount relevance. We fit the cabinet shares
of the ethnic group of the leader in Figure 7 and the cabinet shares of the largest ethnic
group in the country in Figure 8. These two ethnic groups do not overlap substantially (78%
of the leader’s group observations are not from the largest ethnicity). Once again, inspection
of the figures reveals a very good match of the theoretical allocations and the allocations
observed in the data. Excluding Liberia, observed cabinet posts shares to leaders are 202%
on average, while our model predicts 22%. Excluding Liberia, observed cabinet posts shares
to the largest ethnicity are 216% on average, while our model predicts 238%.
      Out of Sample
      So far the analysis has focused on the in-sample fit of the model. In structural estimation
a good in-sample fit may be occasionally achieved through parameter proliferation in the
model. Suﬃciently many degrees of freedom can fit almost any type of data generating
process. Our model is extremely parsimonious in its parametric choices, so this should not
appear a major concern, but still we wish to push this assessment further with a demanding
set of checks.
      We present in Figures 9-12 the out-of-sample fit of our model based on the following
design. We begin by restricting the estimation of the model to the 1960-1980 sample25 and
then try to match, based on the ML estimates from this early period, the coalition size,
 25
      These estimates are available from the authors upon request.



                                                     35
coalition membership, and seat share allocations of cabinets for the 1980-2004 period. With
the exception of Liberia, which is clearly even more penalized by the focus on its Americo-
Liberian phase, the out-of-sample fit is precise. Our model correctly predicts the share of the
population with and without representation in the government and the overall population
share of the included ethnic groups with a very high success rate (Figures 9-10). Excluding
Liberia, the observed coalitions cover on average 825% of the population based on ministerial
ethnic aﬃliations, while our out-of-sample prediction is 763%. Predicted leadership shares
from the model are generally accurate as well (see Figure 11). Excluding Liberia, observed
cabinet posts shares to leaders are 191% on average, while our model predicts 241%. Note
that this is true even if almost systematically the ethnicities ruling these African countries
in the 1980-2004 diﬀer from those ruling in 1960-80. Shares of cabinet seats to the largest
ethnicity are also correctly predicted out of sample. Excluding Liberia, observed cabinet
posts shares to the largest ethnicity are 211% on average, while our model predicts 235%.
Overall, this precise out-of-sample goodness of fit not only reinforces the empirical value of
our analysis, but also strongly supports our assumption on the stationarity of the coalition
formation equilibrium26 .


5.3       Fit Along Additional Dimensions

       By considering the relative fit of the model over diﬀerent subsamples, some of the insti-
tutional and political details, deliberately omitted from the model, can be assessed. Were
the model missing relevant institutional dimensions, this approach would reveal it.
       Informally, we can observe that in Table 6 fit and precision of our estimates are consistent
across English and French colonial origin countries and East and West African countries. Our
model seems to capture allocation mechanisms of historically diﬀerent regimes, occasionally
even delivering quantitatively similar outcomes (e.g. Guinea and Kenya’s estimates in Table
6).
  26
    The same quality of fit is also displayed in the top positions sample as well, as produced by Tables 9
and 10. We do not report the figures for brevity, but are available upon request.

                                                   36
      More formally, we can evaluate diﬀerent subsamples separately, assessing whether the
main results are dominated by any specific dimension of the data and fit is consistently
accurate across samples. We chose two important dimensions here: military nature of the
regime and form of government. For military versus civilian rule, about 58% of our country-
year observations fall in the latter category based on a classification that incorporates both
Archigos and the Europa Year Book (Rainer and Trebbi, 2011). With regard to autocratic
versus democratic forms of government, about 14% of our country-year observations fall in
the latter category based on the Polity2 score of the country (we define a democracy as
Polity2 score  5, as standard in the literature). We do not report the ML estimates for the
separate subsamples27 , but only focus on the predictions of our model for coalition size and
leader group’s share.
      The fit is consistently good. For military regimes, the predicted average coalition size
pooling all countries and time periods is 83 versus an actual size of 78 and the predicted
leader’s share is 20 versus an actual share of 19. For civilian regimes, the predicted average
coalition size is 88 versus an actual size of 77, while the predicted leader’s share is 26
versus an actual share of 24. For autocratic regimes, the predicted average coalition size is
83 versus an actual size of 77, while the predicted leader’s share is 24 versus an actual share
of 22. For democratic periods, the predicted average coalition size is 77 versus an actual
size of 80, while the predicted leader’s share is 25 versus an actual share of 22. Surprisingly,
even though there are few democratic regimes and our model is clearly not apt to describe
modern democratic power sharing, the model’s fit is still very good. A conjecture would be
that democratic transitions do not completely make tabula rasa of the power structure in
place during autocracies.
 27
      All results available from the authors upon request.




                                                      37
6     Counterfactuals

    We now investigate a set of counterfactual experiments based on our structural estimates.
Concerning the role of the revolution and coup technologies in the allocation of ministerial
posts in Africa, we focus on three counterfactuals: i) an increase the cost of the revolution
parameter, 1 − ; ii) a reduction in the likelihood of success of coups, ; and iii) a reduction
of the size of the private benefits from leadership,  . Lowering  produces more exclusive
coalitions by increasing the cost of revolt against the leader and hence makes revolutions
less threatening. Drops in  and  make coups less threatening for the leader as well. As
leadership becomes safer to maintain, lower  and  induce a less proportional allocation of
seats relative to group size and more rents for the leader’s ethnic group. Stemming not from
the love for democracy of African leaders, large coalitions and close-to-proportional patronage
allocations are indeed a result of the fragility of the institutional structure of Sub-Saharan
countries. Finally, we explore the eﬀects of counterfactual ethnic group distributions within
countries. In particular, we show how an increase in ethnic fractionalization can translate in
larger coalitions and seats losses to the leadership.
    We begin by estimating the model for the 1960-1980 sample. We then modify only one
parameter at a time and observe how the model predictions change in the 1980-2004 sample.
One could potentially simulate the counterfactuals using the entire 1960-2004 sample as well.
We opt for the former approach in order to show how diﬀerent the out-of-sample predictions
would be in presence of structural breaks in each of the main parameters of the model.
    A. Reducing the Threat of Revolutions
    Figures 13-15 present the counterfactual coalitions in presence of a 10% drop in  vis-à-
vis the baseline predicted coalition, shares allocated to leaders, and shares allocated to the
largest group. In Figure 13 the population share with at least one minister represented in
the coalition falls substantially when lowering . The threat of revolutions is so reduced by
the increase in their cost that coalitions drop in size from 763% in the baseline to 483%
of the population in the counterfactual (on average across all countries, excluding Liberia).

                                              38
Concerning allocated shares within these smaller coalitions, we notice that leader’s groups
now enjoy substantially higher shares of cabinet seats, going from 241% to 562% on average
across all countries (Figure 14). In Figure 15 the largest group also gains seat shares, moving
from 235% to 378%.
   B. Reducing the Threat of Coups
   Figures 16-18 present the counterfactual coalitions and allocations in presence of a 25%
relative drop in . Similarly, Figures 19-21 present the same counterfactuals in presence of
a 25% relative reduction in  . Notice that changing  and  does not necessarily aﬀect the
optimal coalition unless constraint (4) begins to bind. However, changing  and  always
aﬀects how much a member of the coalition is paid.
   The diﬀerence between modifying the coup technology and modifying the revolution
technology is substantial. In both Figure 16 and Figure 19 we notice that even a drastic
drop in  or  does not aﬀect the optimal coalition, leaving the insider constraint (4) slack.
Insiders are paid less when they are less dangerous (as they have lower incentives to stage a
coup), but they do not appear to have incentive to abandon the ruling coalition and hence
the leader does not change the composition of Ω . Counterfactual coalitions under the new
 and  have the same membership as the baseline in Figures 16 and 19. Notice that this
is true even if in relative terms the drops in  or  are much higher than the relative drop
in  we have considered above.
   Reducing the threat of coups does have an eﬀect on allocations within the coalition.
When reducing , the leader’s group gets to enjoy a higher seat share, going from 241% to
34% on average across all countries excluding Liberia (Figure 17). Interestingly, the largest
group is less of threat now and therefore the leader assures its loyalty more cheaply. In
Figure 18 the largest group loses seat shares, moving from 235% to 216% when  drops.
In the counterfactual reducing  , the leader’s group again enjoys higher shares of seats, up
from 241% to 30% on average across all countries excluding Liberia (Figure 20). In Figure
21 the largest group again loses seat shares, moving down from 235% to 215%.


                                              39
    C. Increasing Ethnic Fractionalization
    A standard index of ethnic fractionalization considered here is the Herfindahl concentra-
                              2
tion28  = 1 − Σ
                  =1 (  ) . Typically an increase in  will require a shift towards a

more equal distribution of population across groups. Insider groups, the large ones according
to our model, should lose clout vis-à-vis outsiders, which are typically small29 .
    As an example, let us impose a reduction of 1 percent of the population to any group
above the median group size, while adding 1 percent to any group below the median (the
median group is left unchanged). This modification essentially tilts the distribution towards
equal shares of 1, which maximizes  . It also unambiguously strengthens small groups
on the outside of the government and weakens government insiders. The endogenous response
predicted by our model is a more inclusive coalition, which is what we observe across the
board in the counterfactuals of Figure 22. The increase in ethnic fractionalization has the
eﬀect of increasing the average coalition size from 755 percent of the population to 769
percent. Interestingly, both the allocations to the leader’s own group and to the largest
group in the country decrease in Figures 23-24. By reducing the inequality in group size,
an increase in  makes challengers to the leadership more threatening and induces more
redistribution of the leadership and insiders’ spoils. The average share to the leader’s group
across the countries in our sample drops from 259 to 241 percent, while the largest group’s
share drops from 223 to 20 percent. The latter is a more than proportional reduction given
the 1 percent fall in the largest group population shares.
   28
      See Alesina et al. (2003); Fearon (2003), but also Posner (2004) for a criticism and an alternative
measure. For an analysis of the determinants of ethnolinguistic diversity see Michalopoulos (2012).
   29
      This intuition is generally correct. However, the specific eﬀect of  on post allocations needs to be
studied on an case-by-case basis within our framework. The reason is that there are multiple ways an ethnic
group distribution N = {1   } can be modified to increase  . Carefully shifting mass across groups
may produce no change in the balance of strength between insiders and outsiders, while still increasing  .
This ambiguity is the result of the large amount of degrees of freedom allowed when the full vector of group
sizes N is modified. The following example clarifies how our model captures distributional changes in a
straightforward case.




                                                     40
7     Alternative Models of Allocation

    We now assess the relative performance of our model versus two relevant alternative
hypotheses. A first model of allocation, which could challenge our theoretical interpretation,
is one of pure window dressing on the part of the leader. One could reasonably conjecture
a proportional mechanism of cabinet allocation simply based on random sampling from the
population of elites. Were the leader only concerned with giving an appearance of fair
representation of ethnic interests, he could just pick political pawns at random (plus or
minus a statistical error ). Censoring should be allowed in such alternative setup as well,
but only due to the coarseness of the cabinet allocation process (e.g. a group with 130
of the population can not be proportionally represented in a cabinet of 20 seats) and not
because of revolution constraints. Formally, this would imply:


                                     ̂  =  for any 


and latent shares equal to:
                                      ∗ = ̂  +   .

Although relying on somewhat arbitrary assumptions about the lack of rationality of non-
elites (systematically fooled by window dressing), this alternative model would appear a
strong challenger to our baseline. It embeds an assumption of proportionality of seat allo-
cation and has the ability to accommodate censoring.
    A second alternative model of allocation that we explore here is a strong version of
the “big man” autocratic model. We wish to reject starkly a pure interpretation of ethnic
favoritism on the part of the ruler, a winner-take-all specification of the form:


                                  ̂  = 0 for any  6= 

                                         = 1 for 



                                               41
and latent shares equal to:
                                             ∗ = ̂  +   .

We already have a sense that such degree of disproportionality might be rejected by the data
in light of the evidence above. However, the alternative models presented here are much
more parametrically parsimonious than the model of Section 2, by 45 parameters, a factor
which weighs against our baseline in model selection tests.
      Since all models are non-nested, a standard econometric approach is to run generalized
likelihood ratio tests of model selection. We employ the Vuong (1989) and Clarke (2003)
model selection tests. The null hypothesis for both the Vuong and Clarke tests is that the
baseline and the alternative model are both true against a two-sided alternative that only
one of the two models is true. The former test has better power properties when the density
of the likelihood ratios of the baseline and the alternative is normal, while the latter is a
more powerful test when this condition is violated. The baseline specification is always our
main model from Table 6, and it is tested against the random allocation model, first, and
the “big man” model, next. Table 11 reports all test statistics and p-values.
      Our model fares substantially better than the proposed alternatives according to the
Vuong test for non-nested models. The test statistic of the baseline against the random
allocation model is 19 and we reject the null of equivalent fit with a p value of  0001 based
on a diﬀerence of 45 degrees of freedom (   for 15 countries)30 . Our model appears closer
to the actual data generating model. The rejection of the the “big man” autocratic model
is even starker, with a test statistic of 601 in favor of the baseline. Employing the Clarke
(2003) test we reject the null of equal fit for the random coalition model with a p-value of 0.
We reject the null of equal fit for the “big man” model with a p-value of 00002. Interestingly
the “big man” model fares slightly better using the Clarke test, as the statistic is based on
the number of positive diﬀerences between individual loglikelihoods, independently on the
actual size of those diﬀerences.
 30
      The Vuong test statistic is asymptotically distributed as a standard normal.


                                                      42
       Table 11 reports the Vuong and Clarke tests for four subsamples considered in Section 5.3
(military, civilian, autocracies, democracies). In all subsamples the baseline model trumps
both alternative models, indicating that our theoretical setup is not dominated by alternative
mechanisms that may be at work within these specific subsets. The only exception is the
case of democratic regimes for the random allocation model. Here we see that, although the
loglikelihood for the baseline model is higher than the loglikelihood for the random allocation
model, still the tests reject the baseline in favor of the random model. The reason is the
relative lack of parsimony of the baseline model relative to the random model, which spares
45 parameters. Both Vuong and Clarke statistics penalize lack of parsimony, especially with
small samples like for this case (only 722 out of 11749 group-country-year observations).
Due to the small sample of democratic regimes, we would not venture in asserting that
democratic periods present radical breaks from our baseline allocation model, but do note
that additional research on the specific power-sharing dynamics of new African democracies
would be clearly of further interest.



8        Theory Extensions: Elite — Non-Elite Divisions

       A final issue worth addressing concerns the clientelistic microfoundations of the within-
ethnic group organization31 . In this section we answer the following questions: Why do
non-elites support a leader who allocates a patronage position to their representative elite?
How much of the value generated by such a patronage position does an elite keep, and how
much does he have to share with his non-elite? Why do elites have incentives to organize
their non-elites in support of a leader?
  31
    We follow the intuition in Jackson and Roseberg (1982, p.40): “The arrangements by which regimes
of personal rule are able to secure a modicum of stability and predictability have come to be spoken of
as "clientilism".....The image of clientilism is one of extensive patron-client ties. The substance and the
conditions of such ties can be conceived of as the intermingling of two factors: first, the resources of patronage
(and the interests in such resources, which can be used to satisfy wants and needs) may be regarded as the
motivation for the personal contracts and agreements of which patron-client ties consist; and second the
loyalty which transcends mere interests and is the social ‘cement’ that permits such ties to endure in the
face of resource fluctuations. Both of these factors are important as an explanation for some of the stable
elements in African personal rule.”

                                                       43
   We define the patronage value of a government post (i.e., the dollar amount that a
minister gets from controlling appointments, apportionment, acquisitions in his ministry) as
 .  was normalized to 1 in Section 2, but we will keep it unnormalized here to focus on
its explicit division between elite and non-elite. An elite member controlling  government
posts controls a flow of resources  . We still assume  is continuous and abstract from the
discreteness of post allocations.
   Assume the use value of a government post to a member of the non-elite is  in total
if it is controlled by their own elite. If my group controls a ministry, I benefit by being
more likely to be able to get benefits from this ministry. If it is education, for instance, my
children will be more likely to access good schools. If it is public works, our people will be
more likely to get jobs in the sector and the benefits of good infrastructure. If it is the army,
our men will be more likely to get commands. An empirical illustration of this logic for road
building in Kenya is given by Burgess et al. (2010).
   The use value of a post to the non-elite if it is controlled by someone else is . Let
 ≤ 1 be related to the degree of ethnic harmony. If  = 1 non-elites do not care about the
identity of the minister, they get as much out of the ministry no matter who controls it. If
 = 0, society is extremely ethnically polarized. A ministry controlled by someone else is of
no use to me.


8.1    Nash Bargaining

   The elite obtains posts in return for delivering support. The non-elites give support in
return for having the control of posts in the hands of their own ethnic elites. We assume
that these two parties bargain over the allocation of the patronage value of the posts that
the elite receive from the leader,  . We also assume that they can commit to agreements
ex ante. That is, if the non-elites withdraw support, a post will revert to some other ethnic
elite member, with the consequent loss of value (1 − )  for them. If the elite loses the
patronage value of the post, he loses  . This implies a Nash bargain, with  denoting the


                                               44
share of  going to the elite, as follows:

                              ½µ             ¶µ                             ¶¾
                                    − 0        (1 − )  + (1 − ) 
                       max
                                     1                     1

                          1+(1−)
and implying that  =        2
                                   .   So that the value to an elite of controlling  posts is:

                                                 1 + (1 − ) 
                                          =                 .
                                                       2

This result has several important implications. First of all, the greater the degree of ethnic
tension in a country (i.e. the lower ), the greater the share of the value going to the elite
of each group is. Clearly, ethnic group leaders have incentive to incite ethnic tensions in
this setting in a fashion similar to Padro-i-Miquel (2007). High levels of ethnic tensions can
produce substantial inequality between the elite and the non-elite of ethnic groups. Secondly,
the larger the use value of a government post to a member of the non-elite,  , the greater
the share of the value going to the elite of each group.
   Finally, suppose that the cost to an elite of organizing his 1 non-elite in support of
the leader are  ≥ 0. For an elite from ethnicity  receiving  posts for participating in the
government to be willing to participate in the government we have the following individual
rationality constraint:
                                              1 + (1 − ) 
                                      =                  ≥ 
                                                    2

   This must be satisfied for all groups in government. Let  ≡  1+(1−)
                                                                         2
                                                                              . Since  is
smaller for larger groups, it implies that if there exists some groups for whom    then
these will be paid  . This does not upset the ordering determined in Section 2, but does
require a re-calculation of the equilibrium patronage values. More interestingly,  does aﬀect
the share of post values accruing to the elite members, but does not aﬀect the total number
of posts elites must receive from the leader, unless the participation constraint binds. Hence,
particularly if  aﬀects  adversely, country leaders will have strictly lower incentives to incite



                                                    45
ethnic tension than ethnic group elites have. It is important to underscore the asymmetry
between the incentives of leaders and ethnic group elites along this dimension.



9     Conclusions

    This paper presents a model of the allocation of power within African polities and esti-
mates it employing a novel data set of the ethnic composition of Africa ministerial cabinets
since independence. Our data oﬀer new insight into the internal mechanics of autocracies,
otherwise particularly opaque government forms, and their diverse upper echelons.
    The data reject strongly the view of African autocracies as being run as “one man shows”
by a single leader and his ethnic group, with the sole exception of Liberia. The data display
inclusive coalitions and a positive and highly statistically significant degree of proportionality
of ministerial positions to ethnic group size in the population, suggesting a substantial degree
of political bargaining occurring within these polities. These findings are confirmed when
limiting the analysis to top cabinet posts alone.
    Through the lens of our model these empirical regularities conform to a view of large
threats from revolutions and internal coups, which push African leaders towards inclusive-
ness. Our parsimonious model displays an excellent fit of the data in and out of sample
and can be considered a useful stepping stone for the analysis of African politico-economic
dynamics. We also perform new counterfactual experiments by modifying the revolution and
coup technologies in each country.
    Finally, our model is extended to highlight the connection between within-ethnic group
frictions and between-ethnic group tensions. We discuss how proportionality in the allocation
of cabinet posts to elites from each group does not necessarily trickle down to the non-elites
of each group.
    Future research should address the determinants of relative power among ethnic groups
besides sheer population size, the consequences of shocks to specific ethnic groups, including



                                               46
climatic or terms of trade shocks to local resources, and should employ group-level informa-
tion for non-elites to further analyze the process of within-group political bargaining. The
data employed in this paper will also aide future research on the internal organization of
autocracies, especially with regard to the dynamics of turnover of ministers and members of
the autocratic inner circle (Rainer, Francois, and Trebbi, 2012).




                                             47
10      Appendix
    Proof of Lemma 1:
    Consider a hypothetical equilibrium that does not have a core coalition C. Denote the
equilibrium payments to elites of ethnicity  by  in such an equilibrium. Moreover, assume
that  = inf {1  } and suppose this infimum is unique. Since there are no core ethnicities
in this equilibrium, for any such ethnicity  there exists at least one leader  6=  who
optimally chooses not to include  in his governing coalition. But this implies that  cannot
be optimally choosing his coalition, as he is excluding support from the elite of an ethnicity
who will provide it at a price lower than those in his chosen coalition. So inf {1  } being
unique is inconsistent with the non-existence of a core coaltion.
    It now remains to show what happens if inf {1  } is not unique. There must now be at
least two infima, and denote these two  and  with  =  . Since there is no core coalition,
there exists at least one leader  6=   who optimally chooses not to include  and/or  in
his governing coalition. If not, either  or  would constitute a ‘core’ set of ethnicities C,
violating the supposition. But for both ,  to not be included in all other leaders’ optimal
coalitions, i.e. for a core group of ethnicities not to exist, this must imply that there exists
at least one more group  for whom  =  =   Without at least one alternative group
, it would be impossible for leaders to not choose either  or  when choosing their optimal
coalition. Applying the same reasoning to group , the only way that there cannot exist
a core group of ethnicities is if there exists a set of groups whose elites sum to a number
strictly larger than ∗ in total and whose equilibrium  values are all equal to the lowest
equilibrium payment inf {1  }  Without this, diﬀerent leaders would be forced to choose
at least some members of the same ethnicities when constructing optimal coalitions. Only if
there exist an amount strictly greater than ∗ of ethnicities all equally receiving the lowest
values of  can a leader from  choose an ethnicity not included in a leader from 0  optimal
coalition, so that a core coalition may not exist.
    So it remains possible that the per-elite member cost of buying support is identical for
all leaders, but comprised of diﬀering sets of elite. Denote such per elite member costs  .
The total payment of patronage required to buy support is thus (∗ −  )   for a leader of
                                                    ∗       
ethnicity , implying per period returns of 1−( −  
                                                         )
                                                              +  But for this to be consistent with
                        
equivalent values ( ) for each leader, necessarily for two leaders  and  where  denotes
the larger of the two so that  =  and   1 we have:
                      µ                         ¶       µ                        ¶
                        1 − (∗ −  )                   1 − (∗ −  ) 
         ≡  =                           +    =                          +  =  ≡ 
                                                                  
                                1 − (∗ −  )      1 − (∗ −  ) 
                           =⇒                     =
                                                              
                      =⇒ (1 − ( −  )  )  = 1 − ( −  ) 
                                   ∗                         ∗

                              =⇒  (1 − ∗  ) = 1 − ∗ 
                                           =⇒  = 1

But this is a contradiction, so it is not possible that the amount required to buy support of
ethnicities of diﬀerent sizes is equivalent.


                                                 48
   Given this, necessarily there must exist a core group of ethnicities included in all leaders’
coalitions. ¥

   Proof of Lemma 2: Consider the payments required for members of two distinct elites,
 and  in the core group that are being bought oﬀ by the coalition being formed by a leader
from group , denoted Ω  and suppose that     Using (10) and (2) and the fact that at
most there is a unique included ethnicity that will be split, these are given by:
                             ³                      0    0
                                                                             ´
(14)                =  1 − Σ6=∈Ω   −  () () −   +  
                             ³                      0    0
                                                                             ´
                   =  1 − Σ6=∈Ω   −  () () −   +   .

We explicitly denote the split group seperately with a 0 . Since both  and  are in the core
coalition they both have identically comprised governing coalitions: when a  is leader, all
elites from  are included and paid  when a  is leader, all elites from  are included and paid
 . This implies that for the remainder, there is equivalence: Σ6=∈Ω   = Σ6=∈Ω   .
Also both types of leader will have identically sized split groups, comprising the cheapest
                                   0    0       0    0
non-core elites available so that  () () =  () (). Consequently, subtracting the second
from the first equation above leaves:

                            −   =  (  −   ) + ( −  ) 
                        (  −   )     
(15)                  ∴                  =         .
                          ( −  )       (1 − )

Let   1 denote the ratio of elite sizes,  and  so that  =  . Rewriting (15) using this
notation yields:
                                 −      
                                         =
                                 −1       (1 − )
                                                  (1 − ) 
(16)                                ∴  =  +             .
                                                    (1 − )

To prove the claim it is necessary to show that since    necessarily     Using (16),
   if and only if:

                                        (1 − ) 
                                 +                  
                                          (1 − )
                                                          
                                                   
                                                        (1 − )
                                             or      −  .

But we know from (14) that,
                             ¡                                            ¢
                             1 − Σ6=∈Ω   − 0 ()0 () −  
                   −  =                                                 ≡  .
                                                  


                                                 49
So we need to show that:

                                                    
                                                      ⇔
                                                      .

Since we only consider equilibria without coups or revolutions, a necessary condition is that
elite from any governing ethnicity, including the leader’s own, have no incentive to mount a
coup. Thus, necessarily for an equilibrium of this form to exist   ̄ , we ignore the zero
measure parameter configuration where the residual left after paying oﬀ all other ethnicities
just equals the incentive compatible amount for co-ethnics (i.e., ignoring   = ̄  ). If
this condition were violated leader  0  co-ethnic elite would have incentive to mount a coup.
Which thus proves the claim.¥

    Proof of Proposition 1: Since any candidate equilibrium¡¡has payments determined ¢by                   ¢
                                                                                         0    0
(10) we know that, for an elite of group
                                     ¡¡     the payment is  =    1 − Σ∈Ω
                                                                           ¢
                                                                                 −  () ()  + 
                                                                                         ¢
                                                          0        0
and for elite  + 1 it is +1 =  1 − Σ∈Ω+1   −  ( + 1) ( + 1) +1 +  . The dif-
ference  − +1 can be expressed as:
        ³³                     0    0
                                        ´         ´    ³³                      0          0
                                                                                                  ´          ´
       1 − Σ∈Ω   −  () ()  +  −  1 − Σ∈Ω+1   −  ( + 1) ( + 1) +1 + 
          h³                        0   0
                                             ´       ³                    0           0
                                                                                              ´ i
  ≡              1 − Σ∈Ω   −  () () +1 − 1 − Σ∈Ω+1   −  ( + 1) ( + 1) 
       +1
            (17)

where 0 ( + 1) is the per elite payment to the highest paid group for leader  + 1. Now
note that since   +1 a leader of ethnicity  + 1 must buy the support of a strictly larger
number of elite than does a leader of  and therefore includes all elite included by  and
some additional ones to whom he pays 0 ( + 1)( − +1 ). Consequently, since all included
elite other than the split group are common       ¡ 0 so that Σ∈Ω       = Σ∈Ω+1   and for the split
                                                                        ¢ 0
          0          0             0      0                      0
groups:  ( + 1) ( + 1) =  () () +  ( + 1) −  ()  ( + 1) Substituting these into
(17) we have  − +1 :
                 h                                          0    0              0          0
                                                                                                      i
         ≡              (1 − Σ∈Ω   ) (+1 −  ) −  () ()+1 +  ( + 1) ( + 1)
              +1
                       ∙                                       0    0                               ¸
                        (1 − Σ∈Ω   ) (+1 −  ) −  () ()+1 + 0 ( + 1)0 ()
         ≡
              +1                        +0 ( + 1) (0 ( + 1) − 0 ()) 
                       ∙                                       0    0                                  ¸
                        (1 − Σ∈Ω   ) (+1 −  ) −  () () + 0 ()0 () ( − +1 )
         ≡
              +1            +0 ( + 1)0 () + 0 ( + 1) (0 ( + 1) − 0 ()) 
                                 0     0
Since for the group 0 ()  () () = 0 ( + 1)0 ()
       
≡           [(1 − Σ∈Ω   ) (+1 −  ) + 0 ()0 () ( − +1 ) + 0 ( + 1) (0 ( + 1) − 0 ())  ]
     +1



                                                      50
and since 0 ( + 1) − 0 () =  − +1 , we have
                     
              ≡           [(0 ( + 1) − (1 − Σ∈Ω   − 0 ()0 ())) ( − +1 )] 
                   +1

The term (1 − Σ∈Ω   − 0 ()0 ()) ≡ ̄  i.e. the share of patronage received by a
member  0  own ethnicity if  is leader.
                                          
(18)                     − +1 ≡            ( − +1 ) [0 ( + 1) −  ] 
                                        +1

Necessarily, ̄ ≥  or else  0  own elite would mount a coup against him, violating our
supposition. So provided ̄  0 ( +1) then it follows immediately from (18) that +1   .
Suppose the contrary: ̄ ≤ 0 ( + 1). Then since   ̄ necessarily   0 ( + 1). But
since 0 ( + 1) are the highest payments  + 1 makes, necessarily  ∈ Ω+1 . But if  ∈ Ω+1
then  ∈ Ω+2 as  + 2 must include a strictly larger number of elite from other ethnicities to
attain ∗ . Consequently, if there exist two groups  and  + 1 such that   +1 necessarily
the elite of  are included in the government of a leader of any ethnicity   .
    Now consider any   , so that    . The same reasoning implies that either   
in which case since  is included by leaders of all ethnicities  + 1, i.e.,  ∈ Ω ∀  . Or
if  ≥  then as in the comparison between  and  + 1, it follows from the analog of (18)
for  that ̄  0 () and therefore that   0 () so that  ∈ Ω which also implies that
 ∈ Ω ∀  .
    So, if there exist two groups for which   +1 then  and all groups    must also
be included in the government of all groups  + 1 to . But if  + 1 is such that Σ=1   ∗
then we have a contradiction, since including all groups from 1 to  + 1 yields a coaltion
size exceeding ∗ . So it is only possible that if there exists  :   +1 that  is such
that Σ=1  ≤ ∗ implying that  is in the core group. Thus any leader’s optimal coalition
includes  and all groups larger than , i.e., 1 − 1. It also follows that for all ethnicities
   + 1 then   +1  Because either these are in the core group, and they are ordered
from Lemma 2, or if they are not in the core group they cannot violate this ordering without
including all groups above them in the core group, in which case core groups would exceed
∗ in size.
    Consequently, either the ordering is   +1 ∀ implying that larger groups are preferred
in the governing coalition as they are uniformly cheaper. Or if there exists a  for which
  +1 then  and +1 are in the core group, as are all   , and for all   +1   +1 .
This also implies that larger groups are preferred in the governing coalition. ¥
    Proof of Lemma 3: It is optimal for any leader to ensure that there are no revolutions.
The cheapest way for any leader to ensure no revolutions is to have a total    Pof    ∗ = ∗  elite
                                                                                   ∗ −2
members in their government — including their own elite   Since 1 + =2   ∗  and
                                                                P ∗ −2         ∗
since 1 is the largest ethnicity, it then follows that  + =16    =     Moreover, since
for any leader   +1  all leaders will find it optimal to include groups 1 to  ∗ − 2 in their
governing coalition. ¥

        Pof∗ Proposition 2: It is already shown that any leader from ethnicity  optimally
    Proof
includes =1−2  in Ω  Since any leader must reach ∗ ethnic elites in total in his government,

                                                    51
for leader  the remaining number to be included is given by:
                                                        ∗ −2
                                                       X
                                     () = ∗ −               +  
                                                      =16=

                                                                        P∗
    Consider leader  ≤  ∗ − 1 For such a leader  () = ∗ − =1−1   Since   
for    and  ∗   () from the definition of  ∗ . It then follows immediately that the
                                                                                   P∗
cheapest  () elites to include are from group  thus  () = 0 ∗ = ∗ − =1−1   for
   ∗ − 1                                                                  P ∗ −1
    Consider a leader    ∗ − 1 For such a leader, either:  () = ∗ − =1      +   0
    ∗
         P ∗ −1                                                                    +
or  − =1  +  ≥ 0 Consider the former first, this corresponds to an     as defined
in the statement of the proposition. For such an  :
                                                        ∗ −2
                                                       X
                                      () = ∗ −             +  
                                                        =1

since including all of the elite from  −1 would exceed ∗ and ethnicity  −1 is the cheapest re-
maining ethnicity not included in the coalition, the leader optimally sets  () = 0−1 () ≡
     P ∗ −2                                                                   P ∗ −1
∗ − =1      +   Now consider the latter, i.e.,  ≥  + :  () = ∗ − =1     +  ≥ 0
By definition, for such a leader, only including ethnicities up to and including  ∗ − 1 in Ω is
insuﬃcient to achieve ∗ elite. So for such an  :
                                                        ∗ −1
                                                       X
                                      () = ∗ −             +  
                                                        =1

                                                                                      P ∗ −1
Clearly, from the definition of  ∗ in equation (11)   ∗   () = ∗ − =1              +  
and since  ∗ is the cheapest
                      P ∗ −1    remaining  ethnicity not  in the included   coalition, leader   sets
 0              ∗
 ∗ =  () =  − =1  +  
     Finally,
      P   ∗
              note that  ∗ ≤  +  However, if the smallest ethnicity,  is suﬃciently large that
∗  =1−1  +   then set  + = .¥

    Proof of Proposition 3: Statement 1. Since  denotes the probability of a coup being
successful,   1 and   0 is the non-divisible oﬃce rent, the RHS of (15)  0 Since
   it then follows directly that (  −   )  0 thus proving statement 1 in the
proposition. It is also immediate that any solution to these equations is unique.
    Statement 2. Here we suppress the 0 notation for split groups, as these are of equivalent
size for core groups. Consider the leadership premia accruing to members of two distinct
elites,  and  ∈ C in case the leader belongs to their groups respectively and suppose that
   :

(19)                   (1 − Σ∈Ω   − 0 ()0 ()) −   = 
                      (1 − Σ∈Ω   − 0 ()0 ()) −   =  .



                                                  52
We can rewrite (19):
               ¡                                           ¢
                1 − Σ6=∈Ω   −   − 0 ()0 () −   = 
              ¡                                            ¢
                1 − Σ6=∈Ω   −   − 0 ()0 () −   = 

and noticing that Σ6=∈Ω   −0 ()0 () = Σ6=∈Ω   −0 ()0 (), as both are in the core
group, this implies  =  . This further implies the leadership premium
per elite member is higher in small groups      . ¥

   Proof of Proposition 4:
          e ≡    so that the system for all groups  in the core coalition is:
   Define 
                                   ¡     ∗ −1               0
                                                                      ¢
(20)                        e =  1 − Σ=16
                                              = ̃ − ∗ ∗ +   ,

                                                                               
where 0∗ is defined in proposition 2. From (15) we know        e = e + (1−) ( −  ). Repeatedly
substituting for each  in (20) yields:
           µ               ∙                          ¸                  ¶
                    ∗ −1                                    0
e =  1 − Σ=16= 
                            e +          ( −  ) − ∗ ∗ +  
                                   (1 − )
   (21)
           µ                                                                           ¶
                                   £ ∗ −1                        ¤        0
e =  1 − ( − 2)e
                          −           Σ          − (∗ − 2) − ∗ ∗ +  
                                (1 − ) =16=
                 £                                     £ ∗ −1                  ¤            ¡           ¢¤
e =
                  1 −  − (1 − ) ( − 2)e   −  Σ=1        − (∗ − 1) + (1 − )   − ∗ 0∗
         (1 − )
           £          ¡           ¢     ¡ ∗ −1                             ¢¤
          (1 − ) 1 − ∗ 0∗ −  Σ=1          −  (1 +  (∗ − 2))
e =

                               (1 − ) [1 + (∗ − 2)]
           £          ¡           ¢       ¡ ∗ −1 ¢¤
          (1 − ) 1 − ∗ 0∗ −  Σ=1                 
    =                                                   +           .
                   (1 − ) [1 + (∗ − 2)]                (1 − )

These are the optimal payments to any nonleader group  = 1  ∗ − 2 of the core coalition
independently from the identity of the leader. It also identifies the payment to group  =
∗ − 1 whenever part of the optimal coalition. Also notice that per capita cost is determined
by:                        h¡
                                     0
                                       ¢     
                                                ¡ ∗ −1 ¢i
                          1 − ∗ ∗ − (1−) Σ=1  1           
                    =                                       +          .
                                  [1 + (∗ − 2)]            (1 − )




                                                   53
      For group ∗ we have:

                               ∗ =  ((1 − Σ∈Ω∗   ) ∗ +  )
                                       ¡¡      ∗ −2                            ¢         ¢
                                    =  1 − Σ=1       − 0∗ −1 (∗ )∗ −1 ∗ + 
                                         Ã           ∗ −2
                                                                              !
                                                     X
                 with 0∗ −1 (∗ ) =  1 −  −             − ∗ 
                                                                    =1
                                                       Ã           ∗ −2
                                                                                               !
                                                                   X
               and 0∗ (∗ − 1) =                      1−−               − ∗ −1 
                                                                   =1
                                                ¡¡    ∗ −2                         ¢           ¢
                          and ∗ −1         =  1 − Σ=1     − 0∗ (∗ − 1)∗ ∗ −1 +  

which jointly imply
             ¡¡     ∗ −2                            ¢           ¢
  ∗ =  1 − Σ=1          − 0∗ −1 (∗ )∗ −1 ∗ + 
             ¡¡     ∗ −2
                                                 ¡¡      ∗ −2                ¢           ¢¢        ¢
       =  1 − Σ=1         − 0∗ −1 (∗ ) 1 − Σ=1        − ∗ ∗ ∗ −1 +  ∗ + 

or simplifying:

                                             Ã                                                                          !
                                                      ∗ −2
                                                1 − Σ=1     ¡                         ¢   ¡                      ¢
∗ =            0∗ (∗ −1)0∗ −1 (∗ )
                                                                   1 − 0∗ −1 (∗ )∗ −1 +  1 − 0∗ −1 (∗ )∗ .
        1 − 2                                        ∗
                        ∗ ∗ −1

                  ∗ −2
We can compute Σ=1       from (21) and it is a linear function of ∗ :
                            h                                i
                                     0                −1     ∗ −2
                          1 − ∗ ∗ (∗ − 1) − 1− Σ=1  Σ=1      ( − 2)
           ∗ −2                                                              ∗
          Σ=1   =                                                  +           .
                                         1 + (∗ − 2)                       1−

This implies:
        ⎛         ¡                                ¢             0∗ (∗ −1) ∗ −2
                                                                                     ⎞−1
                            0                              
                 1 − ∗ −1 (∗ )∗ −1 1+(∗ −2)                      Σ=1 
∗    = ⎝1 −                                   0         0
                                                (∗ −1) ∗ −1 (∗ )
                                                                        ∗            ⎠
                                    1 −  2 ∗   −1
                                                      ∗ ∗
                       
         ∗        0 (∗ −1)0 ∗ −1 (∗ )
           1 −  2 ∗   −1
                          ∗ ∗
           ⎛             
                   [1− 1− Σ−1         ∗ −2                                                                         ⎞
                              =1  ]Σ=1          (∗ −2)
             1−           1+(∗ −2)
                                                  −    1−      ¡                          ¢   ¡                      ¢
         ∗⎝                                                       1 − 0∗ −1 (∗ )∗ −1 +  1 − 0∗ −1 (∗ )∗ ⎠ .
                                    ∗

    For existence of an equilibrium without coups or revolutions it is necessary that for a
leader randomly drawn from any group the value of patronage is large enough to ensure that
after incentive compatible payments are made to elites required to ensure no revolutions,
there still remains suﬃcient residual patronage for elites from the leader’s own ethnic group


                                                                 54
to dissuade them mounting coups. A suﬃcient condition is that:
                       h¡          ¢        ¡ ∗ −1 ¢i
                                 0      
                       1 − ∗ ∗ − (1−) Σ=1  1        
                 1 =                                    +         0.
                              [1 + (∗ − 2)]          1 (1 − )

This condition is suﬃcient, because if this holds for group 1 then it necessarily holds for all
other groups as well since 1   for all   1
    To prove uniqueness, we know that our equilibrium set of optimal transfers must satisfy
:   =  (1 − Σ∈Ω   − 0 ()0 () +   ). Consider an alternative equilibrium denoted
                    00
by 00 for which    It follows from the equation immediately above that there must
                                                                  00
exist at least one coalition member,  ∈ Ω for which    But this violates equation
(16)above
    Since the solution to the set of equations (12) is unique, and these equations determine
the payments in equilibria consisting of a core set of ethnicities chosen by any leader, the
optimal coalitions defined in Proposition (2) will also apply whenever there exists a core set
of ethnicities included in all governing coalitions. An alternative equilibrium set of payments
and optimal coalition can only arise were there to be equilibria where there does not exist a
‘core’ set of ethnicities chosen by all leaders. We have already shown in Lemma 1 that this
cannot occur. ¥
    No revolutions along the equilibrium path condition
    If (3)or (4)fails then the indicator variable, <(Ω) = 1always so that the government faces
a constant revolution. We thus have:
                                                                µ             ¶
                                    Σ∈Ω
                                                           Σ∈Ω
                                                                         
                         (Ω) =            ∗ +         (Ω) ∗ 1 −            
                                                                      

    Note that we do not have to consider a leader constructing a coalition that included an
insider mounting revolutions against the government each period. If such a group would
revolt as insiders, they would also, at worse, revolt as outsiders, and they do not cost the
leader patronage in that case, so they would not be included. A suﬃcient condition to rule
out constant revolutions is that it is not worthwhile for the leader to tolerate such revolutions
from even the smallest group of outsiders,   This group represents the lowest chance of
revolution success, so a leader unwilling to bear this risk, will not bear it from any larger
                        0
excluded group. Let Ω denote the coalition formed by including all groups  6=  Thus we
have as a suﬃcient condition for no revolutions along the equilibrium path:
                                              ³     ´
                            ∗ + (Ω0 ) ∗ 1 −         (Ω) 
                                                    
This is satisfied for suﬃciently low  and we assume that  is suﬃciently low so that this
condition never binds.

   No coups along the equilibrium path condition.
   We will now derive and discuss a suﬃcient condition for the leader’s choice of completely
ensuring against coups from any group  ∈ Ω .
   Under  solving (8) it is never worthwhile for an elite included in the coalition to exercise


                                               55
his coup option. We now show the condition under which the leader will choose to give
transfers solving (8). What is the alternative to solving this condition? It may be better for
a leader to include a group so that it will not be willing to walk out and join a revolution
against the leader, but that it would still exercise a coup option if one arose. Under this
condition, the  given to it can be lower, denote it 0 . This 0 has to be high enough that
the group  does not simply walk straight out and start a revolution, but not¡high  ¢ enough so
that  will be loyal if he has a coup chance. This is solved as follows. Let 0 Ω denote the
value to a member of group  in leader 0  coalition if he is receiving 0    The amount
that is just suﬃcient to stop a member of  forming a coalition against him is given by:
             µP               ¶                µ   P               ¶
                     + 
                 ∈Ω                            + 
                                                      ∈Ω
                                                                               ¡ ¢
                                           + 1−                   0 = 0 Ω .
                                                         
         ¡ ¢       0 +              0+ 
Since 0 Ω =          1−(1−)
                                          0 =     1−(1−)
                                                                    and   this implies
                       ∙                  µP               ¶   µ     P               ¶             ¸
                                                  + 
                                              ∈Ω                           + 
                                                                        ∈Ω
    0=     (1 −  (1 − ))                     + 1−                      − 
                                                                             
                                                                          ¡       ¢
The trade oﬀ faced by the leader is between personally saving  − 0  and facing a
possible coup if the opportunity arises for any member of group . Notice that the trade oﬀ
is in theory ambiguous with respect to which size group should be paid below  . A large
group allows large savings, but it is also a very likely source of coups.
    Similarly to the case of revolutions, we assume there is a personal cost   0 associated
to the leader falling victim of a coup (independently of winning or losing, as for revolutions).
A suﬃciently high loss  will rule out any willingness by the leader of taking chances with
coups. The condition for the leader to exclude coups from group  is:
                ¡                  ¡ ¢                ¢
        ̄ +  (1 − )  Ω +  ≥
        µ                   ¶µ                                                                    ¶
                                     ¡      0
                                                  ¢          ¡       
                                                                            ¡ ¢      
                                                                                                 ¢
           1 − P               ̄ +      −  +  +  (1 − )           Ω + 
                    ∈Ω            
                     ¡      ¡                             ¢¢      
        + P            0 +  (1 − )  +  −  P          .
               ∈Ω                                              ∈Ω 

Notice that this condition is monotonic in the loss , hence there is always a suﬃciently high
cost of a coup so that the leader chooses to fully insure against it.
    The rationale behind this suﬃcient condition is parsimony in the number of model para-
meters to be estimated from the data. The advantage of this treatment is that since cost 
is not incurred on the equilibrium path, and we assume it is large enough so that the leader’s
no coup condition never binds,  will not enter into the estimating equations.
    A final comment is in order. If a leader is victim of a coup, then he suﬀers a large one
period cost   0. This is asymmetric in that such cost is not also incurred by the failed
coup leader, who only gets 0 upon failure in (8). We think of  as the counterpart of the
leadership premium  that the leader also receives asymmetrically. Leaders are diﬀerent
from other elites: when you become a leader you obtain personal rents, but you also face a
risk of a large negative cost if you are deposed.

                                                            56
REFERENCES
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2001. “A Theory of Political Transitions”
     American Economic Review, 91(4): 938-963.

 [2] Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2005. Economic Origins of Dictatorship
     and Democracy. Columbia University Press, New York.

 [3] Acemoglu, Daron Georgy Egorov and Constantin Sonin. 2008. “Coalition For-
     mation in Non-Democracies”, Review of Economic Studies, 75: 987-1009.

 [4] Adachi, Takanori and Yasutora Watanabe. 2007. “Ministerial Weights and Gov-
     ernment Formation: Estimation Using a Barganing Model” Journal of Law, Economics,
     and Organization. 24(1).

 [5] Aghion, Phillipe, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi. 2004. “Endogenous
     Political Institutions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(2), May.

 [6] Amy, Douglas. 2002. Real Choices/New Voices. New York: Columbia University Press.

 [7] Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeshauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat,
     Romain Wacziarg. 2003.“Fractionalization” Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2): 155-
     194

 [8] Ansolabehere, Stephen, Snyder, James, Aaron B. Strauss, and Michael M.
     Ting. 2005. “Voting Weights and Formateur Advantages in the Formation of Coalition
     Governments” American Journal of Political Science, 49(3): 550-563.

 [9] Arriola, Leonardo R. 2009. “Patronage and Political Stability in Africa” Comparative
     Political Studies, 42(10), 1339-62.

[10] Baron, David and John Ferejohn (1989), “Bargaining in Legislatures” American
     Political Science Review 83 (December), 1181

[11] Baumol, William J., John C. Panzar and Robert D. Willig. 1982. Contestable
     Markets and the Theory of Industry Structure. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

[12] Bates, Robert. 1981. Markets and States in Tropical Africa: The Poltical Basis of
     Agricultural Policies. University of California Press.

[13] Berman, Bruce. 1998. “Ethnicity, Patronage and the African State: The Politics of
     Uncivil Nationalism.” African Aﬀairs 97:305-341.

[14] Besley, Timothy, and Masayuki Kudamatsu. 2008. “Making Autocracy Work” In-
     stitutions and Economic Performance, edited by Elhanan Helpman (Harvard University
     Press).

[15] Bienen, John, Henry Londregan and Nicolas van de Walle. 1995. “Ethnicity
     and Leadership Succession in Africa.” International Studies Quarterly, 39(1):1-25.


                                           57
[16] Breusch, T.S. and Adrian R. Pagan. 1980. “The Lagrange Multiplier Test and Its
     Applications to Model Specifications in Econometrics”, Review of Economic Studies,
     47: 239-253.

[17] Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Alastair Smith, Randolph Siverson, and James
     D. Morrow. 2003. The Logic of Political Survival. MIT Press, Cambridge.

[18] Burgess, Robin, Remi Jedwaby, Edward Miguel, Ameet Morjaria, and Ger-
     ard Padro i Miquel. 2011. “Ethnic Favoritism” mimeo LSE.

[19] Carey, J., and Hix, S. 2011. “The electoral sweet spot: Low-magnitude proportional
     electoral systems”. American Journal of Political Science, 55, 383-397.

[20] Clarke, Kevin A. 2003. “Nonparametric Model Discrimination in International Rela-
     tions,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 47(1), 72-93.

[21] Diermeier, Daniel, Hulya Eraslan, and Antonio Merlo. 2003. “A Structural
     Model of Government Formation” Econometrica, 71(1): 27-70.

[22] Diermeier, Daniel and Antonio Merlo. 2004. “An Empirical Investigation of Coali-
     tional Barganing Procedures” Journal of Public Economics, 88(3-4): 783-797.

[23] Diermeier, Daniel and Randy Stevenson. 1999. “Cabinet Survival and Competing
     Risks” American Journal of Political Science, 43(5): 1051-1098.

[24] Easterly, William R. and Levine, Ross. 1997. “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies
     and Ethnic Divisions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1997, 112(4), pp.
     1203-50.
[25] Fearon, James D. 2003. “Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country” Journal of Eco-
     nomic Growth, 8(2): 195-222

[26] Gandhi, Jennifer and Przeworski, Adam. 2006. “Cooperation, cooptation and
     rebellion under dictatorship.” Economics and Politics, 18(1), 1-26.
[27] Gandhi, Jennifer. 2008. Political Institutions under Dictatorship. New York: Cam-
     bridge University Press.

[28] Gallagher, Michael. 1991. “Proportionality, Disproportionality, and Electoral Sys-
     tems”. Electoral Sudies 10:33-51.
[29] Geddes, Barbara. 2003. Paradigms and sand castles: Research design in comparative
     politics. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

[30] Haber, Stephen. 2006. “Authoritarian government”. In Barry Weingast & Donland
     Wittman, The Oxford handbook of political economy. New York: Oxford University
     Press.

[31] Khapoya, Vincent. 1980. “Kenya Under Moi: Continuity or Change?” Africa Today,
     27(1), 17-32.

                                          58
[32] Jackson RH and CG Rosberg. 1982. Personal Rule in Black Africa: Prince, Auto-
     crat, Prophet, Tyrant. UC Berkely Press CA.

[33] Kotzé Hennie and Caryl Steyn. 2003. African Elite Perspectives: AU and NEPAD.
     A Comparative Study Across Seven African Countries Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung: Jo-
     hannesburg, South Africa.

[34] Magaloni, Beatriz. 2010. “Credible Power-Sharing and the Longevity of Authoritarian
     Rule.” Comparative Political Studies 41(4/5):715—741.

[35] Merlo, Antonio. 1997. “Bargaining Over Governments in a Stochastic Environment”
     Journal of Political Economy, 105: 101-131.

[36] Michalopoulos, Stelios. 2012. “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity” American
     Economic Review, 102(4): 1508-39.

[37] Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou. 2011. “The Long-Run Eﬀects of
     the Scramble For Africa” NBER WP 17620.

[38] Mulligan, C. and K. Tsui. 2008. “Causes and Consequences of Political Competi-
     tiveness” mimeo University of Chicago.

[39] Osaghae, Eghosa E. 1989. “The Federal Cabinet, 1951-1984.” In Federal Character
     and Federalism in Nigeria, edited by Peter Ekeh and Eghosa Osaghae. Ibadan: Heine-
     mann Educational Books.

[40] Padro-i-Miquel, Gerard. 2007. “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The
     Politics of Fear”, Review of Economic Studies, 74(4): 1259-127.

[41] Posner, Daniel 2004. “Measuring Ethnic Fractionalization in Africa.” American Jour-
     nal of Political Science, 48: 849—863.

[42] Posner, Daniel. 2005. Institutions and Ethnic Politics in Africa. Cambridge: Cam-
     bridge University Press.

[43] Posner, Daniel and Daniel Young. 2007. “The Institutionalization of Political Power
     in Africa.” Journal of Democracy 18(3).

[44] Rainer, Ilia and Francesco Trebbi. 2011. “New Tools for the Analysis of Political
     Power in Africa.” NBER Africa Project Volume.

[45] Rainer, Ilia, Patrick Francois, and Francesco Trebbi. 2012. “The Dictator’s Inner
     Circle.” mimeo UBC.

[46] Snyder, James, Michael M. Ting and Stephen Ansolabehere. 2005. “Legislative
     Bargaining Under Weighted Voting” American Economic Review, 95(4): 981-1004.

[47] Tullock,Gordon. 1987. Autocracy. Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands.



                                          59
[48] Vuong, Quang H. 1989. “Likelihood Ratio Tests for Model Selection and Non-Nested
     Hypotheses,” Econometrica, 2, 307-333

[49] Wintrobe, Ronald.1990. “The Tinpot and the Totalitarian: An Economic Theory of
     Dictatorship.” American Political Science Review. 84(3), September : 849-72.

[50] Wintrobe, Ronald. 1998. The Political Economy of Dictatorship. Cambridge: Cam-
     bridge University Press.

[51] Wittman, Donald A.1995. The Myth of Democratic Failure: Why Political Institu-
     tions are Eﬃcient. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                         60
Table 1: African Cabinets - Summary Statistics by
Country
                                                                                                                                                                                   Number of      Percent of
                                                                                                                            Average          Total          Average               Government-    Government-
                                                                                                                                                                         Number
                        Time                            Years                           Number of         Number of          Size of       Number of       Number of       of      Ministers      Ministers
                       Period           Years         with Two         Number of          Leaders        Government-      Government        Unique        Governments    Ethnic   with Missing   with Missing
Country               Covered          Missing      Governments      Governments          in Power         Ministers        (# posts)      Ministers      per Minister   Groups    Ethnicity      Ethnicity

Benin                 1960-2004      1969, 1975       1968, 1970           45                10               730             16.22           209             3.49         15          1            0.14%
Cameroon             1960-2004       1969, 1975          1968              44                2               1445             32.84           262             5.52         21         43            2.98%
Congo-
Brazzaville           1960-2004      1969, 1975       1968, 1970           45                 7               918             20.40           239             3.84         10          9            0.98%
Cote d'Ivoire         1960-2004         1975             1970              45                 4              1256             27.91           233             5.39         17          0             0%
Dem. Rep.
of Congo             1961-2004       1972, 1974      1970, 1973            44                4               1352             30.73           515             2.63         30          5            0.37%
Gabon                1960-2004          1975                               44                 2              1173             26.66           185              6.34        10          6            0.51%
Ghana                 1960-2004         1975             1970              45                 9              1140             25.33           362             3.15         22          0             0%
Guinea                1960-2004         1975             1969              45                 2              1213             26.96           244              4.97        9           4            0.33%
Kenya                1964-2004          1975             1970              41                 3              1010             24.63           155             6.52         16          2            0.20%
Liberia              1960-2004          1975             1970              45                10               938             20.84           272             3.45         15          9            0.96%
Nigeria               1961-2004         1975             1970              44                11              1499             34.07           473             3.17         17         13            0.87%
Sierra Leone         1960-2004       1972, 1975       1970, 1973           45                 9              1109             24.64           288             3.85         14          0             0%
Tanzania             1965-2004       1972, 1974       1970, 1973           40                 3              1016             25.40           158             6.43         37          0             0%
Togo                 1960-2004          1975             1970              45                3                757             16.82           199             3.80         20          0             0%
Uganda                1963-2004      1972, 1974       1970, 1973           42                 6              1037             24.69           205              5.06        26          3            0.29%

Notes: In the "Number of Leaders in Power" column, we count a new nonconsecutive term in office of the same leader as a new leader. Source: Rainer and Trebbi (2011).
Table 2: Summary Statistics by
Group
                                                       Std.
             Variable               Obs       Mean     Dev.     Min     Max
                                     Africa
  Group's Share of Cabinet Posts    11749      0.054    0.083       0    0.882
  Group's Share of Population       11749      0.054    0.062   0.004     0.39
  Leader’s Ethnic Group Indicator   11749      0.061     0.24       0        1
  Largest Ethnic Group Indicator    11749      0.058    0.234       0        1
  Coalition Member Indicator        11749      0.552    0.497       0        1
Table 3: Elite Inclusiveness in Africa.
Country                                           Average Share of the Population Not
                                                  Represented in Government
Benin                                                                              28.23
Cameroon                                                                           17.64
Cote d'Ivoire                                                                      13.93
Dem. Rep. Congo                                                                    28.17
Gabon                                                                              13.72
Ghana                                                                              29.84
Guinea                                                                              7.54
Kenya                                                                               9.21
Liberia                                                                            50.38
Nigeria                                                                            12.02
Rep. of Congo                                                                      11.13
Sierra Leone                                                                       15.92
Tanzania                                                                           42.87
Togo                                                                               31.95
Uganda                                                                             27.91
Average                                                                            22.70


Table 4: Group Size, Leadership, and Cabinet Membership, 1960-2004. All Ethnic
Groups
                                                     Leader          Leader
                 In Government? In Government?      Group?          Group?
                         (1)              (2)          (3)              (4)
  Group Size           6.5887           8.0741       0.5353           0.5807
                      (1.0925)        (0.6245)      (0.0871)        (0.1540)
  Largest Group                        -0.5702                       -0.0125
                                      (0.0593)                      (0.0356)

  Country FE                 Yes                    Yes                  Yes                Yes
  Year FE                    Yes                    Yes                  Yes                Yes
  N                         11,749                 11,749               11,749             11,749
Notes: Dep. Var. (1), (2) = Dummy for membership of the ruling coalition. Dep. Var. Cols. (3), (4) =
Dummy for the group being the ethnicity of the leader. Group Size = Ethnic Share of Population. Largest
Group = Largest Ethnic Group. Probit marginal effects and standard errors clustered at the country level
in parentheses below.
  Table 5: Elite Disproportionality in Africa.
  Country                          Disproportionality Mean
  Benin                                                    16.59
  Cameroon                                                 11.35
  Cote d'Ivoire                                            13.48
  Dem. Rep. Congo                                          12.96
  Gabon                                                    15.64
  Ghana                                                    16.39
  Guinea                                                   16.60
  Kenya                                                    11.06
  Liberia                                                  38.01
  Nigeria                                                  14.24
  Rep. of Congo                                            19.62
  Sierra Leone                                             17.03
  Tanzania                                                 16.06
  Togo                                                     17.43
  Uganda                                                   14.32
  Average                                                  16.72
  Note: Gallagher (1991) least squares disproportionality measure reported.


  Table 6: Leadership in Cabinet Formation, Group Size, and Allocation of Cabinet Seats,
                               1960-2004. All Ethnic Groups
                        Share of All        Share of All    Share of Top    Share of Top
                       Cabinet Seats       Cabinet Seats    Cabinet Seats Cabinet Seats
                            (1)                   (2)            (3)             (4)
  Group Size              0.7740               1.0142          0.7649          0.8976
                         (0.0755)             (0.1437)        (0.0713)        (0.1644)
  Group Size^2                                  -0.885                         -0.631
                                               (0.496)                         (0.604)
  Leader Group            0.1126               0.1110          0.2084          0.2071
                         (0.0270)             (0.0275)        (0.0257)        (0.0259)
  Largest Group                                -0.0044                         0.0105
                                              (0.0249)                        (0.0331)
  Country FE               Yes                   Yes             Yes             Yes
  Year FE                  Yes                   Yes             Yes             Yes
  R2                       0.55                  0.55           0.49            0.49
  N                       11,749               11,749          11,749          11,749
Notes: Dep. Var. Cols. (1), (3) = Share of All Cabinet Posts Reported. Dep. Var. (2), (4) = Share of Top Cabinet
Posts (Presidency/Premiership, Defense, Budget, Commerce, Finance, Treasury, Economy, Agriculture, Justice,
Foreign). Standard errors clustered at the country level in parentheses. Group Size = Ethnic Share of Population.
Largest Group = Largest Ethnic Group. Group size squared coefficient and standard errors are x10,000.
                       Table 7: Full Cabinet - Maximum Likelihood Estimates
a                       11.5
                        (1.4)
                     0.115
                     (0.012)
d                       0.95
                                                                                           Insider IC constraint
Country                           r                       F            logLL                violated?

Benin                   63.5       0.893     1.0e-13         1.2e+13       106.8494                                no
                        (5.0)    (0.011)      (0.018)       (2.1e24)
Cameroon               254.5      0.9692     3.8e-13         2.6e+12       589.6414                                no
                      (15.3)    (0.0047)    (0.0083)       (5.5e+23)
Congo                  178.8       0.886        0.200            3.99      514.6169                                no
                      (10.3)     (0.011)      (0.034)          (0.95)
Cote d'Ivoire          172.7      0.9209        0.381            0.33      418.7874                                no
                      (11.8)    (0.0076)      (0.016)          (0.12)
Gabon                   72.9      0.9847     3.8e-11         2.5e+10       201.4787                                no
                        (6.8)   (0.0092)      (0.081)      (5.3e+19)
Ghana                   79.6       0.854          0.77           0.41      150.2744                                no
                        (4.8)    (0.013)        (0.38)         (0.89)
Guinea                 126.7      0.9909        0.089              6.9     270.5889                                no
                      (10.5)    (0.0035)      (0.021)            (2.1)
Kenya                  250.9      0.9667        0.107              6.9     562.5347                                no
                      (14.5)    (0.0042)      (0.025)            (2.0)
Liberia                 24.5       0.894         0.233          -2.26       -67.6506                             yes
                        (2.0)    (0.014)      (0.056)          (0.23)
Nigeria                139.9      0.9577        0.385            1.03      521.5482                                no
                        (7.3)   (0.0046)      (0.045)          (0.22)
Rep. of Congo           76.0      0.9317         0.498          0.000      261.4404                                no
                        (5.2)   (0.0071)      (0.033)         (0.086)
Sierra Leone            69.8      0.9010         0.574          0.262      180.2609                                no
                        (5.2)    0.0092)      (0.034)         (0.051)
Tanzania               142.8      1.0000        0.112            4.84      337.3617                                no
                        (7.2)   (0.0058)      (0.040)          (2.56)
Togo                    53.6       0.840         0.582           0.34        45.4974                               no
                        (4.2)    (0.014)      (0.060)          (0.17)
Uganda                 134.3       0.929       1.0000        1.5e-12       273.8432                                no
                        (8.5)    (0.016)     (8.1e-8)        (1.4e-7)
Notes: Asymptotic Standard Errors in Parentheses. The logLL reported is specific to the contribution of each country.
The insider constraint of a unilateral deviation of a coalition member is checked ex post in the last column. This is
constraint (3) in the text.
   Table 8: Full Cabinet - Slopes and Leadership Premia

                                      Slope:        Leadership
Country                              F       Premium

Benin                                        1.26         0.120
                                          (0.034)       (0.025)
Cameroon                                     0.98         0.086
                                          (0.016)       (0.008)
Congo                                        1.00         0.074
                                          (0.040)       (0.009)
Cote d'Ivoire                                0.20         0.148
                                          (0.066)       (0.008)
Gabon                                        0.93         0.100
                                          (0.058)       (0.020)
Ghana                                        1.36         0.016
                                          (0.120)       (0.021)
Guinea                                       0.67         0.199
                                          (0.032)       (0.010)
Kenya                                        0.82         0.105
                                          (0.029)       (0.006)
Liberia                                     -0.69         0.430
                                          (0.260)       (0.041)
Nigeria                                      0.64         0.058
                                          (0.035)       (0.008)
Rep. of Congo                                0.00         0.270
                                          (0.085)       (0.009)
Sierra Leone                                 0.35         0.198
                                          (0.055)       (0.016)
Tanzania                                     0.60         0.070
                                          (0.095)       (0.015)
Togo                                         0.48         0.234
                                          (0.140)       (0.013)
Uganda                                       1.68     -2.7e-14
                                          (0.053)      (2.1e-9)
Average (excluding LIB)                      0.78          0.12
Notes: Asymptotic Standard Errors in Parentheses.
                Table 9: Top Cabinet Posts Only - Maximum Likelihood Estimates
a                       11.5
                        (1.4)
                     0.115
                     (0.012)
d                       0.95
                                                                                           Insider IC constraint
Country                           r                       F            logLL                violated?

Benin                  18.6     0.821           0.35               2.0    -209.9855                                no
                       (2.1) (0.016)          (0.18)             (2.1)
Cameroon               40.1     0.837          0.443             0.27     -259.4370                                no
                       (3.9) (0.014)         (0.067)           (0.41)
Congo                  29.3     0.853          0.053             20.4     -485.2384                                no
                       (2.9) (0.014)         (0.056)           (25.5)
Cote d'Ivoire          22.9     0.910          0.116             1.59     -281.0537                                no
                       (2.9) (0.015)         (0.041)           (2.21)
Gabon                  18.9     0.815        5.6e-13         2.5e+12        -57.2651                               no
                       (2.1) (0.017)          (0.33)       (1.6e+24)
Ghana                  10.4     0.816           0.29             1.36     -488.0237                                no
                       (1.0) (0.016)          (0.18)           (2.91)
Guinea                 25.9     0.919          0.405             0.43       -19.3376                               no
                       (2.9) (0.008)         (0.079)           (0.32)
Kenya                  23.4     0.907        6.2e-15         6.0e+14      -152.3001                                no
                       (2.5) (0.016)         (0.004)       (1.1e+26)
Liberia                10.8     1.000          0.071         -3.0121      -282.3815                              yes
                       (1.6) (0.023)         (0.029)         (1.3e-5)
Nigeria                27.6    0.9218          0.275             1.47     -180.0479                                no
                       (2.7) (0.0085)        (0.071)           (0.83)
Rep. of Congo          19.7    0.9057          0.583            -0.48       -75.7406                               no
                       (2.2) (0.0093)        (0.058)           (0.10)
Sierra Leone           16.6     0.897           0.36             1.35     -205.9451                                no
                       (1.3)   0.012)         (0.10)           (0.79)
Tanzania               43.0     0.876          0.249             0.18     -403.8598                                no
                       (4.0) (0.012)         (0.042)           (0.55)
Togo                   15.8     0.836          0.411             0.36     -382.4744                                no
                       (2.1) (0.014)         (0.082)           (0.45)
Uganda                 24.5     0.832        9.8e-14         1.5e+13      -439.4047                                no
                       (2.5) (0.015)          (0.03)       (4.7e+24)
Notes: Asymptotic Standard Errors in Parentheses. The logLL reported is specific to the contribution of each country.
The insider constraint of a unilateral deviation of a coalition member is checked ex post in the last column. This is
constraint (3) in the text.
 Table 10: Top Cabinet Posts Only - Slopes and Leadership
                         Premia

                                      Slope:        Leadership
Country                              F       Premium

Benin                                        1.06        0.282
                                           (0.31)      (0.030)
Cameroon                                     0.22        0.312
                                           (0.27)      (0.018)
Congo                                        1.13        0.207
                                           (0.15)      (0.028)
Cote d'Ivoire                                0.21        0.436
                                           (0.21)      (0.031)
Gabon                                        1.44        0.347
                                           (0.34)      (0.026)
Ghana                                        0.57        0.346
                                           (0.74)      (0.044)
Guinea                                       0.30        0.293
                                           (0.13)      (0.026)
Kenya                                       0.989        0.282
                                          (0.058)      (0.023)
Liberia                                     -0.23        0.572
                                           (0.10)      (0.074)
Nigeria                                      0.56        0.209
                                           (0.13)      (0.033)
Rep. of Congo                               -0.67        0.319
                                           (0.22)      (0.028)
Sierra Leone                                 0.68        0.223
                                           (0.14)      (0.037)
Tanzania                                     0.06        0.152
                                           (0.17)      (0.020)
Togo                                         0.25        0.341
                                           (0.25)      (0.030)
Uganda                                      1.483        0.243
                                          (0.086)      (0.026)
Average (excluding LIB)                      0.59         0.28
Notes: Asymptotic Standard Errors in Parentheses.
Table 11: Specification Tests

Full Sample. Generalized likelihood ratio tests: Null is equivalent fit between the specified model and the Baseline model
                                                                                      Log-           Vuong        p-       Clarke     p-
Model                                                                                 likelihood     statistic    value statistic     value
Baseline                                                                                      4367.1            -      -            -       -
Random Allocation                                                                             3136.7         19.0 0.000          7478 0.000
Big Man Allocation                                                                           -5134.2         60.1 0.000          6070 0.000
Observations                                                                                  11749
Note: Clarke statistic corresponds to number of positive differences between log
likelihoods. The null corresponds to
Observations/2=5875 positive differences. Vuong test statistic is distributed N(0,1).

Military Regimes Only. Generalized likelihood ratio tests: Null is equivalent fit between the specified model and the Baseline model
                                                                                      Log-           Vuong        p-      Clarke     p-
Model                                                                                 likelihood     statistic    value statistic    value
Baseline                                                                                      2099.2            -      -           -       -
Random Allocation                                                                             1400.1         13.7 0.000         3270 0.000
Big Man Allocation                                                                           -2282.1         40.1 0.000         2699 0.000
Observations                                                                                   5156
Note: Clarke statistic corresponds to number of positive differences between log
likelihoods. The null corresponds to
Observations/2=2578 positive differences. Vuong test statistic is distributed N(0,1).

Civilian Regimes Only. Generalized likelihood ratio tests: Null is equivalent fit between the specified model and the Baseline model
                                                                                      Log-           Vuong        p-      Clarke      p-
Model                                                                                 likelihood     statistic    value statistic     value
Baseline                                                                                      2552.7            -      -            -       -
Random Allocation                                                                             1880.1         12.4 0.000         3976 0.000
Big Man Allocation                                                                           -2832.2         44.5 0.000         3381 0.036
Observations                                                                                   6593
Note: Clarke statistic corresponds to number of positive differences between log
likelihoods. The null corresponds to
Observations/2=3297 positive differences. Vuong test statistic is distributed N(0,1).
Table 11: Specification Tests (cont.)

Autocratic Regimes Only. Generalized likelihood ratio tests: Null is equivalent fit between the specified model and the Baseline model
                                                                                      Log-           Vuong        p-     Clarke        p-
Model                                                                                 likelihood     statistic    value statistic      value
Baseline                                                                                      4173.6            -      -           -         -
Random Allocation                                                                             2986.3         18.8 0.000         6910 0.000
Big Man Allocation                                                                           -4799.0         58.2 0.000         5699 0.000
Observations                                                                                  11013
Note: Clarke statistic corresponds to number of positive differences between log
likelihoods. The null corresponds to
Observations/2=5507 positive differences. Vuong test statistic is distributed N(0,1).

Democratic Regimes Only. Generalized likelihood ratio tests: Null is equivalent fit between the specified model and the Baseline model
                                                                                            Log-           Vuong           p-       Clarke        p-
Model                                                                                       likelihood     statistic       value statistic        value
Baseline Model                                                                                       278.8             -         -             -        -
Random Allocation                                                                                    183.1          -3.5 0.000             234 0.000
Big Man Allocation                                                                                  -318.9         12.7 0.000              366 0.682
Observations                                                                                          722
Note: Clarke statistic corresponds to number of positive differences between log
likelihoods. The null corresponds to
Observations/2=361 positive differences. Vuong test statistic is distributed N(0,1).
Note: Values in bold indicate the test rejects equal fit of the models in favor of the main baseline model against the alternative model. Positive log-
likelihood values are a natural occurrence in censored models.
Figure 1: Pop. Share of Ethnicities Not Represented in Cabinet, African Sample, 1960-2004
  Pop. Share of Ethnicities Not Represented in Government


                                                                          Benin                     Cameroon                   CongoKinshasa                   Cote d'Ivoire
                                                            100
                                                            50
                                                            0




                                                                          Gabon                      Ghana                         Guinea                         Kenya
                                                            100
                                                            50
                                                            0




                                                                          Liberia                    Nigeria                  Republic of Congo                Sierra Leone
                                                            100
                                                            50
                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                      1960m1    1980m1         2000m1

                                                                         Tanzania                     Togo                        Uganda
                                                            100
                                                            50
                                                            0




                                                             1960m1      1980m1     2000m1 1960m1   1980m1     2000m1 1960m1     1980m1     2000m1

                                                                                                                  Year
                                                            Graphs by Country




Figure 2: Disproportionality in Cabinet Allocation, African Sample, 1960-2004

                                                                          Benin                     Cameroon                   CongoKinshasa                   Cote d'Ivoire
                                                            60
                                                            30
                                                            0




                                                                          Gabon                      Ghana                         Guinea                         Kenya
                                                            60
  LSq Disproportionality
                                                            30
                                                            0




                                                                          Liberia                    Nigeria                  Republic of Congo                Sierra Leone
                                                            60
                                                            30
                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                       1960      1980           2000

                                                                         Tanzania                     Togo                        Uganda
                                                            60
                                                            30
                                                            0




                                                                  1960    1980       2000   1960     1980       2000   1960        1980        2000

                                                                                                                  Year
                                                            Graphs by Country
Figure 3: Difference between Cabinet Shares and Population Shares. Guinea, 1960-2004


                            Fulani                                Kissi                               Kpelle
   -20 0 20




                            Malinke                           Mano                                    Susu
   -20 0 20




                                                                                       1960           1980           2000

                            Toma                             Yalunka
   -20 0 20




              1960          1980           2000   1960       1980          2000
                                   Share of Cabinet Seats - Pop. Share in Guinea
                                            If Leader Group                         If Not Leader
                                            Leader Transition
  Graphs by Ethnicity




Figure 4: Difference between Cabinet Shares and Population Shares. Kenya, 1960-2004

                     Boran                         Embu                    Kalenjin                          Kamba
   20
   -20 0




                     Kikuyu                        Kisii                    Luhya                             Luo
   20
   -20 0




                     Masai                         Meru                    Mijikenda                     Rendille
   20
   -20 0




                                                                                               1960          1980     2000

                     Somali                        Taita                   Turkana
   20
   -20 0




           1960      1980          2000   1960    1980     2000     1960    1980        2000

                                    Share of Cabinet Seats - Pop. Share in Kenya
                                            If Leader Group                         If Not Leader
                                            Leader Transition
  Graphs by Ethnicity
Figure 5: In-Sample Fit of Coalition Size

                                                     Coalition size (fraction of population)

 1.000
 0.900
 0.800
 0.700
 0.600
                                                                                                                                                                       Predicted
 0.500
                                                                                                                                                                       Observed
 0.400
 0.300
 0.200
 0.100
 0.000




Figure 6: In-Sample Successfully Predicted Groups in % of Population

                                               Correct predictions (fraction of population)
                                                                                                          Rep. of Congo
                                     Cote d'Ivoire




                                                                                                                          Sierra Leone
                  Cameroon




                                                                     Guinea

                                                                              Kenya



                                                                                                Nigeria
                                                     Gabon




 1.000
                                                             Ghana
                             Congo




                                                                                                                                                           Uganda
          Benin




 0.900
                                                                                                                                                    Togo




 0.800
                                                                                                                                         Tanzania
                                                                                      Liberia




 0.700

 0.600                                                                                                                                                              Predicted out
 0.500                                                                                                                                                              Predicted in

 0.400

 0.300

 0.200

 0.100

 0.000
Figure 7: In-Sample Leadership Shares

                                   Leadership share

 0.600

 0.500

 0.400

                                                          Predicted
 0.300
                                                          Observed

 0.200

 0.100

 0.000




Figure 8: In-Sample Shares to Largest Group

                                Largest ethnicity share

 0.400

 0.350

 0.300

 0.250
                                                          Predicted
 0.200
                                                          Observed
 0.150

 0.100

 0.050

 0.000
Figure 9: Out-of-Sample Fit of Coalition Size (1980-2004 predicted based on estimation of
1960-80 sample)

                                                     Coalition size (fraction of population)

 1.000
 0.900
 0.800
 0.700
 0.600
                                                                                                                                                                       Predicted
 0.500
                                                                                                                                                                       Observed
 0.400
 0.300
 0.200
 0.100
 0.000




Figure 10: Out-of-Sample Fit, Successfully Predicted Groups in % of Population (1980-
2004 predicted based on estimation of 1960-80 sample)

                                               Correct predictions (fraction of population)
                                                                                                          Rep. of Congo
                                     Cote d'Ivoire




                                                                                                                          Sierra Leone
                                                                                                Nigeria
                                                                              Kenya
                                                                     Guinea
                                                     Gabon

                                                             Ghana
                  Cameroon




 1.000
                             Congo




                                                                                                                                                           Uganda
                                                                                                                                                    Togo




 0.900
                                                                                                                                         Tanzania
          Benin




 0.800
 0.700
                                                                                      Liberia




                                                                                                                                                                    Predicted out
 0.600
                                                                                                                                                                    Predicted in
 0.500
 0.400
 0.300
 0.200
 0.100
 0.000
Figure 11: Out-of-Sample Fit of Leadership Shares (1980-2004 predicted based on
estimation of 1960-80 sample)

                                   Leadership share

 1.000
 0.900
 0.800
 0.700
 0.600
                                                                             Predicted
 0.500
                                                                             Observed
 0.400
 0.300
 0.200
 0.100
 0.000




Figure 12: Out-of-Sample Fit, Shares to Largest Group (1980-2004 predicted based on
estimation of 1960-80 sample)

                                Largest ethnicity share

 0.450
 0.400
 0.350
 0.300
 0.250                                                                       Predicted
 0.200                                                                       Observed

 0.150
 0.100
 0.050
 0.000
Figure 13: Counterfactual Coalition Size (1980-2004 predicted based on estimation of 1960-
80 sample). r/r = -.1

                             Coalition size (fraction of population)

1.000
0.900
0.800
0.700
0.600
                                                                           Predicted
0.500
                                                                           Counterfactual
0.400
0.300
0.200
0.100
0.000




Figure 14: Counterfactual Shares to Leader’s Group (1980-2004 predicted based on
estimation of 1960-80 sample). r/r = -.1

                                    Leadership share

 1.200

 1.000

 0.800

                                                                             Predicted
 0.600
                                                                             Counterfactual

 0.400

 0.200

 0.000
Figure 15: Counterfactual Shares to Largest Group (1980-2004 predicted based on
estimation of 1960-80 sample). r/r = -.1

                                   Largest ethnicity share

0.800
0.700
0.600
0.500
                                                                            Predicted
0.400
                                                                            Counterfactual
0.300
0.200
0.100
0.000




Figure 16: Counterfactual Coalition Size (1980-2004 predicted based on estimation of 1960-
80 sample). / = -.25

                             Coalition size (fraction of population)

1.000
0.900
0.800
0.700
0.600
                                                                            Predicted
0.500
                                                                            Counterfactual
0.400
0.300
0.200
0.100
0.000
Figure 17: Counterfactual Shares to Leader’s Group (1980-2004 predicted based on
estimation of 1960-80 sample). / = -.25

                                   Leadership share

 1.000
 0.900
 0.800
 0.700
 0.600
                                                                          Predicted
 0.500
                                                                          Counterfactual
 0.400
 0.300
 0.200
 0.100
 0.000




Figure 18: Counterfactual Shares to Largest Group (1980-2004 predicted based on
estimation of 1960-80 sample).  /= -.25

                                  Largest ethnicity share

0.450
0.400
0.350
0.300
0.250                                                                     Predicted
0.200                                                                     Counterfactual
0.150
0.100
0.050
0.000
Figure 19: Counterfactual Coalition Size (1980-2004 predicted based on estimation of 1960-
80 sample). F/F = -.25

                             Coalition size (fraction of population)

1.000
0.900
0.800
0.700
0.600
                                                                            Predicted
0.500
                                                                            Counterfactual
0.400
0.300
0.200
0.100
0.000




Figure 20: Counterfactual Shares to Leader’s Group (1980-2004 predicted based on
estimation of 1960-80 sample). F/F = -.25

                                    Leadership share

 1.000
 0.900
 0.800
 0.700
 0.600
                                                                             Predicted
 0.500
                                                                             Counterfactual
 0.400
 0.300
 0.200
 0.100
 0.000
Figure 21: Counterfactual Shares to Largest Group (1980-2004 predicted based on
estimation of 1960-80 sample). F/F = -.25

                                   Largest ethnicity share

0.450
0.400
0.350
0.300
0.250                                                                       Predicted
0.200                                                                       Counterfactual
0.150
0.100
0.050
0.000




Figure 22: Counterfactual Coalition Size (1980-04 predicted based on estimation of 1960-80
sample). Counterfactual distribution ni= ni - 1% for i=1,..,N/2-1; ni= ni + 1% for
i=N/2+1,..,N.

                             Coalition size (fraction of population)

1.000
0.900
0.800
0.700
0.600
                                                                            Predicted
0.500
                                                                            Counterfactual
0.400
0.300
0.200
0.100
0.000
Figure 23: Counterfactual Shares to Leader’s Group (1980-04 predict. based on estimation
of 1960-80 sample). Counterfactual ni= ni - 1% for i=1,..,N/2-1; ni= ni + 1% for i=N/2+1,..,N.

                                      Leadership share

 1.200

 1.000

 0.800

                                                                                Predicted
 0.600                                                                          Counterfactual

 0.400

 0.200

 0.000




Figure 24: Counterfactual Shares to Largest Group (1980-04 predict. based on estimation
of 1960-80 sample). Counterfactual ni= ni - 1% for i=1,..,N/2-1; ni= ni + 1% for i=N/2+1,..,N.

                                     Largest ethnicity share

0.450
0.400
0.350
0.300
0.250
                                                                                Predicted
0.200
                                                                                Counterfactual
0.150
0.100
0.050
0.000
