NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNCERTAINTY SHOCKS IN A MODEL OF EFFECTIVE DEMAND
Susanto Basu
Brent Bundick
Working Paper 18420
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18420

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012, Revised March 2017

We thank the editor and four referees for extremely helpful comments. Discussions with Nick
Bloom, David Chapman, Fabio Ghironi, Jos´e Mustre-del-R´ o, Taisuke Nakata, Julio
Rotemberg, A. Lee Smith, Stephen Terry, ChristinaWang, and Jonathan Willis improved the
paper substantially. We thank our formal discussants, Robert Barro, Francois Gourio, Liam
Graham, Cosmin Ilut, and Johannes Pfeifer for their insights, and Johannes Pfeifer for pointing
out an error in a previous draft. We have benefited from comments made by participants at
various conferences and seminars. We thank Trenton Herriford for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2012 by Susanto Basu and Brent Bundick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of Effective Demand
Susanto Basu and Brent Bundick
NBER Working Paper No. 18420
September 2012, Revised March 2017
JEL No. E32,E52
ABSTRACT
Can increased uncertainty about the future cause a contraction in output and its components? An
identified uncertainty shock in the data causes significant declines in output, consumption,
investment, and hours worked. Standard general-equilibrium models with flexible prices cannot
reproduce this comovement. However, uncertainty shocks can easily generate comovement with
countercyclical markups through sticky prices. Monetary policy plays a key role in offsetting the
negative impact of uncertainty shocks during normal times. Higher uncertainty has even more
negative effects if monetary policy can no longer perform its usual stabilizing function because of
the zero lower bound. We calibrate our uncertainty shock process using fluctuations in implied
stock market volatility, and show that the model with nominal price rigidity is consistent with
empirical evidence from a structural vector autoregression. We argue that increased uncertainty
about the future likely played a role in worsening the Great Recession. The economic mechanism
we identify applies to a large set of shocks that change expectations of the future without
changing current fundamentals.

Susanto Basu
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
susanto.basu@bc.edu
Brent Bundick
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Research Department
1 Memorial Drive
Kansas City, MO 64198
brent.bundick@kc.frb.org

1

Introduction

Economists and the ﬁnancial press often discuss uncertainty about the future as an important
driver of economic ﬂuctuations and a contributor in the Great Recession. For example, Diamond (2010) says, “What’s critical right now is not the functioning of the labor market, but the
limits on the demand for labor coming from the great caution on the side of both consumers
and ﬁrms because of the great uncertainty of what’s going to happen next.” Recent research
by Bloom (2009), Bloom et al. (2014), Bachmann and Bayer (2013), and Gilchrist, Sim and
Zakrajšek (2013) also suggests that uncertainty shocks can cause ﬂuctuations in macroeconomic
aggregates. However, these papers experience diﬃculty in generating business-cycle comovements among output, consumption, investment, and hours worked from changes in uncertainty.
We argue that this macroeconomic comovement is a key empirical feature of the economy’s
response to an uncertainty shock. Using a structural vector autoregression (VAR), we identify
an uncertainty shock in the data as an exogenous increase in the implied volatility of future
stock returns, an identiﬁcation strategy that is consistent with our theoretical model. Empirically, an uncertainty shock causes statistically signiﬁcant declines in output, consumption,
investment, and hours, with a peak response occurring after about one year. A one standard
deviation increase in uncertainty produces a peak decline in output of about 0.2 percent. Based
on this empirical evidence, we view this macroeconomic comovement as a key minimum condition that business-cycle models driven by uncertainty ﬂuctuations should satisfy.
After presenting this stylized fact, we show why competitive, one-sector, closed-economy
models generally cannot reproduce this comovement in response to changes in uncertainty. Under reasonable assumptions, an increase in uncertainty about the future induces precautionary
saving and lowers consumption. If households supply labor inelastically, then total output remains constant since the level of technology and capital stock remain unchanged in response to
the uncertainty shock. Unchanged total output and reduced consumption together imply that
investment must rise. If households can adjust their labor supply and consumption and leisure
are both normal goods, an increase in uncertainty also induces “precautionary labor supply,”
or a desire for the household to supply more labor for any given level of the real wage. As
current technology and the capital stock remain unchanged, the competitive demand for labor
remains unchanged as well. Thus, higher uncertainty reduces consumption but raises output,
investment, and hours worked. This lack of comovement is a robust prediction of simple neoclassical models subject to uncertainty ﬂuctuations.

2

Yet intuition suggests that the reduction in household expenditure resulting from increased
uncertainty could lead to a general decline in output and its components. We show that this
intuition is typically correct in models where output is demand-determined, at least over some
time horizon. In such models, the reduction in consumption demand reduces output and labor input, which in turn reduces the demand for capital and hence investment. Aggregate
demand-determined output is made consistent with household and ﬁrm optimization through
endogenous movements in markups, which in our model is driven by the standard assumption
of nominal price rigidity. Following Diamond’s (2010) intuition, simple competitive businesscycle models do not exhibit movements in “the demand for labor” as a result of an uncertainty
shock. However, uncertainty shocks do cause shifts in labor demand in non-competitive, stickyprice models with endogenously-varying markups, which capture the intuition articulated by
Diamond. Understanding the dynamics of the demand for labor explains why the two models
behave so diﬀerently in response to a change in uncertainty.
Importantly, the non-competitive model is able to match the estimated eﬀects of uncertainty
shocks in the data. To analyze the quantitative impact of uncertainty shocks, we calibrate and
solve a representative-agent, dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model with capital accumulation and nominal price rigidity. We examine the eﬀects of second-moment shocks
to household discount factors, which we interpret as demand uncertainty. We calibrate our
uncertainty shock process using the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VXO),
which measures the expected volatility of the Standard and Poor’s 100 stock index over the next
30 days. When prices adjust slowly, uncertainty shocks can produce contractions in output and
all its components. In particular, the declines in output, hours, consumption, and investment
in the model are consistent with our empirical evidence. Using simulated data from our model,
we show that our empirical identiﬁcation strategy can recover the true macroeconomic eﬀects
of higher uncertainty.
Finally, we examine the role of monetary policy in determining the equilibrium eﬀects of
uncertainty shocks. Standard monetary policy rules imply that the central bank usually oﬀsets
increases in uncertainty by lowering its nominal policy rate. We show that increases in uncertainty have larger negative eﬀects on the economy if the monetary authority is constrained by
the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. The sharp increase in uncertainty in late 2008
corresponds to a period when the Federal Reserve had a policy rate near zero. Our results
suggest that greater uncertainty, in conjunction with the zero lower bound, can explain over
one-fourth of the drop in output that occurred in late 2008.

3

2

Empirical Evidence

This section presents our key stylized fact: Higher uncertainty about the future causes declines
in output, consumption, investment, and hours worked. To document this feature of the data,
we estimate a VAR with the following variables: a measure of uncertainty, gross domestic product (GDP), consumption, investment, hours worked, the GDP deﬂator, the M2 money stock,
and a measure of the stance of monetary policy. We measure uncertainty using the VXO, a
well-known and readily-observable measure of aggregate uncertainty. Since the VXO data start
in 1986, we estimate our baseline empirical model using quarterly data over the 1986-2014
sample period. With the exception of the monetary policy measure, all other variables enter
the VAR in log levels. Appendix A.1 provides further details on the data construction and the
VAR estimation.
We identify an uncertainty shock using a Cholesky decomposition with the VXO ordered
ﬁrst. This ordering assumes that uncertainty shocks can have an immediate impact on output and its components, but non-uncertainty shocks do not aﬀect the implied stock market
volatility on impact. In Section 5.3, we show that our theoretical model fully supports this
identiﬁcation strategy: First-moment or non-uncertainty shocks in the model have almost no
eﬀect on the expected volatility of future equity returns.
Figure 1 plots the estimated responses to an identiﬁed uncertainty shock along with the 95%
conﬁdence intervals. A one-standard deviation uncertainty shock increases the VXO by 15%.1
On impact, higher uncertainty causes statistically signiﬁcant declines in output, consumption,
and investment.2 Following the shock, output, consumption, investment, and hours all decline
together, with their peak responses occurring after about one year. The peak decline in investment is roughly twice as large as the decline in total output, while consumption moves by
slightly less than output. Prices fall for about two years following the shock. The declines in
inﬂation and economic activity lead the monetary authority to reduce its nominal policy rate
signiﬁcantly. The impulse responses are statistically indistinguishable from zero after about
three years. Figure A.1 in the Appendix shows the time-series of identiﬁed uncertainty shocks.
The empirical model identiﬁes large uncertainty shocks after the 1987 stock market crash, the
1

In annualized percentage points, a one-standard deviation shock raises the level of the VXO to about 24.5%,
from its unconditional average of about 21%.
2
Our results are quantitatively similar to the ﬁndings of Alexopoulos and Cohen (2009) and Jurado, Ludvigson and Ng (2015). These papers ﬁnd that higher uncertainty decreases several monthly indicators of economic
activity. Our responses also share many features with the impulse responses in Figure 3 of Fernández-Villaverde
et al. (2015) following a policy uncertainty shock.

4

failure of Lehman brothers, and the euro area sovereign debt crisis.
Macroeconomic comovment following an uncertainty shock is a robust feature of the data.
Appendix A.2 shows that our key stylized fact survives if we include stock prices in the VAR,
measure uncertainty with the VIX rather than the VXO, order uncertainty last in the VAR, use
higher frequency estimation, or restrict our analysis to the pre-Great Recession sample period.
Based on this empirical evidence, we argue that this macroeconomic comovement is a key
litmus test for models of uncertainty ﬂuctuations. In the following sections, we show that a
standard model with nominal price rigidity is consistent with this empirical evidence. We show
that monetary policy plays a key role in determining the eﬀects of higher uncertainty. At
the end of 2008, the Federal Reserve became constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal
interest rates. In the later sections, we discuss this issue in detail using our theoretical model.
From an econometric standpoint, however, it is less clear how to empirically model the stance
of monetary policy over our full 1986-2014 sample period. In our baseline VAR results, we use
the Wu and Xia (2016) shadow rate as our indicator of monetary policy. In Appendix A.2, we
also show that our key stylized fact remains unchanged if we use alternative measures for the
stance of monetary policy in the VAR.

3

Intuition

We now examine the ability of standard macroeconomic models to generate comovement among
aggregates following an uncertainty shock. We ﬁnd that demand-determined output is the key
mechanism for generating comovement in response to uncertainty ﬂuctuations. As we show
below, changes in aggregate demand are made consistent with household and ﬁrm optimization
via endogenous changes in markups. The economics, however, is that higher uncertainty increases desired saving. Higher desired savings is expansionary if full employment of all factors
is guaranteed, but may be contractionary if output is demand-determined. In such models,
the increase in desired saving by households can easily lead to lower actual saving in general
equilibrium.
We now illustrate these ideas using a few key equations that characterize a large class of
one-sector business-cycle models. These equations link output Yt , consumption Ct , investment
It , hours worked Nt , and the real wage Wt /Pt through the national income accounts identity,
an aggregate production function, and ﬁrst-order conditions for household labor supply and

5

ﬁrm labor demand:
Yt = C t + I t ,

(1)

Yt = F (Kt , Zt Nt ),

(2)

Wt
U1 (Ct , 1 − Nt ) = U2 (Ct , 1 − Nt ),
Pt
Wt
= Zt F2 (Kt , Zt Nt ).
Pt

(3)
(4)

Households want to consume less and save more when uncertainty increases in the economy.
In a model where output is always at its ﬂexible-price or “natural” level, this higher desired
saving translates into higher actual saving. To save more, households would like to reduce
consumption and increase hours worked. Figure 2 illustrates this intuition graphically. Higher
uncertainty increases the marginal utility of wealth λt = U1 (Ct , 1 − Nt ), which shifts the household labor supply curve outward.3 When prices are ﬂexible, ﬁrm labor demand in Equation (4)
only depends on the level of the capital stock Kt and technology Zt , neither of which changes
in response to higher uncertainty. Through the production function, higher labor supply with
unchanged capital and technology means that output must rise. Higher output with lower consumption implies that investment must rise via the national income accounts identity. Thus,
higher uncertainty under ﬂexible prices lowers consumption but causes an expansion in output,
investment, and hours worked.4
When prices adjust slowly, however, aggregate demand determines output in the short run
which reverses the causal ordering of these equations. Higher uncertainty reduces the demand
for consumption goods, which lowers output directly in Equation (1). Lower output reduces
the beneﬁt to owning capital, since the marginal revenue product of capital falls. The decline
in the desired capital stock is reﬂected in a lower level of investment. Since consumption and
investment both fall, output and hours worked both decline, since labor is the only input to
production that can change in response to higher uncertainty.
To make this outcome consistent with household and ﬁrm optimization, ﬁrm markups must
increase. When prices are sticky, the labor demand curve now becomes:
Wt
1
= Zt F2 (Kt , Zt Nt ),
Pt
μt

(5)

where μt is the markup of price over marginal cost. To make the increase in desired labor supply consistent with the reduced demand for output, the labor demand curve in Figure 2 shifts
3

Domeij and Flodén (2006), Pijoan-Mas (2006), Low (2005), and Flodén (2006) show that households also
display precautionary labor supply when they face uninsurable, idiosyncratic income risk.
4
This argument follows Barro and King (1984).

6

inward. Mechanically, precautionary labor supply reduces ﬁrm marginal cost, which increases
the markup when prices are sticky. Thus, equilibrium hours worked may fall as a result of the
shifts in labor supply and labor demand. In the next section, we show that in a reasonably calibrated model with nominal price rigidity, ﬁrm markups increase enough to produce a decrease
in equilibrium hours worked in response to a rise in uncertainty.
Our insights about macroeconomic comovement also apply to other sources of ﬂuctuations,
such as news shocks, shocks to the ﬁnancial system, or expected changes in future tax rates.
Like uncertainty shocks, these disturbances change expected future marginal products of capital
without aﬀecting the intratemporal optimality condition in a competitive model with timeseparable preferences. Our mechanism will also restore comovement in standard models in
response to such shocks, making the resulting predictions more intuitive.5 For example, an
adverse ﬁnancial shock will cause a decline in consumption and hours worked on impact instead
of leading to a temporary consumption boom. In general, we view our results as a test of the
overidentifying predictions of the New Keynesian model. The model was developed to explain
why real variables change in response to monetary shocks, and as Christiano, Eichenbaum
and Evans (2005) show, it can do so quite well. However, the model was not developed to
explain the eﬀects of real shocks. To the extent that the model can also match the responses
to other shocks, then we have more conﬁdence that the model can serve as a parsimonious way
of modeling economic ﬂuctuations in general.

4

Model

This section outlines the baseline dynamic, stochastic general-equilibrium model that we use
in our analysis of uncertainty shocks. The model features optimizing households and ﬁrms and
a central bank that follows a Taylor rule to stabilize inﬂation and oﬀset adverse shocks. We
allow for sticky prices using the quadratic-adjustment cost speciﬁcation of Rotemberg (1982).
Our baseline model considers household discount rate and technology shocks. The discount
rate shocks have a time-varying second moment, which we interpret as the degree of ex ante
uncertainty about future demand. Appendix B contains a detailed derivation of our model.
5

Thus, the mechanism we identify echoes ﬁndings from the prior news shocks literature of Wang (2012),
Kobayashi and Nutahara (2010), and Christiano et al. (2010). These papers show that countercyclical markups
via nominal rigidities can generate macroeconomic comovement following a news shock.

7

4.1

Households

The representative household maximizes lifetime utility given Epstein-Zin preferences over
streams of consumption Ct and leisure 1 − Nt . The key parameters governing household decisions are its risk aversion σ over the consumption-leisure basket and its intertemporal elasticity
of substitution ψ. The parameter θV  (1 − σ) (1 − 1/ψ)−1 controls the household’s preference
for the resolution of uncertainty.6 The household receives labor income Wt for each unit of labor Nt supplied to the intermediate goods-producing ﬁrms. The representative household also
owns the intermediate goods ﬁrm and holds equity shares St and one-period riskless bonds Bt
issued by the representative intermediate goods ﬁrm. Equity shares have a price of PtE and pay
dividends DtE for each share St owned. The riskless bonds return the gross one-period risk-free
interest rate RtR . The household divides its income from labor and its ﬁnancial assets between
consumption Ct and holdings of ﬁnancial assets St+1 and Bt+1 to carry into next period. The
discount rate of the household β is subject to shocks via the stochastic process at .
The representative household maximizes lifetime utility by choosing Ct+s , Nt+s , Bt+s+1 , and
St+s+1 for all s = 0, 1, 2, . . . by solving the following problem:
 
 1−σ
 1  θV

η
1−η θV
1−σ θV 1−σ
+ β Et Vt+1
Vt = max at Ct (1 − Nt )
subject to its intertemporal household budget constraint each period,

 E
Dt
PtE
1
Wt
PtE
St + Bt .
St+1 + R Bt+1 ≤
Nt +
+
Ct +
Pt
Pt
Pt
Pt
Rt
Epstein-Zin utility implies a stochastic discount factor M between periods t and t + 1:

Mt+1 

4.2

∂Vt /∂Ct+1
∂Vt /∂Ct




=

at+1
β
at



η
Ct+1
(1 − Nt+1 )1−η

Ctη (1 − Nt )1−η

1−σ
θV



Ct
Ct+1



1−σ
Vt+1
1−σ
Et Vt+1

1− θ1

V

Intermediate Goods Producers

Each intermediate goods-producing ﬁrm i rents labor Nt (i) from the representative household
to produce intermediate good Yt (i). Intermediate goods are produced in a monopolistically
competitive market where producers face a quadratic cost φP of changing their nominal price
Pt (i) each period. The intermediate-goods ﬁrms own their capital stocks Kt (i), and face convex
costs φK of changing the quantity of installed capital. Firms also choose the rate of utilization
6

Our main qualitative results regarding macroeconomic comovement are robust to using standard expected
utility preferences. Epstein-Zin preferences allow us to calibrate our model using stock market data. Appendix
D.5 discusses the role of risk aversion in generating our quantitative results.

8

of their installed physical capital Ut (i), which aﬀects its depreciation rate. Each ﬁrm issues
equity shares St (i) and one-period risk-less bonds Bt (i). Firm i chooses Nt (i), It (i), Ut (i),
and Pt (i) to maximize ﬁrm cash ﬂows Dt (i)/Pt (i) given aggregate demand Yt , the elasticity of
substitution among intermediate goods θμ , and the price Pt of the ﬁnished goods sector. The
intermediate goods ﬁrms all have the same constant-returns-to-scale Cobb-Douglas production
function, subject to a ﬁxed cost of production Φ and the level of productivity Zt .
Each maximizes discounted cash ﬂows using the household’s stochastic discount factor:
∞

max Et
s=0



∂Vt /∂Ct+s
∂Vt /∂Ct



Dt+s (i)
Pt+s



subject to the production function,
Pt (i)
Pt

−θμ

Yt ≤ [Kt (i)Ut (i)]α [Zt Nt (i)]1−α − Φ,

and subject to the capital accumulation equation,

2

 φ  I (i)
K
t
Kt+1 (i) = 1 − δ Ut (i) −
−δ
Kt (i) + It (i),
2 Kt (i)
where
Pt (i)
Dt (i)
=
Pt
Pt

1−θμ

Wt
φP
Yt −
Nt (i) − It (i) −
Pt
2

Pt (i)
−1
ΠPt−1 (i)

2
Yt .

Depreciation depends on utilization via the following functional form:

2


 δ  
2
δ Ut (i) = δ + δ1 Ut (i) − U +
Ut (i) − U
2
Ξt denotes the marginal cost of producing one additional unit of intermediate good i.
Following Jermann (1998), each intermediate goods ﬁrm ﬁnances a percentage ν of its capital
stock each period with one-period riskless bonds. The bonds pay the one-period real risk-free
interest rate. Thus, the quantity of bonds Bt (i) = νKt (i). Total ﬁrm cash ﬂows are divided
between payments to bond holders and equity holders as follows:


DtE (i)
Dt (i)
1
=
− ν Kt (i) − R Kt+1 (i) .
Pt
Pt
Rt

(6)

Since the Modigliani and Miller (1958) theorem holds in our model, leverage does not aﬀect ﬁrm
value or optimal ﬁrm decisions. Leverage makes the price of equity more volatile and allows us
to deﬁne a concept of equity returns.
9

4.3

Final Goods Producers

The representative ﬁnal goods producer uses Yt (i) units of each intermediate good produced
by the intermediate goods-producing ﬁrm i ∈ [0, 1]. The market for ﬁnal goods is perfectly
competitive, and thus the ﬁnal goods-producing ﬁrm earns zero proﬁts in equilibrium. Appendix
B.3 shows that the aggregate price index Pt can be written as follows:


1

Pt (i)1−θμ di

Pt =

 1−θ1 μ

0

4.4

Equilibrium

In the symmetric equilibrium, all intermediate goods ﬁrms choose the same price Pt (i) = Pt ,
employ the same amount of labor Nt (i) = Nt , and choose the same level of capital and utilization
rate Kt (i) = Kt and Ut (i) = Ut . Thus, all ﬁrms have the same cash ﬂows and are ﬁnanced with
the mix of bonds and equity. The markup of price over marginal cost is μt = 1/Ξt , and gross
inﬂation is Πt = Pt /Pt−1 .

4.5

Monetary Policy

We assume a cashless economy where the monetary authority sets the nominal interest rate rt
to stabilize inﬂation and output growth. Monetary policy adjusts the nominal interest rate in
accordance with the following rule:
rt = r + ρπ (πt − π) + ρy Δyt ,

(7)

where rt = ln(Rt ), πt = ln(Πt ), and Δyt = ln(Yt /Yt−1 ). Changes in the gross nominal interest
rate Rt aﬀect expected inﬂation and the real interest rate. Thus, we include the following Euler
equation for a zero-net supply-nominal bond as one of our equilibrium conditions:



1
1 = Rt Et Mt+1
Πt+1

4.6

Shock Processes

The demand and technology shock processes are parameterized as follows:
a
at = (1 − ρa ) a + ρa at−1 + σt−1
εat
a

a
σta = (1 − ρσa ) σ a + ρσa σt−1
+ σ σ εσt

Zt = (1 − ρZ ) Z + ρZ Zt−1 + σ Z εZt
10

a

(8)

εat and εZt are ﬁrst-moment shocks that capture innovations to the level of the stochastic proa

cess for technology and household discount factors. We refer to εσt as second-moment or
“uncertainty” shock since it captures innovations to the volatility of the exogenous process for
household discount factors. An increase in the volatility of the shock process increases the
uncertainty about the future time path of household demand. All three stochastic shocks are
independent, standard normal random variables.7

4.7

Uncertainty Shock Calibration

The quantitative impact of uncertainty on the macroeconomy depends on the calibration of the
size and persistence of the uncertainty shock process. Thus, we discipline our model to produce
ﬂuctuations in uncertainty that are consistent with the VXO, an observable indicator of ex ante
stock market volatility.
To link our model with the data, we create a model counterpart to our observable measure of
aggregate uncertainty. We compute a model-implied VXO index VtM as the expected conditional
volatility of the return on ﬁrm equity:
E
E
Dt+1
+ Pt+1
,
PtE

E
= 100 ∗ 4 ∗ VARt Rt+1
,
E
Rt+1
=

VtM

(9)
(10)

E
E 8
where VARt Rt+1
is the quarterly conditional variance of the return on equity Rt+1
. We

annualize the quarterly conditional variance, and then transform the annual volatility units
into percentage points. We calibrate our uncertainty shock parameters such that the impulse
response for the model-implied log VXO closely matches the log VXO movements from our
identiﬁed VAR.

4.8

Solution Method

Our primary focus is examining the eﬀect of an increase in the second moment of the preference shock process. As discussed in Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2011), examining the impulse
response to a second-moment shock requires at least a third-order approximation of the policy
functions of the model. We use the Dynare software package developed by Adjemian et al.
7

We specify the stochastic processes in levels rather than logs to prevent the volatility σta from impacting
the average value of at through a Jensen’s inequality eﬀect.
8
Technically, the VXO is the expected volatility of equity returns under the risk-neutral measure. In preliminary work, we found the results were quantitatively unchanged if we compute the model-implied VXO using
the risk-neutral expectation.

11

(2011) to solve our baseline model. Dynare computes the rational expectations solution to
the model using third-order Taylor series approximation around the deterministic steady state
of the model. Appendix B contains all the equilibrium conditions for the baseline model and
provides additional details on the construction of the model impulse responses.

4.9

Calibration Using Impulse Response & Moment Matching

Table 1 lists the calibrated and estimated parameters of our model. Following Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans (2005), we partition the model parameters into two groups. We calibrate parameters in the ﬁrst group using steady-state relationships or results from previous
studies. To match our empirical evidence, we calibrate the model to quarterly frequency. We
choose steady-state hours worked N and the model-implied value for η such that our model has
a Frisch labor supply elasticity of two. We calibrate the intertemporal elasticity of substitution
ψ to be less than one, which is consistent with the ﬁndings of Hall (1988) and a large succeeding literature. The ﬁxed cost of production for the intermediate-goods ﬁrm Φ is calibrated to
eliminate pure proﬁts in the deterministic steady state of the model. We calibrate risk aversion
over the consumption-leisure basket σ = 80, which is in line with the previous estimates of van
Binsbergen et al. (2012) and Swanson and Rudebusch (2012). We set δ1 = β 1 − 1 + δ based
on steady-state relationships and calibrate δ2 such that the elasticity of capital utilization with
respect to the rental rate of capital matches the value from Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans
(2005). We choose standard values for the monetary policy reaction to inﬂation and output
growth and assume a two percent annualized inﬂation target. We calibrate our price adjustment cost parameter φP = 100, which implies prices are reset about once every four quarters in
a linearized Calvo setting. In the following analysis, we compare the results from our baseline
sticky-price calibration with a ﬂexible-price calibration (φP = 0).
We estimate the second set of model parameters which include the investment adjustment
a

costs φK , the size σ σ and persistence ρσa of the uncertainty shock process, and the remaining
ﬁrst-moment exogenous shock parameters. We want to choose our uncertainty shock parameters to minimize the distance between the model-implied impulse responses and the empirical
responses in Figure 1. However, our uncertainty shock calibration also aﬀects other predictions
of the model, such as the unconditional volatility of output and its components. Therefore, we
estimate the model parameters using a combination of impulse response and moment matching.
Formally, we write our estimator as the solution of following problem,








J = min Ψ̂ − Ψ(γ) V −1 Ψ̂ − Ψ(γ) + ζ ξˆ − ξ(γ) W −1 ξˆ − ξ(γ)
12

(11)

a

where Ψ̂ denotes the empirical impulse responses in Figure 1, γ  (φK , σ σ , ρσa , ρa , σ a , ρZ , σ Z )
is the vector of estimated parameters, and Ψ(γ) is the model-implied impulse responses to an
uncertainty shock. V is a diagonal matrix with the variances of the empirical impulse responses
along the main diagonal. ξˆ is a vector that comprises the unconditional standard deviations
of output, consumption, investment and hours worked in the data, and ξ(γ) denotes its model
counterpart.9 W is a diagonal matrix with the empirical unconditional variances of output and
its components along its main diagonal. We set the scalar ζ to roughly equalize the weight
on matching the impulse responses and unconditional moments. While remaining consistent
with the unconditional volatility in key macroeconomic aggregates, the estimation procedure
chooses the uncertainty shock process such that the model generates the same movement in
implied stock market volatility as in the data.
We denote the estimated parameters in bold in Table 1. We ﬁnd that the data prefer a
small amount of investment adjustment costs in the model. The estimated uncertainty shock
process roughly doubles the uncertainty about future household demand at impact and the
uncertainty remains elevated for some time. The remaining ﬁrst-moment shock processes are
broadly in line with the previous estimates from Ireland (2003) who estimates a similar model
with capital and nominal price rigidity.

5

Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Uncertainty Shocks

5.1

Uncertainty Shocks & Macroeconomic Comovement

Figure 3 plots the impulse responses of the model to a demand uncertainty shock under both
ﬂexible and sticky prices. Households want to consume less and save more when uncertainty
increases in the economy. To save more, households would like to reduce consumption and increase hours worked. In a model where output is always at its ﬂexible-price or “natural” level,
this higher desired saving translates into higher actual saving and investment rises. Higher
labor supply with unchanged capital and technology means that output must rise. Through
the national income accounting identity, higher output with lower consumption implies that
investment must rise. Thus, higher uncertainty under ﬂexible prices lowers consumption but
causes an expansion in output, investment, and hours worked.
9

Appendix A.1 provides additional details on the construction of the empirical unconditional moments.

Appendix D.3 contains further discussion and standard errors for the model-implied unconditional moments,
including the model’s implications for asset prices.

13

With sticky prices, however, aggregate demand determines output in the short run. Higher
uncertainty reduces the demand for consumption goods, which lowers output directly. Lower
output reduces the beneﬁt to owning capital, since the marginal revenue product of capital
falls. The decline in the desired capital stock is reﬂected in a lower level of investment. Since
consumption and investment both fall, output and hours worked both decline, since labor is
the only input to production that can change when the shock is realized. Finally, Figure 3
shows that consumption falls further when prices are sticky. The slow adjustment of prices
creates a prolonged period of lower inﬂation, which raises the real interest rate relative to the
ﬂexible-price benchmark and further depresses consumption.
As we discuss in Section 3, demand-determined output is made consistent with household and ﬁrm optimization via endogenous changes in markups. The economics, however,
is that higher uncertainty increases desired saving. Higher desired savings is expansionary if
full employment of all factors is guaranteed, but may be contractionary if output is demanddetermined. Since saving equals investment in a closed economy, the increase in desired saving
by households can easily lead to lower actual saving in general equilibrium.

5.2

Quantitative Results

Our model also matches the quantitative implications of an identiﬁed uncertainty shock in the
data. Figure 1 plots the impulse responses of the model versus the estimated responses from
the vector autoregression. As in the data, an innovation to our uncertainty shock process raises
implied stock market volatility in the model by roughly 15 percent. In both the data and model,
the peak decline in output in the model is around 0.2 percent and the model generates a decline
in investment that is signiﬁcantly larger than the response of consumption. The model also
captures the gradual decline in the price level following an uncertainty shock. In line with the
empirical evidence, the monetary authority in our model lowers its nominal policy rate to help
oﬀset the declines in output and inﬂation. Our model replicates both the qualitative comovement among the four key macroeconomics aggregates and matches the quantitative implications
of an identiﬁed uncertainty shock in the data. These results suggest that nominal price rigidity likely plays a key role in understanding the transmission of uncertainty to the macroeconomy.
In addition to matching the conditional correlations following an uncertainty shock, our
model is also broadly consistent with the unconditional volatility in key macroeconomic aggregates. Table 2 contains the empirical and model-implied unconditional volatilities of output
and its components. Our model closely matches the volatility of output, consumption, and
investment we observe in the data. As with many other standard macroeconomic models, how14

ever, the model does struggle to generate suﬃcient ﬂuctuations in hours worked relative to
output.10 With the exception of hours worked, the model is generally successful at reproducing
the macroeconomic responses following an uncertainty shock while remaining consistent with
the unconditional volatility of output and its components.
As an additional check on our calibration, we also compare the model-implied stochastic
volatility in key macroeconomic aggregates with the data. Since our model features stochastic
volatility in the exogenous shocks, the endogenous variables also display time-varying volatility.
Table 2 shows that the stochastic volatility generated by the model is generally in line with
its empirical counterpart.11 Similarly to our ﬁndings about the unconditional volatilities, the
model also generates too little stochastic volatility in hours worked. However, these additional
results suggest that we would likely draw similar conclusions about the eﬀects of uncertainty
shocks if we instead chose to calibrate our model using the stochastic volatility in key macro
variables directly (as opposed to our impulse response-matching procedure based on implied
stock market volatility).

5.3

Model-Based Support for Empirical Identiﬁcation

In our empirical evidence, we identiﬁed an uncertainty shock using a Cholesky decomposition
with the VXO ordered ﬁrst. This ordering assumes that uncertainty shocks can have an immediate impact on output and its components, but non-uncertainty shocks do not aﬀect the implied
stock market volatility at impact. This identiﬁcation strategy is supported by our theoretical
model. Figure 4 plots the impulse responses for all three shocks in our model.12 Consistent
with the identifying assumptions in our VAR, a ﬁrst-moment technology or demand shock has
little eﬀect on the expected volatility of future equity returns. Despite causing a decline in
investment and equity prices, ﬁrst-moment shocks primarily aﬀect the expected mean equity
return, not its expected future volatility.
10

This gap can be attributed, at least in part, to the diﬀerence between model and data concepts. Solon,
Barksy and Parker (1994) show that a disproportionate fraction of cyclical changes in total hours come from the
hours of lower-wage workers. If relative wages measure relative productivity, then productivity-adjusted work
hours ﬂuctuate less than measured total hours in the data. Workers in the model, however, are homogeneous
so the model-implied hours predictions are for workers with a common productivity level. If we had a quarterly
time series on compositionally-adjusted hours worked, the ﬂuctuations in hours in the data would be smaller
and would align better with our model’s concept of hours.
11
We measure stochastic volatility using the standard deviation of the time-series estimate for the 5-year
rolling standard deviation. See Appendix A for additional details.
12
We plot a one standard deviation innovation for all three shocks. For comparison, we plot a negative
technology shock to generate the appropriate sign on the investment and equity price responses.

15

Simulation evidence suggests that our identiﬁcation strategy can recover the true macroeconomic eﬀects of higher uncertainty. Using simulated data from our theoretical model, we
replicate our empirical exercise from Section 2. We estimate 10,000 structural vector autoregressions, each estimated using only 30 years of simulated data from our model. Figure 5 plots
the median estimated impulse responses, along with its 95% probability interval, versus the
true impulse response from our model.13 Our empirical methodology is generally successful at
recovering the true impulse responses from the model. Even in a small sample, the estimated
VAR responses suggest that an econometrician would likely be able to identify macroeconomic
comovement following an uncertainty shock. We also ﬁnd an average small-sample correlation
of 0.77 between the series of identiﬁed uncertainty shocks from each SVAR with the true uncera

tainty shocks εσt from the model. These ﬁndings suggest that our identiﬁcation procedure is
relatively successful at recovering both the model-implied impulse responses and the true series
of structural uncertainty shocks.

5.4

Additional Results

In Appendix D, we further examine the ingredients and predictions of our theoretical model.
We discuss the contributions of risk aversion, leverage, variable capital utilization, features of
the labor supply curve, investment adjustment costs, and the persistence of the uncertainty
shock process in generating our main results. While these features are not strictly necessary
to generate qualitative comovement following an uncertainty shock, they help the model match
quantitative features of the data. Epstein-Zin preferences allow us match the VAR evidence
with smaller movements in the expected volatility of the exogenous shocks. Leverage increases
the volatility of equity prices, which helps the model generate a non-trivial amount of implied
stock market volatility. Similarly, ﬁxed costs in production remove the steady-state pure profits induced by monopolistic competition in the market for intermediate goods.14 If we fail to
remove these proﬁts, the model-implied equity premium falls dramatically, since equity holders
receive signiﬁcantly higher payouts in all states of the world.
Many of our model features help the model reproduce a key stylized fact in the data: In
response to an uncertainty shock, investment declines signiﬁcantly more than consumption.
Investment is more intertemporally substitutable than consumption. Thus, an increase in uncertainty creates a situation like a preannounced sale on durables. Firms know that the price of
investment goods will fall but due to sticky prices they have not fallen yet, so ﬁrms delay their
13

Appendix C provides additional details about our estimation exercise using simulated data from the model.
Fixed costs thus make the model consistent with the evidence of roughly zero average pure proﬁts surveyed
in Rotemberg and Woodford (1995).
14

16

purchases. This eﬀect exists for consumption too but it is much stronger for investment, hence
investment falls more. Investment adjustment costs also make it more diﬃcult for households to
convert their desired savings into physical capital, which also helps to generate a larger decline
in investment. Finally, capacity utilization extends the half-life of price stickiness, and hence
the period of time over which our results diverge substantially from those of a competitive
model. Under nominal rigidities, ﬁrms set prices according to the expected present value of
marginal cost. Variable capacity utilization creates an elastic supply of capital services and
reduces the responsiveness of marginal cost to output, just as elastic labor supply does.
In Appendix D, we also explore uncertainty shocks about future technology. While technology uncertainty shocks can easily generate macroeconomic comovement, they struggle to match
quantitative aspects of the empirical evidence. We also show that countercyclical markups, even
without nominal rigidities, can generate macroeconomic comovement following an uncertainty
shock. Our results also extend to the case where nominal wages, rather than prices, adjust
slowly to changing economic conditions.

6

Discussion and Connections

6.1

Connections with Existing Literature

Recent work by Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2011) studies the eﬀects of uncertainty in a small
open economy setting, where they directly shock the exogenous process for the real interest
rate. Since a small open economy is essentially a partial-equilibrium framework, they experience no diﬃculties in generating macroeconomic comovement from an uncertainty shock. As
we show, the diﬃculties come when the real interest rate is endogenous in a general equilibrium
framework.
In a general-equilibrium setting, Bloom et al. (2014) and Gilchrist, Sim and Zakrajšek
(2013) use multi-sector, ﬂexible-price models to show that shocks to uncertainty can lead to
ﬂuctuations that resemble business cycles. Through misallocation, these models can transform
a change in the expected future dispersion of total factor productivity (TFP) into a change in
the current mean of the TFP distribution. This approach may allow equilibrium real wages,
consumption and labor supply to move in the same direction. However, both papers experience diﬃculties in getting the desired comovements. Gourio (2012) introduces a time-varying
“disaster risk” into a real business cycle model. This shock can be viewed as bad news about
the future ﬁrst-moment of technology combined with an increase in the future dispersion of

17

technology. An increased chance of a disaster results in lower equilibrium output, investment,
and hours, but higher equilibrium consumption.
In simultaneous and independent work, Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2015) and Born and
Pfeifer (2014) examine the role of ﬁscal uncertainty shocks. These two papers show that our
mechanism can have important economic eﬀects in medium-scale macroeconomic models with
wage and price rigidities. Our work emphasizes the basic mechanism in a stripped-down model
and shows why many types of uncertainty shocks can generate macroeconomic comovement.
Other than sharing a mechanism for generating comovement, these papers diﬀer greatly from
our work. We focus on demand uncertainty, rather than policy uncertainty. We follow a very
diﬀerent calibration strategy, which allows us to closely link the model with the data using an
observable ex ante measure of stock market volatility. Unlike the model of Fernández-Villaverde
et al. (2015), our model can also reproduce the declines in prices and policy rates following an
uncertainty shock that we observe in the data. Finally, we aim to understand the role of
increased uncertainty in generating the Great Recession.

6.2

Evidence on Countercyclical Markups

Our mechanism for generating comovement relies on countercyclical markups following an uncertainty shock. However, Nekarda and Ramey (2013) argue that markups actually move
procyclically after an identiﬁed government spending or monetary policy shock.15 Thus, a natural test would be to include a measure of markups in our empirical VAR. However, simulation
evidence from our model suggests that the empirical VAR would likely struggle to identify the
true movements in markups. We now re-estimate our structural VARs using simulated model
data but include actual ﬁrm markups. Despite perfectly observing ﬁrm markups, Figure 6
shows that the structural VAR underestimates the actual movements in markups. Our results
suggest that identifying movements in markups remains diﬃcult, even in a setting where we
can likely identify the true movements in macroeconomic aggregates.
15

This conclusion is disputed in the recent literature. Bils, Klenow and Malin (2014) ﬁnd that measures of
the markup that do not rely on wage data show clear evidence of countercyclical markup movements. Basu and
House (2016) ﬁnd markups rise signiﬁcantly in response to identiﬁed contractionary monetary policy shocks if
one uses a dynamic measure of labor cost instead of the spot wage.

18

7

The Role of Monetary Policy & the Zero Lower Bound

7.1

Optimal Policy Rule

In response to an uncertainty shock, the monetary authority in our model lowers its nominal
policy rate. However, the response is not suﬃcient to oﬀset the contractionary eﬀects of higher
uncertainty. If policy instead implements the following rule, which mimics optimal policy, then
Figure 7 shows that the monetary authority can replicate the ﬂexible price allocation even when
prices adjust slowly:
rt = rtn + π + ρπ (πt − π) + ρx xt ,

(12)

where rtn is the “natural” real rate of interest from the equivalent ﬂexible-price economy and
xt is the gap between equilibrium and ﬂexible-price output.16

7.2

Zero Lower Bound

However, monetary policy cannot replicate the ﬂexible-price allocations when it is constrained
by the zero lower bound. We now show that higher uncertainty has larger eﬀects when monetary
policy cannot lower its policy rate. We now assume that central bank implements policy through
the following rule:
rtd = r + ρπ (πt − π) + ρy Δyt ,


rt = max 0, rtd ,

(13)
(14)

where rtd is the desired policy rate of the central bank and rt is the actual policy rate subject
to the zero lower bound. To rigorously model the occasionally-binding zero lower bound constraint, we solve a fully nonlinear, but simpliﬁed, version of our baseline model using policy
function iteration. Appendix E contains details on the simpliﬁed model, the policy function
iteration algorithm, and the construction of the impulse responses.
Figure 7 plots the impulse responses of an uncertainty shock for our simpliﬁed model both
at and away from the zero lower bound. We choose the size of the uncertainty shock such
that, at the stochastic steady state, the simpliﬁed model generates roughly the same movements in output as our baseline model from Section 4. Away from the zero lower bound, an
increase in uncertainty causes a 0.2 percent decline in output. When the central bank is unable
to change its current nominal policy rate, the uncertainty shock produces a 0.6 percent drop
in output on impact, and causes much larger declines in consumption, investment, and hours
worked.17 Thus, the zero lower bound more than doubles the negative eﬀects of the uncertainty
16
17

For this example, we calibrate ρπ = 1.5 and ρx = 0.2.
The zero lower bound lasts for six quarters in this simulation.

19

shock at impact. In a companion paper, Basu and Bundick (2015), we show this ampliﬁcation
emerges from the endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound. Since policy can
no longer play its usual stabilizing role, households understand that the economy faces higher
expected volatility at the zero lower bound. The exogenous uncertainty shock, ampliﬁed by the
endogenous volatility generated by the zero lower bound, translates into a larger drop in output.
At the zero lower bound, increases in uncertainty can produce an additional source of ﬂuctuations beyond the precautionary working and saving channel. This additional ampliﬁcation
mechanism, the contractionary bias in the nominal interest rate distribution, emerges from
the interaction between uncertainty and the zero lower bound when monetary policy follows a
standard Taylor-type policy rule. In Basu and Bundick (2015), we show that the form of the
monetary policy rule is crucial for eliminating the contractionary bias. In the current paper,
our primary interest in modeling an uncertainty shock at the zero lower bound is to quantify
the likely impact of uncertainty shocks during the Great Recession. Following the previous
literature, we assume that monetary policy continues to follow a standard Taylor-type policy
rule at the zero lower bound. Thus, our zero lower bound responses contain the eﬀects of both
the precautionary working mechanism and the contractionary bias. Thus, we note that our
exact quantitative conclusions regarding the ampliﬁcation of uncertainty shocks at the zero
lower bound depends on our assumptions about monetary policy.

7.3

Uncertainty in the Great Recession

Many economists argue higher uncertainty in the Fall of 2008 played a role in generating the
Great Recession. Our structural VAR identiﬁes a 2.75 standard deviation uncertainty shock
in 2008:Q4. Feeding this shock into our baseline model from Section 4 implies a decline in
output of about 0.6 percent. However, our zero lower bound exercise suggests that the zero
lower bound more than doubles the negative eﬀects of an uncertainty shock, which implies a
larger 1.5 percent drop in output. The CBO estimates that the output gap was -5.0 percent in
2008Q4.18 Thus, our results suggest that over one-fourth of the decline in output during the
Great Recession can be explained by higher uncertainty about the future.
18

Since ﬂexible-price output increases only slightly after an uncertainty shock, the output gap is very close to
output in our baseline model.

20

8

Conclusion

We argue that macroeconomic comovement between output, consumption, investment, and
hours worked is a key empirical feature of the economy’s response to an identiﬁed uncertainty
shock. A standard model can replicate this stylized fact if prices adjust slowly to changing
economic conditions. We calibrate our model to be consistent with a well-known and observable
index of ex ante stock market volatility. We ﬁnd that the dramatic increase in uncertainty
during the Fall of 2008, combined with the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, may
be an important factor in explaining the large decline in output starting at that time. Finally,
we show the economic mechanism we identify applies to a large set of shocks that change
expectations of the future without changing current fundamentals.

References
Adjemian, Stéphane, Houtan Bastani, Michel Juillard, Frédéric Karamé, Ferhat
Mihoubi, George Perendia, Johannes Pfeifer, Marco Ratto, and Sébastien Villemot. 2011. “Dynare: Reference Manual, Version 4.”
Alexopoulos, Michelle, and Jon Cohen. 2009. “Uncertainty Times, Uncertain Measures.”
University of Toronto Working Paper.
Bachmann, Rüdiger, and Christian Bayer. 2013. “Wait-and-See Business Cycles?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60: 704–719.
Barro, Robert J., and Robert G. King. 1984. “Time-Separable Preferences and
Intertemporal-Substitution Models of Business Cycles.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
99(4): 817–839.
Basu, Susanto, and Brent Bundick. 2015. “Endogenous Volatility at the Zero Lower Bound:
Implications for Stabilization Policy.” NBER Working Paper #21838.
Basu, Susanto, and Christopher L. House. 2016. “Challenges for New Keynesian Models
with Sticky Wages.” Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 2. Forthcoming.
Bils, Mark, Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin. 2014. “Resurrecting the Role of
the Product Market Wedge in Recessions.” NBER Working Paper #20555.
Bloom, Nicholas. 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks.” Econometrica, 77(3): 623–685.
Bloom, Nicholas, Max Foetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen
Terry. 2014. “Really Uncertain Business Cycles.” NBER Working Paper #18245.
21

Born, Benjamin, and Johannes Pfeifer. 2014. “Policy Risk and the Business Cycle.”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 68: 68–85.
Christiano, Lawrence, Cosmin Ilut, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2010.
“Monetary Policy and Stock Market Booms.” Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead.
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. “Nominal
Rigidities and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political
Economy, 113(1): 1–45.
Diamond, Peter. 2010. National Public Radio Interview on October 31, 2010.
Domeij, David, and Martin Flodén. 2006. “The Labor-Supply Elasticity and Borrowing
Constraints: Why Estimated are Biased.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9: 242–262.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Pablo A. Guerrón-Quintana, Juan Rubio-Ramı́rez,
and Martin Uribe. 2011. “Risk Matters: The Real Eﬀects of Volatility Shocks.” American
Economic Review, 101: 2530–2561.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Pablo A. Guerrón-Quintana, Keith Kuester, and Juan
Rubio-Ramı́rez. 2015. “Fiscal Uncertainty and Economic Activity.” American Economic
Review, 105: 3352–3384.
Flodén, Martin. 2006. “Labour Supply and Saving Under Uncertainty.” The Economic Journal, 116: 721–737.
Gilchrist, Simon, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek. 2013. “Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and Investment Dynamics.” Working Paper.
Gourio, Francois. 2012. “Disaster Risk and Business Cycles.” American Economic Review,
102: 2734–2766.
Hall, Robert E. 1988. “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.” Journal of Political
Economy, 96(2): 339–357.
Ireland, Peter N. 2003. “Endogenous Money or Sticky Prices.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50: 1623–1648.
Jermann, Urban J. 1998. “Asset Pricing in Production Economies.” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 41(2): 257–275.

22

Jurado, Kyle, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Serena Ng. 2015. “Measuring Uncertainty.”
American Economic Review, 105(3): 1177–1216.
Kobayashi, Keiichiro, and Kengo Nutahara. 2010. “Nominal Rigidities, News-Driven
Business Cycles, and Monetary Policy.” The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 10.
Low, Hamish W. 2005. “Self-Insurance in a Life-Cycle Model of Labour Supply and Savings.”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 8: 945–975.
Modigliani, Franco, and Merton Miller. 1958. “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance
and the Theory of Investment.” American Economic Review, 48(3): 261–297.
Nekarda, Christopher J., and Valerie A. Ramey. 2013. “The Cyclical Behavior of the
Price-Cost Markup.” NBER Working Paper #19099.
Pijoan-Mas, Josep. 2006. “Precautionary Savings or Working Longer Hours?” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 9: 326–352.
Rotemberg, Julio J. 1982. “Sticky Prices in the United States.” Journal of Political Economy,
90: 1187–1211.
Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1995. “Dynamic General Equilibrium Models with Imperfectly Competitive Product Markets.” In Frontiers of Business Cycle Research.
Edited by Thomas Cooley. Princeton University Press.
Solon, Gary, Robert Barksy, and Jonathan A. Parker. 1994. “Measuring the Cyclicality
of Real Wages: How Important is Composition Bias?” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
109(1): 1–25.
Swanson, Eric T., and Glenn D. Rudebusch. 2012. “The Bond Premium in a DSGE Model
with Long-Run Real and Nominal Risks.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
4(1): 1–5.
van Binsbergen, Jules H., Jesùs Fernàndez-Villaverde, Ralph S.J. Koijen, and Juan
Rubio-Ramı̀rez. 2012. “The Term Structure of Interest Rates in a DSGE Model with
Recursive Preferences.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59: 624–64.
Wang, Pengfei. 2012. “Understanding Expectations-Driven Fluctuations: A Labor-Market
Approach.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 44(2-3): 487–506.
Wu, Jing Cynthia, and Fan Dora Xia. 2016. “Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of
Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 48(23): 253–291.
23

Figure 1: Empirical & Model-Implied Impulse Responses to Uncertainty Shock

Output

0.6

Consumption

0.4

1.5

0.4
0.2

1

0

Percent

Percent

Percent

0.2
0

-0.2
-0.2

12

16

-0.4

20

Hours Worked

4

0.2

0.2

0.1

0
-0.2

8

12

16

0

8

12

16

20

Policy Rate

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.2
4

8

12

16

-0.3

20

Implied Stock Market
Volatility

100

15

4

8

12

16

20

-0.4

4

8

12

16

20

Preference Shock
Volatility

Data - Estimated Response

80

Data - 95% Confidence Interval

Percent

10
Percent

4

0.4

-0.1

-0.4

5

60

Model

40

0
20

-5
-10

-0.5

-2

20

Price Level

0.3

Percent

Percent

8

Percentage Points

4

0.4

20

0

-1.5

0.6

-0.6

0.5

-1

-0.4
-0.6

Investment

2

4

8

12

16

20

0

4

8

24

12

16

20

Figure 2: Model Intuition
Flexible Prices

Sticky Prices
LS (t )

Wt

LS (t )

Wt

LD (Kt , Zt )

LD (Kt , Zt

Nt

)

Nt

Table 1: Model Parameters
Household
β

0.994

Firm
α

0.333

φK

Policy
2.09

Π

Shocks
ρa

1.005

a

σ

80.0

δ

0.025

φP

100

ρπ

1.5

σ

ψ

0.95

δ1

0.03

θμ

6.0

ρy

0.2

ρσ a

η

0.35

δ2

0.0003

ν

σ

0.9

σa

0.94
0.003

ρZ
σ

Z

0.99
0.001

0.74
0.003

Note: Parameters listed in bold are estimated via impulse response and moment matching.

Table 2: Empirical & Model-Implied Volatility in Macroeconomic Aggregates
Percent
Moment

Relative to Output

Data

Model

Data

Model

Output

1.1

1.0

1

1

Consumption

0.7

0.8

0.6

0.7

Investment

3.8

4.7

3.4

4.5

Hours Worked

1.4

0.8

1.3

0.8

Output

0.4

0.2

1

1

Consumption

0.2

0.2

0.5

0.7

Investment

1.6

1.2

3.6

5.0

Hours Worked

0.5

0.2

1.0

0.9

Unconditional Volatility

Stochastic Volatility

Note: Unconditional volatility is measured with the sample standard deviation. We measure stochastic volatility using the standard
deviation of the time-series estimate for the 5-year rolling standard deviation. The empirical sample period is 1986 - 2014. See
Appendix A for additional details.

25

Figure 3: Model-Implied Impulse Responses Under Flexible & Sticky Prices
Output

0.2

Consumption

0.1

0.5

0
-0.1

Percent

0
Percent

Percent

0.1

0

-0.1
-0.5

-0.2
-0.3

Investment

1

4

8

12

16

-0.2

20

Markup

0.2

4

8

12

16

-1

20

Hours Worked

0.2

4

8

12

16

20

16

20

Real Wage

0.1

0.1
Percent

Percent

0

Percent

0.1
0

0

-0.1
-0.1

8

12

16

Real Interest Rate

4

8

12

16

-0.2

20

Inflation

0.1

4

8

-0.1

-0.2

4

8

12

16

20

12

Preference Shock Volatility

100

Sticky Prices
Flexible Prices

80

0

-0.3

-0.2

20

Percentage Points

Percentage Points

0.1

4

0
Percent

-0.1

-0.1

60
40
20

-0.2

4

8

26

12

16

20

0

4

8

12

16

20

Figure 4: Model-Based Support for Empirical Identiﬁcation Scheme
Investment

0.5

0

0

-0.5

-1

-1.5

-1.5

8

12

16

2nd-Moment Preference
1st-Moment Preference
1st-Moment Technology

10

5

0

-2

20

Implied Stock Market Volatility

15

-0.5

-1

4

20

Percent

0.5

-2

Price of Equity

1

Percent

Percent

1

4

8

12

16

-5

20

4

8

12

16

20

Figure 5: Estimating Structural Vector Autoregressions on Simulated Data from the Model
Output

0.4

Consumption

0.2

Investment

1.5
1

0.2

0.1

0

Percent

Percent

Percent

0.5
0

0
-0.5

-0.2

-0.1
-1

-0.4

4

8

12

16

-0.2

20

Hours

0.3

60

4

8

12

16

20

8

12

16

Estimated Response
Using SVAR on Simulated Data
95% Probability Interval

Percent

0.1
0

20

-0.1
0
-0.2

4

8

12

16

20

-20

20

Model - True Response

40

Percent

4

Implied Stock Market Volatility

0.2

-0.3

-1.5

4

8

12

27

16

20

Figure 6: Estimating Conditional Movements in Markups
Output

0.4

Markup

0.2

60

0.2

Implied Stock Market Volatility
Model - True Response
Estimated Response
Using SVAR on Simulated Data
95% Probability Interval

40

0

Percent

Percent

Percent

0.1
20

0
-0.2

0

-0.4

4

8

12

16

-0.1

20

4

8

12

16

20

-20

4

8

12

16

20

Figure 7: Role of Monetary Policy
Output

0.2

Consumption

0.1
0

0

Investment

1

0.5

-0.4

-0.2

Percent

-0.2

Percent

Percent

-0.1

-0.3

0

-0.5

-0.4
-0.6

-0.8

-1

-0.5
4

8

12

16

-0.6

20

Markup

0.8

4

8

12

16

20

-1.5

4

8

12

16

20

Hours Worked

0.2

Optimal Policy Rule

0.4

0.2

Taylor Rule
Six-Quarter Zero Lower Bound Episode

-0.2

-0.4

0

-0.2

Taylor Rule
Away From Zero Lower Bound

0

Percent

Percent

0.6

4

8

12

16

20

-0.6

4

8

12

28

16

20

