                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     RECENT MARGINAL LABOR INCOME TAX RATE CHANGES BY SKILL AND
                          MARITAL STATUS

                                         Casey B. Mulligan

                                        Working Paper 18426
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18426


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




I appreciate conversations with Gary Becker, Jeff Brown, Christian Ferrada, Elizabeth Lower-Basch,
Bruce Meyer, and Rob Shimer, seminar participants at the University of Chicago, UC-Irvine, and the
2012 Tax Policy and the Economy Conference, and the research assistance of Sophie Wang. I also
appreciate the financial support of the George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the
State. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Recent Marginal Labor Income Tax Rate Changes by Skill and Marital Status
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 18426
September 2012
JEL No. E24,H31,I38,J22

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper calculates monthly time series for the overall safety net’s statutory marginal labor income
tax rate as a function of skill and marital status. Marginal tax rates increased significantly for all groups
between 2007 and 2009, and dramatically so for unmarried household heads. The relationship between
incentive changes and skill varies by marital status. Unemployment insurance and related expansions
contribute to the patterns by skill while food stamp expansions contribute to the patterns by marital
status. Remarkably, group changes in hours worked per capita line up with the statutory measures
of incentive changes.


Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18426
           The economy experienced an unusually deep and prolonged contraction, especially in its
labor markets. Employment and hours worked fell during 2008 and 2009 for many demographic
groups, but disproportionately so among less skilled people, and among the unmarried. As of
2012, labor market activity still remained far below pre-recession levels. Over the same time
frame, many facets of fiscal policy were changed, especially policies related to the distribution of
safety net program benefits.

           Fiscal policymakers were of course watching the economy closely, and major safety net
legislation was certainly a reaction to economic conditions. But unless behavior is completely
unresponsive to tax and benefit formulas, we cannot have a full understanding of the relationship
between fiscal policy and the economy without quantifying marginal tax rates, their changes over
time, and their differences across demographic groups. The purpose of this paper is to help
examine the labor market impacts of recent changes in safety net programs by measuring time
series of implicit marginal labor income tax rates for the safety net as a whole and recognizing
that marginal tax rates and their changes vary by demographic group. In this regard, the paper is
a longitudinal version of prior studies appearing in Tax Policy and the Economy that showed
how implicit marginal income tax rates vary with household income and other characteristics
under a single year’s tax and benefit rules.1

           Analysis of implicit marginal tax rates and their differences across groups might seem to
be a specialized topic of poverty research, and only relevant for macroeconomic analysis to the
extent that the economy is populated by poor people. However, this paper explains how people
from the middle and above-middle parts of the skill distribution can become eligible overnight
for safety net programs such as unemployment insurance and now SNAP (formerly known as
food stamps) merely by becoming unemployed for a period of time. Thus, even skilled people
have their incentives to seek and retain work determined in part by safety net program rules.
This paper shows that wide swaths of the skill distribution saw their marginal tax rates increase
by more than five percentage points in less than two years.


1
    See Liebman (1998) and Kotlikoff and Rapson (2007).


                                                                                                  2
         I consider the entire safety net, as well as payroll and income taxes, but give most of my
attention to three programs spending the largest amounts on non-elderly households, and with
significant legislative changes: unemployment insurance, SNAP (formerly known as food
stamps), and Medicaid.2 I focus on the non-elderly population because the elderly have access to
a different set of safety net programs and have a different (and weaker) relationship with the
labor market.

         My marginal tax rate concept is a comparison of the total amount of subsidies net of taxes
received if and when a person were not working to the total amount received (or paid) if and
when the same person were working full time, expressed as a fraction of the amount produced
when working full time. This measure is a marginal tax rate on the decision margin of working
full time or not at all during a specific time interval. In this regard, my tax rate concept is
reminiscent of the implicit tax rates used by Gruber and Wise (1999) and collaborators in their
“tax force” measures of the retirement incentives created by public pension and disability
programs around the world.3

         The relationship between subsidies received when not working and the amount that could
be earned when working full time varies by demographic group. A number of subsidies are set
as specific dollar amounts (such as the SNAP maximum benefit, or the maximum unemployment
insurance benefit), or as a specific bundle of services (as with Medicaid) regardless of how much
the beneficiary might earn if he worked full time. Unemployment insurance benefits below the
maximum are, on the other hand, specified as a proportion of the amounts earned in prior
employment.



2
  Because subsidy program participation is voluntary, a subsidy cannot have a large effect on incentives or behavior
unless it redistributes a significant amount of resources. A tax program, on the other hand, can in principle create
large marginal tax rates without redistributing much revenue.
3
  My tax rate is equivalent to a weighted average of (one minus) the local slopes of a worker’s budget constraint (in
a graph of disposable income versus earnings from work), where the weights are the size of the income interval over
which each local slope applies, because my tax rate is one minus the slope of the straight line connecting the no
work point of the budget set to the full-time work point. In this regard, some might say that my tax rate measures
“extensive margin” incentives, which are a weighted average of “intensive margin” incentives. However, readers
should recognize that the concepts of intensive and extensive margins have a time dimension, which varies across
studies and safety net programs. For example, the decision whether to work in the month of August is an extensive
margin decision from the point of view of a program that monitors beneficiaries’ labor income on a monthly basis,
but an intensive margin decision from the point of view of a program such as the Earned Income Tax Credit that
monitors income on a calendar year basis (unless not working in all of the other eleven months of that year).


                                                                                                                   3
        Subsidies received by both employed and non-employed people also depend on the
income of others in the household, and therefore can vary significantly by marital status. Finally,
subsidy rules have changed over time as new legislation was passed, and calendar time triggered
new provisions in old legislation. This paper therefore calculates marginal tax rates as a function
of earnings potential, marital status, and calendar time.

        The paper begins with its conceptual framework for measuring work incentives implicit
in the composite of programs known as the safety net, with emphasis on isolating groups-specific
changes over time that come from changes in safety net program rules rather than changes in the
behavior of the population served under a fixed set of rules. I then identify the changes in safety
net eligibility and benefit rules that were significant for the non-elderly population. The paper
concludes with marginal tax rate series that combine the program-by-program results of earlier
sections and a first indication of how changes in these rates were correlated with labor market
behavior.

        One point of view is that the labor market is slack during a recession, that as a
consequence labor supply has nothing to do with labor market outcomes, and that household
marginal tax rate calculations are of no help in understanding how people behave during
recessions. Even if this conception of slack markets were accurate, marginal tax rate changes are
relevant because they tell us where the labor market is headed after it is no longer slack and
supply incentives start to matter again. More important, both theory and evidence might support
the opposite point of view: that subsidies for the unemployed and the poor matter as much or
more during a period of significant labor market distortions, in part because those subsidies loom
large relative to low offer wages.4 The conclusion of this paper also presents a puzzle for the
theory that labor supply has recently been irrelevant: that 2007-10 changes in work hours per
capita correlate so closely across demographic groups with statutory changes in the incentives to
work.




4
  Mulligan (2012) reviews evidence on the cyclicality of labor market and production effects of marginal changes in
labor supply and demand. He finds that labor supply and labor demand shifts had essentially the same marginal
effects on employment in 2008 and 2009 as they did in prior years.


                                                                                                                  4
A Framework for Relating the Entire Safety Net to the Reward for
Working


An Index Number Approach
         Consider for a moment a specific homogeneous demographic group g whose members’
labor supply decision consists only of the decision of whether to work full time during, say, a
month t, or not to work at all. The financial reward to working during that interval depends on,
among other things, the probability that each member would be eligible for, and willing to
participate in, the various safety net programs if and when he were not working, and the value of
benefits that would be received from each program when participating and not working.
Because both the probability and the value depend on program rules that change over time, my
approach begins by forming two time series for each safety net program j and demographic
group g: a statutory eligibility index series {Egjt} and a statutory benefit-per-participant index
series {Bgjt}. The indices change only at dates t when new program rules (“statutes”) go into
effect. A time series for demographic group g’s overall statutory safety net generosity {bgt} is
obtained by aggregating the product of the two indices across programs using a set of time-
invariant participation weights gj.


                                               bgt   j gj Egjt Bgjt                                           (1)


where g indexes demographic groups, j indexes safety net programs, and t indexes calendar time.
         In principle, the formula (1) can include any number of subsidy and tax programs with
any number of rule changes over time.5 This paper considers only unemployment insurance and
related programs, SNAP, and the payroll tax, plus time-invariant eligibility and benefit indices
for Medicaid, the personal income tax, for all other anti-poverty programs combined, and for
debt discharges. The time period considered is January 2007, before the recession began, to
December 2011.




5
  Over long time periods and with sufficient data, chained participation weights may yield more accurate results than
fixed weights.


                                                                                                                   5
        Each program’s eligibility index {Egjt} is normalized to one for each group in fiscal year
2010. Each eligibility index change reflects the typical size of the population eligible under
relaxed eligibility rules relative to the size of the population eligible under the stricter rules. For
example, a change in program j’s eligibility index from 1.0 to 0.9 between September and
October 2010 means that ten percent of those who were eligible for program j under the
September program rules were no longer eligible under October rules, solely because of changes
in program rules.

        The participation weights {gj} quantify program j participation under fiscal year 2010
rules among the members of group g who are not working. The weights can be less than one
because some of the group members are ineligible even when not working, as with people who
become unemployed by quitting their job and thereby are ineligible for unemployment insurance
benefits. The weights can also be less than one because eligible people fail to take up the
program, or value program benefits at less than their cost. For this reason, my index number
approach (1) can be used for labor market analysis without assuming that non-employed people
take advantage of all programs, or even all programs for which they are eligible. This is an
important difference between my methodology and that of Kotlifoff and Rapson (2007) that
considers all of the available benefits, even if the benefits are not taken up or valued.6

        In practice, demographic groups are not homogeneous.                      For example, some of the
unemployed quit their jobs, and others were laid off. I interpret the product gjEgjt as average
program j participation among non-employed members of group g under month t program rules.
Also note that the participation weight gj is constant over time, so that changes over time in
group g’s composition have no effect on its overall statutory safety net generosity index. Only
program rule changes cause the index to change over time, which is why I refer to it as a
“statutory index.”

        The benefit index Bgjt measures the average dollar amount received from program j by
non-employed members of demographic group g who participate in the program, minus what
they would receive from the program if they were working full time. The overall level of the

6
  Mulligan (2012) examines a related index number approach, but without heterogeneity by skill or marital status,
and concludes that it may somewhat understate marginal tax rate changes after 2007 as a result of treating program
take-up as a fixed parameter rather than an evolving choice reflecting changing program benefits and restrictions.


                                                                                                                     6
index is related to program spending per beneficiary (more on this below), but its variation over
time and across demographic groups depends on program rules, especially eligibility and benefit
rules for persons who would be working full time. Each benefit index, and all other dollar
amounts in this paper, are adjusted for inflation using the implicit price index for personal
consumption expenditures and expressed in fiscal year 2010 dollars, hereafter “constant dollars,”
unless otherwise noted.




Demographic Groupings
         This paper partitions household heads and spouses aged 25 to 64 into ten groups: five
married and five unmarried. Holding marital status constant, the five groups differ in terms of
their estimated “earnings potential”: what each person would earn when working full time.7 The
middle group in each marital status category has weekly earnings potential of $727 plus fringes,
which is what the median employed non-elderly household head and spouse earned in constant
dollars during the 2007 Current Population Survey reference weeks. The other groups have
weekly earnings potential of $487, $595, $888, and $1025, which differ from the middle group’s
potential by -0.4, -0.2, 0.2, and 0.4 log points, respectively.8

         The calculations in this paper could in principle be made for any amount of earnings
potential, and at more than five points in the distribution. I choose these five points because they
systematically cover a fairly wide range of earnings and because they facilitate matching the ten
groups to specific demographic characteristics so that labor market behavior and especially
program participation can be estimated separately for the ten groups.

         In order to match earnings potential amounts with specific demographic characteristics, I
used the full-time employed household heads and spouses aged 26-64 respondents to Current
Population Surveys to regress 2005-2007 log hourly earnings on indicator variables for white;
state of residence; month of year; the interaction of an age quartic with educational attainment
and sex; the interaction of educational attainment, sex, and presence of children under eighteen;
and all interacted with married (spouse present).                    Hourly earnings are projected to all

7
  Full-time employment is measured in the Current Population Survey as persons working 35 or more hours per
week.
8
  Below I relate the five earnings amounts to the cross-sectional distributions of measured and potential earnings.


                                                                                                                      7
respondents aged 25-64 who are household head or spouse – even those who are not employed
full time or are present in later Current Population Surveys. By sorting on projected hourly
earnings within year and weighting by the CPS weight, I assigned each demographic group to a
potential earnings quintile. It turns out that the average log projected hourly earnings are spaced
about the same as cited above: 0.2 log points from group to group.9 More important, below I use
this classification of the demographic groups to estimate UI program participation at the five
points in the earnings potential distribution cited above. As a sensitivity analysis, I also present
results that hold the UI participation weights constant across demographic groups and thereby do
not rely on the regression projections.




Safety Net Rule Changes 2007‐2011
Benefit Rule Changes
        I model the pre-event UI benefit as 44 percent of potential earnings up to a cap of $400
per week.10 The monthly benefit amount is shown in the top row of Table 1 for each of the five
potential earnings levels considered. Only the highest of the five levels hits the benefit cap,
which is $1,733 on a monthly basis.

        In order to identify significant changes in UI benefit and eligibility rules, I reviewed the
U.S. Labor Department’s Chronology of Federal Unemployment Compensation Laws (2011). It,
and the sources therein, cited eight significant UI benefit rule changes between January 2007 and
December 2011. The first three events come from the American Reinvestment and Recovery
Act (hereafter, ARRA), for which I take April 2009 as the start date. The federal additional


9
  In 2007, 28 percent of working non-elderly household heads and spouses had actual log measured weekly earnings
0.4 below the median. 38 percent were 0.2 below the median. 38 (27) percent were 0.2 (0.4) above the median,
respectively. Only 9 percent (of those age 25-64 – the sample for which I measure completed schooling and thereby
potential earnings) had potential earnings 0.4 below the same median. 26 percent had potential earnings 0.2 below
the median. 33 (17) percent had potential earnings 0.2 (0.4) above the median, respectively. Admittedly, actual and
potential earnings are imperfectly measured at the individual level – potential earnings likely vary within
demographic groups but cannot with my measures – but these statistics show that weekly earnings amounts of $487,
$595, $727, $888, and $1025 cover much of the potential earnings distribution. All CPS-ADF calculations are
weighted by the March Supplement weight.
10
   Appendix Table 3 of Council of Economic Advisers (2011) reports an average replacement rate of 46 percent for
September 2010, but this includes federal additional compensation (my 44 percent refers to the base replacement
rate before adding federal additional compensation).


                                                                                                                 8
compensation program added a $25 weekly bonus (109 constant dollars on a monthly basis) to
unemployment insurance benefits. The ARRA also exempted the first $2,400 of unemployment
benefits received by an unemployed person from 2009 federal income tax (United States
Department of Labor 2011). Because the provision serves to reduce that person’s personal
income tax, I estimate it to be worth about $57 per month for each of the nine months April 2009
through December 2009.11

         For laid-off workers who wanted to remain on their former employer’s health plan, the
ARRA offered to pay 65 percent of the cost. For a $13,027 annual family health insurance
premium (Crimmel 2010), that subsidy is worth $706 per month. However, I estimate that the
number of people receiving the benefit when it was available was only one-fifth the number of
people receiving unemployment benefits, so the effect of the COBRA provision on the index is
only $143 per month (see Mulligan (2012)).12

         The remainder of the UI benefit events relates to expirations of the ARRA provisions.
Two of the provisions were grandfathered: that is, continuing unemployed persons would
continue benefits under each provision, but new unemployed persons were not able to
participate. In those cases, I stepped down the benefit index by half when the grandfathering
begins and by the other half when the program ends entirely.13

         Figure 1 shows the UI benefit index time series for each of the five levels of potential
earnings. The vertical axis measures the index as a ratio to potential earnings, as it appears in the
marginal tax rate formula (more on this below). Before and after the ARRA, four of the five
groups had a benefit index equal to 44 percent of their potential earnings because they were
receiving only the base benefit and it was below the cap. The highest potential earnings group
has its base benefit at the cap, and therefore has a replacement rate less than 44 percent. Benefit


11
   The average federal income tax rate on a marginal dollar earned in 2009 was 21 percent for wage income
(National Bureau of Economic Research 2010). $57 per month = 0.21*2400*1.001/9, where the 1.001 is the
conversion from March 2010 (a typical month to receive tax year 2009 tax refunds) prices to fiscal year 2010 prices.
12
   COBRA refers to the Consolidated Omnibus Reconciliation Act, which is the statute under which laid-off
employees have the option to continue on their former employer’s health insurance plan. Because I use the same
participation weight for all of the unemployment insurance and related provisions, the contribution of the ARRA’s
COBRA subsidy to the UI benefit index must be adjusted for differential participation in UI and the COBRA
subsidy. Equivalently, the COBRA subsidy could be included in the model (1) as a separate program with its own
participation weight.
13
   In the case of UI-FAC, the benefit is nominal so the initial inflation-adjusted step down is a bit more than half.


                                                                                                                    9
indices are greater during the ARRA by dollar amounts that are the same for all five groups, and
therefore lesser fractions of potential earnings for higher potential groups. The fact that UI and
other programs tended to add constant dollar benefits is the primary reason why safety net
marginal tax rates tend to increase more percentage points for low skill groups.

         The Department of Agriculture’s food stamp program, now known as Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance (SNAP), provides funds to low-income households for the purpose of
buying food. SNAP benefits are potentially available to households earning less than 130 percent
of the prior year poverty line, which is adjusted every fiscal year according to the rate of
inflation. For example, 130 percent of the prior year poverty line was, on a monthly basis, $1,430
for a household of two in fiscal year 2007, and $1,578 in fiscal year 2010. A household with
assets below the allowable ceiling (if there is a ceiling for assets – see below) and satisfying
other eligibility criteria has its monthly benefit calculated as the program’s maximum benefit for
its household size minus 30 percent of its net income, where net income is money income minus
deductions for shelter and other items. For this reason, essentially every participating
household’s benefit is linked to the program’s maximum benefit.

         For a non-employed married person, the household benefit depends on the spouse’s
income.14 Using the Department of Agriculture's SNAP quality-control files, I find that the
average household with a married head and an unemployed head or spouse was receiving 75
percent of the maximum SNAP benefit.15 The maximum benefit varies by household size, so I
average those maximum benefits at a point in time using as weights each size’s representation
among program participants, with representation measured in fiscal years 2007 and 2010 and
then averaged. The $236 shown in Table 1’s second row is 75 percent of the average maximum
benefit in September 2007 (the last month before the first SNAP benefit event), converted to
constant dollars.16


14
   In principle, the household benefit depends on the income earned by children, but I treat children’s income as
zero.
15
   From the fiscal year 2007 and 2010 SNAP quality control files, I selected SNAP households with both head and
spouse present, age 18-64, and SNAP eligible (or non-citizen with SNAP eligible children) and at least one of them
unemployed. The average SNAP benefit as a percentage of the maximum benefit for household size was, weighted
with the household weight for full year tabulations, 75.3 and 74.3 in the two fiscal years, respectively. The median
percentages were 81.9 and 80.1, respectively.
16
   Recall that, by definition, the benefit index applies to persons who participate in the program when not employed.
The program’s participation weight (more on this below) reflects the likelihood of participation in the program when


                                                                                                                  10
        I assume that participating unmarried household heads obtain the maximum SNAP
benefit for their household when not working. Whether they obtain a benefit when working full
time depends on the amount they would earn. The middle and above-median potential earnings
amounts put essentially all households above 130 percent of federal poverty guidelines,
regardless of household size. In these cases, the entire maximum SNAP benefit is lost as a
consequence of working full time rather than not working at all. For September 2007, this is the
$314 amount shown in the final two entries of Table 1’s third row.

        The two below-median potential earnings amounts are small enough relative to the
maximum benefit that larger households would still obtain a SNAP benefit if the unmarried
household head were working full time, in which case the benefit lost from working full time is
about 30 percent of potential earnings rather than the full maximum benefit.17                                The
corresponding entries in Table 1’s third row are a weighted average of 30 percent of potential
earnings and the maximum benefit, with weights based on the propensity of full-time employed
household heads and spouses in 2007 with earnings near to the potential shown in Table 1 to
have a maximum SNAP benefit corresponding to their household size that is less than 30 percent
of their earnings.

        I identified significant changes in SNAP benefit rules by reviewing various editions of
the USDA’s Characteristics of Food Stamp Households and Characteristics of Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program Households. The three major SNAP benefit events were all
maximum benefit increases. Their inflation-unadjusted amounts are shown in the bottom panel
of Table 1. In addition, the inflation-adjusted SNAP benefit changes every month with inflation,
because the maximum benefit is not adjusted for inflation in between benefit events.

        Figure 2 shows the SNAP benefit index time series for the various demographic groups.
Its vertical axis is measured in constant dollars per month in order to simplify the presentation of
the ten groups. The five married groups have the same benefit index because all of them receive
zero SNAP benefit when working full time, and all receive the same amount below the SNAP


not employed, which is especially low for married persons because their spouse will likely put household income
above federal poverty guidelines on their own.
17
   My calculation uses a 30 percent benefit reduction rate, but the actual rate varies around 30 depending on the
earnings and shelter deductions, location, and the household’s receipt (if any) of unemployment insurance (Hanson
and Andrews March 2009).


                                                                                                               11
maximum benefit when either head or spouse is not working. The top three or four unmarried
groups have similar benefit indices (to each other) because each is receiving the SNAP
maximum benefit when not working and essentially no benefit when working. The unmarried
group with the least potential earnings has a lesser benefit index (in constant dollars) because it
still receives a significant SNAP benefit when working full time. All of the unmarried groups
have their index increase by the same dollar amount at the event dates due to the SNAP
maximum benefit changes; married group changes are 75 percent (see above). In between event
dates, general inflation or deflation change every index by the same proportion.

         The Medicaid programs do not gradually phase out benefits with income,18 but rather
have discrete income eligibility points, below which otherwise eligible persons receive the full
benefit and above which no benefits are received. The income eligibility points vary by program
(there are different points for children than for adults) and by state, but for simplicity my
calculations assume a single income threshold at 130 percent of the federal poverty guideline.19
As with my SNAP calculations, I assume that married persons put their household income above
the threshold by working full time and therefore eliminate all Medicaid participation in their
household. If Medicaid eligible when not working (a possibility reflected in the Medicaid
participation weight discussed below), a married person therefore foregoes the entire Medicaid
benefit as a consequence of working full time, regardless of potential earnings, which I take to be
$358 per month per non-elderly non-disabled participant.20

         The middle and above-median potential earnings amounts put essentially all households
above 130 percent of federal poverty guidelines, regardless of household size. In these cases, the
entire maximum Medicaid benefit is lost as a consequence of working full time even if the
person is an unmarried household head. Thus, the same $358 from the married Medicaid row of
Table 1 also appears in the right-hand entries of the unmarried Medicaid row.



18
   Some states charge small Medicaid premiums and copayments as a function of household income (Dague 2011),
which are not explicitly incorporated in my calculations.
19
   130 percent of FPG is the gross income threshold for the SNAP program for participants that are not categorically
eligible (that is, qualifying for SNAP under federal rules, rather than state rules). 130 percent of FPG is also
approximately where SNAP benefits are fully phased out, even for categorically eligible households (Eslami, Filion
and Strayer 2011).
20
   The Medicaid participation rate also reflects the possibility that the household might have more than one Medicaid
participant, and that in-kind benefits are worth less than cash benefits.


                                                                                                                  12
         The two below-median potential earnings amounts are small enough relative to the
maximum benefit that larger households would still obtain the full Medicaid benefit if the
unmarried household head were working full time, in which case there is no Medicaid benefit
lost from working full time. The corresponding entries in Table 1’s fifth row are a weighted
average of zero and the full Medicaid benefit, with weights based on the propensity (shown in
the bottom row of Table 1) of full-time employed household heads and spouses in 2007 with
earnings near to the potential shown in Table 1 to have earnings that exceed 130 percent of the
federal poverty guideline corresponding to their household size.

         The “other means tested government programs” category contributes a real dollar amount
to the overall benefit index that is constant over time and across groups, and is taken from
Mulligan’s (2012) average marginal worker calculation, which is based on the national average
amount spent by those programs in 2007 and 2010. It includes the non-elderly parts of SSI,
family assistance, general assistance, energy assistance, and other programs. Medicaid and the
other means-tested programs did not have significant benefit events between January 2007 and
December 2011.

         Collections of mortgages and unsecured consumer debts sometimes serve as an implicit
tax on borrower incomes, because borrowers with more income are required to repay more
(equivalently, borrowers with low incomes are forgiven more). Sometimes the taxes are not all
that implicit, as with wage garnishment. Marginal tax rates created by debt collections are likely
significant, and increasing after 2007 as the amount of mortgages that were unsecured grew as
owner-occupied homes became “underwater,” but analysis of them is beyond the scope of this
paper. Here I take a constant, and probably conservative, 3 percent of potential earnings based
on Mulligan (2012) and refer readers to Herkenhoff and Ohanian (2011) and Herkenhoff and
Ohanian (2012) for detailed analysis of the effects of underwater mortgages on the incentives to
earn income.

         I take payroll taxes as 15.3 percent of earnings (not including fringes) and add an
additional ten percentage points for personal income taxes.21 Recall that the relevant taxes here


21
  Because I am calculating incentives for individuals, the equilibrium incidence of the tax is irrelevant – i.e.,
whether it is ultimately borne by employers or employees – because either way it creates a wedge between the
supply and demand prices of labor. More important is whether the payroll tax is really a marginal tax rather than a


                                                                                                                  13
are the difference between taxes paid when working full-time and taxes paid when not working:
the ten percent is net of any income tax owed on safety net benefits received when not working
or any safety net benefits received through the income tax system.22 The only change in payroll
and income tax rules I find to be significant for the purpose of quantifying marginal tax rates is
the two percentage point cut in the payroll tax effective January 2011, which is shown as the last
benefit event in Table 1.

         The 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act created or changed three federal
individual income tax credits: the Making Work Pay Tax Credit (MWPTC), the Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC), and Additional Child Tax Credit (ACTC). All three of the changes are
credited with reducing poverty (Sherman 2011), which by itself suggests that, if anything, they
reduced work incentives for household heads and spouses with potential incomes in the range
considered in this paper, because those potential income amounts typically exceed the poverty
threshold. Mulligan (2012) explains further why these tax credit changes did not significantly
reduce marginal tax rates at the median,23 but more work is needed to determine the size of their
effects on marginal tax rates for very low skill groups and to determine the degree to which the
credit changes created different marginal tax rate changes for the various groups featured in this
paper.




Eligibility Rule Changes
         In order to identify significant changes in UI eligibility, I further reviewed the U.S. Labor
Department’s Chronology of Federal Unemployment Compensation Laws (2011). It, and the
sources therein, cited four significant UI eligibility rule changes between January 2007 and


user fee whose payments confer benefits on the payer (Feldstein and Samwick 1992). Note that the 2011 payroll tax
cut did not affect social security benefits, so the entire payroll tax rate change is in fact a marginal tax rate cut (for
persons earning under the earnings limit of about $110,000 per year).
22
   A household head or spouse who is not working during, say, a quarter, typically has worked during some or all of
the other three quarters of the year and might therefore qualify for the earned income tax credit despite not working
during the quarter.
23
   The MWPTC enhanced the reward for work by married persons only if their spouse earned less than $12,903 for
the calendar year and work by unmarried persons during, say, a quarter, only in the unusual case that earnings was
less than $6,450 for the remainder of the calendar year or years containing that quarter. The EITC changes had
essentially no effect on the reward for work by unmarried persons with fewer than three children; for the rest of the
population the combined EITC and ACTC changes were a mix of positive and negative marginal tax rate changes
that were minor and slightly positive from an aggregate point of view.


                                                                                                                       14
December 2011, three of which related to the maximum duration of time that benefits could be
collected. They are summarized in my Table 2.

        Table 2 also displays the expansion factor for each eligibility rule change, which is the
ratio of the eligibility index at the date indicated to its value in the previous month. For an
eligibility rule change that involves extending the duration of UI benefits from A weeks to B
weeks, the relative population size is measured by the ratio of the fraction (measured for 2007
and 2010, and then averaged) of unemployed persons aged 25-64 whose spell has not yet
surpassed B weeks to the fraction of unemployed persons aged 25-64 whose spell has not yet
surpassed A weeks. Because I find the distribution of unemployment spells to be similar for the
potential earnings quintiles, I use the same UI eligibility index for all of the ten groups.24

        One significant UI eligibility expansion did not relate to benefit duration. The ARRA,
passed in the first quarter of calendar year 2009, expanded eligibility by encouraging states to
“modernize” (and relax) their eligibility requirements by processing earnings histories through
an “alternative base period”, including persons who quit their job for compelling family reasons,
adding twenty-six weeks of eligibility for persons enrolled in training programs, and/or paying
benefits for persons who search only for part-time work (United States Department of Labor
2009). The modernization expansion factor of 1.047 is based on the amount of modernization
funds allocated by the Act relative to the $211 billion (inflation-unadjusted) spent on overall UI
benefits during the six quarters during which states could obtain the modernization funds.

        States help administer the SNAP program and have been changing their eligibility rules,
petitioning the federal government to waive some of its eligibility rules, and otherwise making it
easier and more attractive for the poor to participate (Eslami, Filion and Strayer 2011, 11).
During fiscal years 2007–2011 at least twenty-seven states, plus the District of Columbia,
adopted “broad-based categorical eligibility,” which means that states confer automatic SNAP
eligibility on all households receiving a specified social service informational brochure.
Households that participate in SNAP under this rule still have benefits determined by the same
formula (of household size and net income) as the other SNAP beneficiaries. A practical result


24
  For example, the percentage of 2007 unemployment spells so far lasting less than 27 weeks ranged little across
potential earnings quintiles: from 79 to 81 percent. The percentage of 2010 unemployment spells so far lasting less
than 27 weeks also ranged little: from 51 to 55 percent.


                                                                                                                 15
of broad-based categorical eligibility (BBCE) is therefore that households can receive benefits
solely on the basis of their net income, and not on the value of their assets. This not only extends
eligibility to households whose assets would have exceeded traditional SNAP limits (and limits
that are still present in other anti-poverty programs like Medicaid), but makes it easier for states
to admit households into the program because the states without asset limits no longer have the
burden of investigating applicant asset holdings. Even SNAP households not participating
through BBCE saw the asset test relaxed as the values of individual retirement accounts and
education savings accounts were excluded from the test by the 2008 Farm Bill and, between
2006 and 2010, as almost 20 states eliminated their consideration of vehicles (Eslami, Filion and
Strayer 2011, 6).

         Prior to the recession, able-bodied adults without dependents who were not working or
participating in a work program had their receipt of SNAP benefits limited to three months in a
three year period (United State Department of Agriculture 2012).                     Entire states could obtain
waivers from the work requirement whenever the Department of Labor indicated that their state
was eligible for extended unemployment benefits (United States Department of Agriculture
2009). The ARRA waived all states through October 2010. Since then, almost all states have
obtained waivers pursuant to the Department of Labor triggers (United States Department of
Agriculture 2011).         All together, the state-wide waivers and ARRA changed eligibility
requirements in the direction of making SNAP eligibility more inclusive than it would have been
if able-bodied adults without dependents were required to work (or have their benefits limited),
as they typically were before the recession began.

         As with the UI program, I assume that the same SNAP eligibility index time series
applies to all demographic groups, and therefore use the series contained in Mulligan’s (2012)
calculation of a single marginal tax rate series for the “average marginal worker.”                               This
assumption does not rule out the possibility that eligibility rule changes alone create marginal tax
rate and participation changes that vary by demographic group, because the benefit indices and
program participation weights in this paper vary by group.25




25
   Recall that the program participation weights reflect the propensity of the various demographic groups to be
eligible for and take up the program.


                                                                                                                   16
         The SNAP eligibility series increases by a factor of 1.024 in October 2008 due to the
waiver of work requirements that continued at least through 2011. Other state and federal
eligibility changes combined increased the index by a factor of 1.277 between January 2007 and
December 2011, with the time pattern of the increase determined by the population-weighted
time pattern of BBCE adoption.26




Aggregating Programs to Obtain Safety Net Marginal Tax Rates
Program Participation Weights
         The benefit amounts shown in Table 1 can be compared across programs only for persons
who would be eligible for, and participate in, all programs when not working. A measure of
safety net generosity that combines the various program benefits therefore needs a set of weights
that reflect program participation, which I call program participation weights and denote as {gj}
in equation (1). Because the weights multiply eligibility indices that are normalized to one in
fiscal year 2010, they should reflect the fraction of each demographic group that would normally
participate in the program under the fiscal year 2010 rules.

         Under the fiscal year 2010 UI rules, anyone whose unemployment spell lasted more than
96 weeks is ineligible, so one component of the UI participation weight is the fraction of
unemployment spells among people aged 25-64 that so far lasted no more than 96 weeks: 0.96 in
2007 and 0.90 in 2010, or an average of 0.93.27 This component of the UI program participation
weights is the same for all of the ten groups because I do not want the tax rate variation across
groups to reflect different unemployment propensities and because, as noted above, I find the
distribution of unemployment spells to be similar for the potential earnings quintiles.


26
   As explained by Mulligan (2012), the SNAP eligibility index change is based on the size of the populations
affected by various SNAP eligibility rule changes and on cross-state and cross-group estimates of the relationship
between SNAP participation levels and changes and various eligibility criteria. The change in the SNAP eligibility
index is significantly less than the change over the same time frame in the propensity of poor people to participate in
SNAP.
27
   A number of states had a maximum duration of 99 weeks, others had less. 96 weeks is the cross-state average
benefit duration, weighted by the number unemployed in the state, from Farber and Valletta (2011).


                                                                                                                    17
        Another component of the participation weight is the fraction of group members who
receive UI any time during their spell, which I estimate in two parts. First, I take the ratio of the
total number of regular UI recipients aged 25-64 (regular UI lasts 26 weeks) to the total number
of unemployed aged 25-64 whose spell has not yet surpassed 26 weeks, which is 0.61 in 2007
(adjusted to 0.64 to reflect the modernization of regular program eligibility rules between 2007
and fiscal year 2010) and 0.72 in 2010, or an average of 0.68. Second, I adjust the 0.68 ratio for
the various potential earnings quintiles’ relative propensity to receive UI during calendar years in
which they experience unemployment, which is measured from the Current Population Survey
Demographic Supplements (hereafter, CPS-ADF) referring to calendar years 2007 and 2010.28
Interestingly, the propensity to receive UI when unemployed is highest for the middle quintile
(76 percent), and lowest for the lowest potential earnings quintile (55 percent).

        Because work hours can change on three margins – movements between employment and
unemployment, movements between employment and out of the labor force, and reductions in
hours among the employed – the UI participation weight needs a final component for the purpose
of quantifying incentives to supply hours because UI benefits are typically not paid to persons
out of the labor force or to employed persons with reduced hours. I take this factor to be 0.58,
which is the unemployment change share of the decomposition of the 2007-2010 change in per
capita hours worked among non-elderly household heads and spouses.29                               The resulting
participation weights are multiplied by the UI eligibility index (common to the ten groups) and
shown in Figure 3. The lowest potential earnings group has the lowest index in Figure 3 because
it has the lowest average UI participation among those unemployed no more than 26 weeks. The
median and median plus 0.2 log potential earnings group have the highest index in the figure
because they had the highest average UI participation. Each of the indices has its greatest
increase in mid-2008, because that is when the duration of UI eligibility was extended from 26 to
52 and thereby impacted the greatest fraction of unemployed people. In contrast, the last
increase at the end of 2009 is the smallest, despite the significant press coverage given to the 99
week limit, because only two percent of the unemployed have spells lasting so far more than 72

28
   The CPS-ADF cannot be used to accurately calculate the level of UI participation because UI benefits are
significantly under-reported in those files (Meyer, Mok and Sullivan 2009). I did not find relative UI participation
to be significantly different between married and unmarried people, holding potential earnings quintile constant.
29
   That is, 58 percent of the reduction in work hours per capita was due to increased unemployment per capita during
the CPS survey reference week. Nine percent was increased out-of-the-labor-force per capita. 33 percent was
reduced hours work among the employed. The decomposition’s interaction term was negligible (Mulligan 2012).


                                                                                                                 18
weeks (the limit before December 2009) and less than 96 weeks. In other words, holding
behavior constant, extending benefit duration from 72 to 96 delivers far fewer dollars to the
unemployed population than extending it from 26 to 52 and therefore has a far lesser effect on
average marginal tax rates.

           Because SNAP is based on household income, I estimate SNAP participation weights
separately for married and unmarried people, and separately for persons unemployed and out-of-
the-labor-force. For each of these four groups (marital status by labor force status), I take the
ratio of the average number of group members in a SNAP household during a month of the fiscal
year 2010 to the weekly average nationwide total number of group members. The numerators
are measured from the USDA’s fiscal year 2010 quality control file and the denominators from
the CPS-MORG. For each marital status, the results by labor force status are averaged with
weights 0.09 on out-of-the-labor-force and 0.91 on unemployed because nine percent of the
decline in average hours worked occurred through an increased propensity to be out-of-the-labor-
force.30

           The resulting SNAP participation weights are 0.83 for unmarried people and 0.20 for
married people: four times greater for the unmarried.31 In particular, during the average week of
fiscal year 2010, almost every non-elderly unmarried household head unemployed – to be exact,
3.3 million or 85 percent – were in SNAP households!32                        Among non-elderly unmarried
household heads, SNAP had become about as common as unemployment insurance as a source
of support during unemployment.33 The SNAP participation weights are multiplied by the SNAP
eligibility index (common to the ten groups) and shown in Figure 4.



30
   In doing so, I give reduced hours the same weight as unemployed, because both create some income for the SNAP
participant that would be considered in the SNAP benefit formula. Results turn out to be insensitive to the 0.09 and
0.91 weights used in the average.
31
   Although this result is not surprising for the reasons cited above, I checked it in the 2008 CPS-ADF by regressing
reported 2007 SNAP participation on a constant, marital status, and 2007 annual earnings relative to federal poverty
guidelines (truncated left and right at 0 and 5, respectively) in the sample of household heads and spouses aged 25-
64 in 2007. At the sample mean earnings ratio, the regression’s predicted SNAP participation rate was 5 times
greater for the unmarried than for the married.
32
   Two thirds of non-elderly unmarried household heads who were out of the labor force were in SNAP households.
33
   The relative dollar amounts of support from the two programs depends on skill level because, holding family
composition constant, SNAP benefits are a fixed dollar amount and UI benefits vary with earnings on the prior job.
At the median skill level, UI benefit dollars are three or four times SNAP’s. For the lowest skill group, UI dollars
are about double SNAP dollars.


                                                                                                                  19
        The figure’s unmarried series is much greater than the married series because it is far
more common for non-employed unmarried household heads to participate in the program than it
is for non-employed married household heads and spouses. This effect on the SNAP program
participation weights, and a similar effect on the Medicaid program participation weights, is an
important reason why marginal tax rates are greater for unmarried people than for married people
at a given level of potential earnings.

        Medicaid participation also depends on household income, so I estimate its participation
weights separately by marital status. I begin with the ratio of the change in nonelderly Medicaid
enrollment (including children) from June 2007 to June 2010 to the 2007–2010 change in the
average weekly number of nonelderly heads and spouses who were not employed or
underemployed, which is 0.946. I then discount the result by 50 percent to reflect the fact that
Medicaid benefits are distributed in-kind, rather than in cash or cash equivalents, because the
effect of benefits on the incentive to work depends on their value to the beneficiary rather than
their cost to the government. I use the CPS-ADF to estimate the Medicaid participation rates
among married unemployed household heads and spouses aged 25-64 relative to unmarried
unemployed household heads aged 25-64 in order to form marital-status-specific weights from
the aggregate weight of 0.47: 0.63 for the unmarried and 0.35 for the married.




Marginal Tax Rate Results
        I calculate a marginal tax rate series for each group by taking the sum (1) over all
programs, and groups of programs, shown in Table 1 and dividing by potential earnings inclusive
of fringes, as in equation (2).


             MTRgt 
                                     bgt
                                                        
                                                                     j   gj
                                                                                Egjt Bgjt
                                                                                                 (2)
                       1.234(potential cash earnings)       1.234(potential cash earnings)


Potential earnings inclusive of fringes is calculated as the product of potential cash earnings (the
monthly amounts $2,110, $2,578, etc. shown in Table 1) and the average (for the years 2007 and
2010) ratio of 1.234 of aggregate employee compensation to aggregate cash employee
compensation.



                                                                                                 20
         Figures 5 and 6 show the results.34 All ten groups have the same qualitative time pattern:
rates increase in 2008 as the unemployment insurance program increases allowable benefit
duration, increase again in 2009 with the ARRA, decrease as ARRA provisions expire, and
decrease with the payroll tax cut. All of the series end 2011 at a rate that significantly exceeds
the rates in place when the recession began.

         Marginal tax rates are greater for unmarried people than for married people at the same
potential earnings.       Holding marital status constant, marginal tax rates are greatest for the
second-to-lowest earnings potential group, because that group has the least earnings potential
among groups with little or no SNAP and Medicaid eligibility when working full time. The
lowest earnings potential group’s marginal tax rate is not especially high despite its small
denominator because many of its members can participate in Medicaid and SNAP regardless of
how much they work.35

         The left half of Table 3 displays marginal tax rate changes through calendar years 2010
and 2011, taking calendar year 2007 as the base year. Through 2010, marginal tax rate changes
ranged from 5.0 percentage points for the highest potential married group to nearly ten
percentage points for the second unmarried group in terms of earnings potential. Note that these
are percentages of potential earnings plus fringes, and therefore on a larger base than actual cash
earnings, as sometimes reported in other marginal tax rate studies.36 Although the calculation of
marginal tax rate series prior to 2007 is beyond the scope of this paper, one suspects that the
changes shown in Table 3 are historically unusual because (a) the allowed unemployment




34
   Because of the number of components in the calculation, many of the results are not particularly sensitive to
reasonable changes in any one of the components. Mulligan (2012) presents a detailed sensitivity analysis for the
average marginal worker (something like the married and middle-potential income group shown in this paper), and
finds that the most important parameter (for the purpose of time series analysis – cross-group comparisons are not
examined) is the 58% weight given to hours reductions due to unemployment rather than out-of-the-labor force or
hours among employees.
35
   The marginal tax rate’s numerator is the difference between the total amount of subsidies net of taxes received if
and when a person does not work and the total amount received (or paid) if and when the same person were working
full time: the causal effect of (not) working on subsidies net of taxes. The lowest skill group has a relatively small
causal effect of working on net subsidies because they receive many of the subsidies even when working full time.
See also Yelowitz (1995).
36
   The two percentage point payroll tax cut is only 1.6 percentage points when the base is earnings plus fringes.


                                                                                                                   21
insurance duration was historically unusual since 2007, (b) unemployment insurance and related
benefits were increased, and (c) SNAP eligibility was expanded so much.37

         Even with the (temporary) payroll tax cut in place in 2011, marginal tax rates were still
significantly elevated above 2007 values. 96 week unemployment benefit duration continued
through 2011, and many of the SNAP expansions are indefinite.

         Because each marginal tax rate is calculated as a cross-program sum (see equation (1)),
each program’s contribution to marginal tax rate changes can be calculated as the change in that
program’s component of the sum. My equation (3) collects those terms in five categories:
changes in UI eligibility associated with the duration of benefits, changes in UI eligibility
associated with the modernization of the program, changes in UI and related benefits (such as the
COBRA subsidy for unemployed people), changes in SNAP eligibility and benefit rules, and all
other eligibility and benefit rule changes.38



                                                            gUI
             MTRgt                                                                      
                               1.234(potential cash earnings)
              E   g ,duration, t   E   g ,modern, t   Bg ,UI , t  E g ,duration , t  E g ,modern, t  Bg ,UI , t  E g ,UI , t Bg ,UI , t   
                                                                                                                                                        (3)
                    gSNAP   E g , SNAP , t Bg , SNAP , t 
             
                 1.234(potential cash earnings)


              payroll tax term and UI interaction terms

where  denotes the time difference operator (between 2007 and 2010, or between 2007 and
2011). Although the marginal tax rate levels depend on all safety net programs, marginal tax rate
changes are calculated merely from programs with changing benefit and eligibility rules. Prior
to 2014, these are only UI, SNAP, and the payroll tax, which is why those are the only terms

37
   The primary contribution to the measured tax rates of my assignment to demographic groups of specific amounts
of potential earnings is to allow for variation in UI participation weights by potential earnings. As shown in Figure
3, the variation turns out to be minimal except for the lowest potential earnings group. If that group were assumed
instead to have the same UI participation weight as the next lowest potential earnings group, then the lowest group’s
marginal tax rate would be two percentage points more than shown in Figures 5 and 6 in 2007 and three percentage
points greater in 2010 and 2011.
38
   The “all other” category includes changes in the payroll tax rate and interactions among the various other change
terms.


                                                                                                                                                        22
appearing in equation (3). The first set of curly brackets show terms relating to changes in UI
eligibility and benefit rules. For these purposes, the UI eligibility index has been decomposed
into the product of two eligibility indices relating to (benefit) “duration” and “modernization.”
The final term in the first set of curly brackets quantifies the effect of changing UI benefits
conditional on eligibility. The second-to-last row of equation (3) is the combined contribution of
changes in SNAP eligibility and benefit rules. The final term relates to the change in the payroll
tax rate, which is zero prior to 2011, and interactions between the various UI change terms.
       Figures 7 and 8 show the results for changes through 2010 and 2011, respectively.
Although the duration of UI insurance benefits is essentially the only marginal tax rate change
that received much attention or analysis during the recession (see Elsby, Hobijn and Sahin
(2010)), the figures show that other eligibility and benefit rules made significant contributions to
marginal tax rate increases. For unmarried people with below median potential earnings, the
SNAP program by itself added as much to marginal tax rates as UI duration did. The weekly
amount of UI and related benefits also significantly added to marginal tax rates through 2010,
but not through 2011 when the additional benefits had expired. About half of the 2007-10
increase in marginal tax rates for married people with potential earnings below median was due
to provisions other than UI benefit duration.

       The payroll tax cut and extended (and emergency, hereafter “extended”) UI benefits have
sometimes been treated by lawmakers as a pair of policies, as in late 2011 and early 2012 when
Congress decided to extend both temporary provisions at least until the end of calendar year
2012 (Pear and Steinhauer 2012). The payroll tax cut appears to be at least as expensive (from
the Treasury’s perspective) as the extended UI benefits and might thereby be expected to have at
least as large an impact on the labor market as UI benefits do. However, Figure 8 shows a much
smaller (negative) contribution of the payroll tax cut to marginal tax rate changes than the
(positive) contribution of extended UI benefits because UI benefits are, by my estimate, roughly
targeted to people on the margin of working or not whereas payroll taxes are paid by all workers.
In other words, the combined effect of the payroll tax cut and extended UI benefits is to raise
marginal tax rates, even for (some) persons with above-median earning potential.

       A number of safety net programs such as Supplemental Security Income and TANF
affect marginal tax rate levels, but not marginal tax rate changes, because the programs did not



                                                                                                 23
have significant changes in their eligibility or benefit rules. For the same reason, the exclusion
of any program from my marginal tax rate calculations affects only the level of the marginal tax
rates and not their changes – as long as that program did not change its eligibility or benefit
rules.39

           Disability insurance (DI) is an interesting example. Federal spending on the program
increased substantially during the 2008-9 recession, and during previous recessions
(Congressional Budget Office (2012), Duggan and Imberman (2009)). However, if I am correct
that the DI program did not significantly change its eligibility or benefit rules since 2007 (see
also Autor (2011) and Congressional Budget Office (2012)), then it did not by itself create
changes in work incentives and DI spending growth during the recession should not be
misunderstood as contributing to rising marginal tax rates. Instead, DI spending growth since
2007 reflects changes in the behavior (and perhaps age) of the population under a fixed set of DI
benefit rules. At most, the DI program should be reflected in the level of the marginal tax
rates.40




Conclusions, and a Cross‐Group Comparison of Incentives and Labor
Market Behavior


           It is recognized, especially in poverty research, that program rules changed for a number
of safety net programs in the direction of providing more assistance for the poor, unemployed,
and financially distressed.41 It is also recognized that helping poor people has a cost in terms of
incentives. For any one of the program rule changes, the aggregate effect on incentives seems


39
   Both marginal tax rate levels and changes matter for analysis of labor supply changes. Mulligan (2012) examines
the sensitivity of labor supply change results with respect to the level of marginal tax rates, program participation
weights, and other components of marginal tax rate series.
40
   My “other means-tested program” category does not capture spending by the federal DI program (largely because
so much of the benefits go to elderly or near-elderly people), but does include other government spending on
disabled people such as SSI.
41
   For two more examples, see the Pell grant expansion and the replacement of the Hope Scholarship Tax Credit
with the American Opportunity Tax Credit cited in this volume (Dynarski, Scott-Clayton and Wiederspan 2013).
Both changes required either greater marginal tax rates in the phase-out range or a wider range of incomes to which
positive marginal tax rates apply.


                                                                                                                  24
small, but the greatest surprises in this paper’s results are the large sum total of those incentive
changes, even when accounting for imperfect take-up, and how different they are by marital
status.

          The right half of Table 3 displays changes in the natural log of the after-tax share
ln(1-MTRgt), which is a way of quantifying the changes in incentives to earn because it is
essentially the percentage change in what a worker keeps after taxes and subsidies. The log
after-tax share fell sharply between 2007 and 2010 for all of the groups: the financial reward to
working was a lot less in 2010 than it was in 2007. The reduction in incentives for unmarried
people at or below median earnings potential is astounding. Incentives improved a bit between
2010 and 2011, but remain remarkably less than they were in 2007.

          Not too long ago, economists believed that the reward to working affects the amount that
people work. They debated the exact magnitude of this effect, but largely agreed that incentive
changes of the amounts shown in Table 3 would noticeably depress the quantity of labor. Even
readers who believe that supply incentives are temporarily irrelevant while the labor market is
“slack” and monetary policy seems ineffective, may still expect that a full labor market recovery
would require a full incentives recovery at the same time that it requires “demand” to return to
pre-recession levels. In this regard, it may be no puzzle that the labor market has so far
recovered only a fraction of its 2008-9 decline: the incentives to work still remain significantly
less than they were five years ago.

          More work needs to be done to understand the 2007-2010 labor market experiences of
different demographic groups. This paper provides one ingredient for that analysis: separate
marginal tax rate series by potential income and by marital status. Figure 9 offers a preview of
such an analysis by comparing the ten group’s incentive changes from Table 3 with estimates of
their per capita hours changes (including zeros for persons not working).42 Unmarried groups
are shown as red squares and married groups as black circles, with each point labeled according
to its potential earnings. The Figure shows an obvious positive correlation between work hours

42
  For the purposes of measuring labor market outcomes I classified household heads and spouses aged 25-64 in the
CPS-ADF by age, race, education, state of residence, and family composition and imputed potential earnings for
each of them as the projected value from a log hourly earnings regression function fit to persons who worked at
least 35 hours per week and at least 26 weeks during the year (see the main text for the regressor details). I
calculated average hours by year, marital status, and imputed potential earnings quintile and show their changes in
Figure 9.


                                                                                                                 25
changes and incentive changes. The correlation is positive within marital status, with higher
potential groups having lesser hours and incentive changes, but is perhaps unsurprising because
less skilled groups are known to have more cyclical work (Solon, Barsky and Parker 1994).
However, it is interesting that hours changes vary less across skill groups among married people
than they do among unmarried people: a labor supply theory might explain this as a consequence
of my finding that incentive changes vary less among married people. In fact, hours changes are
essentially the same for the four married skill groups at the same time that marginal tax rate
changes are the same for those groups.

       Also surprising is that, holding skill constant (as measured by the amount actually earned
in 2005-7 by full-time working persons in the various groups), hours changes are so different for
unmarried people at or below median earnings potential. For example, per capita work hours fell
9 percent among unmarried household heads with earnings potential of about $3,100 per month,
whereas they fell only 6 percent for married household heads and spouses with the same earnings
potential and fell only 6 percent for married household heads and spouses with even less
earnings potential. Perhaps dramatic incentive changes are a significant reason why labor market
experiences vary so much by skill and marital status and their interaction, and why the labor
market is so different after 2007 than it was before.




                                                                                              26
Table 1. Safety Net Benefit Events
as a function of potential earnings and marital status
                                                               potential monthly earnings
                                                         2,110   2,578     3,148     3,845    4,697

Pre-Event Net Benefits                                           real monthly index amounta
UI & relatedb                                             929       1,134    1,385    1,692   1,733
SNAP, marriedc                                            236         236      236      236     236
SNAP, unmarriedd                                          309         313      314      314     314
                  e
Medicaid, married                                         358         358      358      358     358
Medicaid, unmarriedf                                      280         333      356      358     358
All other means-tested government programsg               234         234      234      234     234
                h
Debt discharges                                            63          77       94      115     141
Payroll and income taxes foregonei                        534         652      796      973   1,188

Benefit Events                                                   real monthly index change
UI & related
Federal additional compensation starts Apr-09             109        109      109      109     109
FIT exclusion starts                    Apr-09             57         57       57       57      57
COBRA subsidy starts                    Apr-09            143        143      143      143     143
FIT exclusion ends                      Jan-10            -57        -57      -57      -57     -57
COBRA subsidy grandfathered             Jun-10            -72        -72      -72      -72     -72
Federal additional comp. grandfathered Jun-10             -55        -55      -55      -55     -55
COBRA subsidy ends                     Nov-10             -72        -72      -72      -72     -72
Federal additional compensation ends   Dec-10             -54        -54      -54      -54     -54
SNAP
fiscal year 2008 COLA (nominal amoun Oct-07                13         13        13      13      13
Farm Bill (nominal amount)              Oct-08             28         28        28      28      28
ARRA bonus (nominal amount)             Apr-09             45         45        45      45      45
inflation erosion of nominal benefits  monthly                             various
Payroll tax
2 percentage point FICA cut             Jan-11             -42       -52       -63     -77      -94

potential earnings below 130 percent FPG                 21%         6%        0%      0%       0%
a
  benefit indexes can be compared between two programs only for persons who would participate
  in both of them when not working. Otherwise, comparisons also require participation weights
b
  minimum of 44% percent of potential earnings and $400 per week
c
  average monthly benefit for households with unemployed head or spouse and married head
d
  minimum of max SNAP benefit and 30 percent of potential earnings. Sept 2007 values shown
e
  average monthly Medicaid benefit for non-elderly non-disabled
f
  zero for those with potential earnings below 130% of FPG, otherwise the same as married
g
  average monthly spending on all other means-tested programs in fiscal year 2010, per non-elderly
  head or spouse who is under-employed or not employed and not receiving UI
h
  3.0% of potential income
i
  25.3% of potential income
Table 2. Safety Net Eligibility Events
January 2007 - December 2011

Program       date expansion factor   description
UI          Jul-08           1.267    eligibility extended from 26 to 52
UI         Dec-08            1.086    eligibility extended from 52 to 72
UI         Apr-09            1.047    eligibility criteria modernized
UI         Dec-09            1.025    eligibility extended from 72 to 96 in the average state
SNAP       various           1.277    BCBE diffusion across states; other relaxation of asset and income tests
SNAP       Oct-08            1.024    ABAWD work requirements dropped or waived state-by-state
Table 3. Marginal Tax Rate Changes since 2007
by potential monthly earnings and marital status

                                               Marginal Tax Rate change, percentage points     Log after-tax share change times 100
potential earnings                              2007-2010         2007-2011                        2007-2010          2007-2011
                                                                                  Unmarried
2,110   = 0.4 log points below median                   9.7              6.2                             -21.0            -12.8
2,578   = 0.2 log points below median                   9.9              6.3                             -21.4            -13.1
3,148   = median among working heads & spouses          9.5              6.1                             -19.7            -12.2
3,845   = 0.2 log points above median                   8.6              5.5                             -16.6            -10.4
4,697   = 0.4 log points above median                   6.6              3.9                             -11.5             -6.7

                                                                                     Married
2,110   = 0.4 log points below median                       6.2                2.6                       -11.0              -4.5
2,578   = 0.2 log points below median                       7.1                3.4                       -12.6              -5.8
3,148   = median among working heads & spouses              7.2                3.7                       -12.6              -6.3
3,845   = 0.2 log points above median                       6.6                3.5                       -11.4              -5.8
4,697   = 0.4 log points above median                       5.0                2.3                        -8.0              -3.5

Note: Dollar amounts in fiscal year 2010 dollars and exclude fringe benefits
                                                                                                         Figure 1. UI Benefit Indices
                                                                                                          as a function of potential earnings
                                                                  60%

                                                                              log pot. earn. 0.4 below median
% of pot. earnings, conditional on eligibility while unemployed




                                                                              log pot. earn. 0.2 below median
                                                                              log pot. earn. at median
                                                                  55%         log pot. earn. 0.2 above median
                                                                              log pot. earn. 0.4 above median



                                                                  50%




                                                                  45%




                                                                  40%




                                                                  35%
                                                                     Jan-07               Jan-08                Jan-09               Jan-10     Jan-11   Jan-12
                                                                                      Figure 2. SNAP Benefit Indices
                                                                 400                   by potential earnings and marital status
constant $/month, conditional on eligibility while not working




                                                                 380


                                                                 360


                                                                 340


                                                                 320


                                                                 300


                                                                 280


                                                                 260
                                                                                                           unmarried, log pot. earn. 0.4 below median
                                                                 240                                       unmarried, log pot. earn. 0.2 below median
                                                                                                           unmarried, log pot. earn. at median
                                                                 220                                       unmarried, log pot. earn. 0.2-0.4 above median
                                                                                                           all married
                                                                 200
                                                                    Jan-07   Jan-08            Jan-09               Jan-10              Jan-11              Jan-12
                                          0.45
                                                                   Figure 3. UI Eligibility Indices
                                                       as a function of potential earnings, scaled by participation weights




                                          0.40
1 = reduction in work hours receives UI




                                          0.35




                                          0.30



                                                                                                       log pot. earn. 0.4 below median
                                                                                                       log pot. earn. 0.2 below median
                                          0.25                                                         log pot. earn. at median
                                                                                                       log pot. earn. 0.2 above median
                                                                                                       log pot. earn. 0.4 above median

                                          0.20
                                              Jan-07   Jan-08                Jan-09               Jan-10               Jan-11            Jan-12
                                                                        Figure 4. SNAP Eligibility Indices
                                                    0.9                 by marital status, scaled by participation weights


                                                    0.8
1 = average reduction in work hours receives SNAP




                                                    0.7


                                                    0.6
                                                                                                           unmarried

                                                    0.5

                                                                                                           married
                                                    0.4


                                                    0.3


                                                    0.2


                                                    0.1


                                                     0
                                                      Jan-07   Jan-08                Jan-09               Jan-10             Jan-11   Jan-12
                                       Figure 5. Statutory Marginal Tax Rates
                    60%         for unmarried HH heads, as a function of time and potential earnings




                    55%




                    50%
Marginal Tax Rate




                    45%




                    40%                                                 log pot. earn. 0.4 below median
                                                                        log pot. earn. 0.2 below median
                                                                        log pot. earn. at median
                    35%                                                 log pot. earn. 0.2 above median
                                                                        log pot. earn. 0.4 above median


                    30%
                       Jan-07     Jan-08              Jan-09               Jan-10              Jan-11     Jan-12
                                                 Figure 6. Statutory Marginal Tax Rates
                    60%              for married HH heads and spouses, as a function of time and potential earnings


                                log pot. earn. 0.4 below median
                    55%         log pot. earn. 0.2 below median
                                log pot. earn. at median
                                log pot. earn. 0.2 above median
                                log pot. earn. 0.4 above median
                    50%
Marginal Tax Rate




                    45%




                    40%




                    35%




                    30%
                       Jan-07               Jan-08                Jan-09             Jan-10              Jan-11       Jan-12
                                                Figure 7. Components of 2007-10 Marginal Tax Rate Changes
                                                                      by potential earnings and marital status

                                                    unmarried                                           married
                                    10




                                     8
2007-10 change, percentage points




                                                                                                                               all other
                                     6
                                                                                                                               SNAP elg. & ben.
                                                                                                                               UI benefits
                                                                                                                               UI modernization
                                     4
                                                                                                                               UI duration


                                     2




                                     0
                                         $2,110 $2,578 $3,148 $3,845 $4,697               $2,110 $2,578 $3,148 $3,845 $4,697



                                    -2
                                                                    Potential monthly earnings
                                                Figure 8. Components of 2007-11 Marginal Tax Rate Changes
                                                                       by potential earnings and marital status


                                    10


                                                   unmarried                                           married
                                     8
2007-11 change, percentage points




                                     6                                                                                          all other
                                                                                                                                SNAP elg. & ben.
                                                                                                                                UI benefits
                                     4                                                                                          UI modernization
                                                                                                                                UI duration


                                     2




                                     0
                                         $2,110 $2,578 $3,148 $3,845 $4,697                $2,110 $2,578 $3,148 $3,845 $4,697



                                    -2
                                                                    Potential monthly earnings
                                                 Figure 9. 2007-10 Work Hours Change and Work Incentive Changes
                                                  for non-elderly household heads as spouses, as a function of potential monthly earnings and marital status
                                    -2%


                                                                                                                                                          4,697
                                                                                                                                   4,697
                                    -4%
Hours worked per capita, % change




                                                                                                  3,845                            3,845

                                    -6%
                                                                                                                           2,578
                                                                                                                           3,148
                                                                                                                                     2,110



                                    -8%

                                                                               3,148


                                    -10%
                                                                    2,578
                                                            2,110                                                                       Legend
                                                                                                                                              married
                                                                                                                                              unmarried
                                    -12%
                                           -25                           -20                              -15                           -10                       -5
                                                                                   After-tax share, log change times 100
Bibliography
Autor, David. "The Unsustainable Rise of Disability Roles in the United States." NBER working
       paper, no. 17697 (December 2011).

Congressional Budget Office. "Policy Options for the Social Security Disability Insurance
      Program." cbo.gov. July 2012.
      http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/43421-
      DisabilityInsurance_print.pdf (accessed September 7, 2012).

Council of Economic Advisers. Unemployment Insurance Extensions and Reforms in the
      American Jobs Act. Executive Office of the President, 2011.

Crimmel, Beth Levin. "Employer-Sponsored Single, Employee-Plus-One, and Family Health."
     Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. July 2010.
     http://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_files/publications/st285/stat285.pdf (accessed
     November 10, 2011).

Dague, Laura. "Effects of Medicaid Premiums and Copayments on Insurance Coverage,
       Utilization, and Health: A Regression Discontinuity Approach." manuscript (University
       of Wisconsin, Madison), October 2011.

Duggan, Mark, and Scott A Imberman. "Why are the Disability Rolls Skyrocketing? The
      Contribution of Population Characteristics, Economic Conditions, and Program
      Generosity." In Health at Older Ages: The Causes and Consequences of Declining
      Disability among the Elderly, by David M. Cutler and David A. eds. Wise, 337-79.
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press (for NBER), 2009.

Dynarski, Susan, Judith Scott-Clayton, and Mark Wiederspan. "Simplifying Tax Incentives and
      Aid for College: Progress and Prospects." Edited by Jeffrey R Brown. Tax Policy and the
      Economy 27 (forthcoming 2013).

Elsby, Michael W., Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. "The Labor Market in the Great Recession."
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2010: 1-48.

Eslami, Esa, Kai Filion, and Mark Strayer. "Characteristics of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
       Program Households: Fiscal Year 2010." Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
       (SNAP) Studies. September 2011.
       http://www.fns.usda.gov/ora/menu/Published/snap/FILES/Participation/2010Characteristi
       cs.pdf (accessed November 5, 2011).




                                                                                             27
Farber, Henry S., and Robert Valletta. "Extended Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment
        Duration in The Great Recession: The U.S. Experience." Institute for the Study of Labor.
        June 23, 2011. http://www.iza.org/conference_files/UnIRe2011/valletta_r3299.pdf
        (accessed February 19, 2012).

Feldstein, Martin, and Andrew Samwick. "Social Security Rules and Marginal Tax Rates."
       National Tax Journal 45, no. 1 (March 1992): 1-22.

Gruber, Jonathan, and David A. Wise. Social Security and Retirement around the World.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press (for NBER), 1999.

Hanson, Kenneth, and Margaret Andrews. State Variations in the Food Stamp Benefit Reduction
      Rate for Earnings. EIB-46, United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
      Service, March 2009.

Herkenhoff, Kyle F., and Lee E. Ohanian. "Foreclosure Delay and U.S. Unemployment." March
      19, 2012. https://sites.google.com/site/kyleherkenhoff/z-
      list/foreclosure_delay_unemployment_3_19_12_edit.pdf (accessed July 26, 2012).

Herkenhoff, Kyle F., and Lee E. Ohanian. "Labor Market Dysfunction During the Great
      Recession." NBER working paper, no. 17313 (August 2011).

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and David Rapson. "Does it pay, at the margin, to work and save?" In Tax
       Policy and the Economy, edited by James M. Poterba, 83-144. Cambridge, MA: National
       Bureau of Economic Research, 2007.

Liebman, Jeffrey B. "The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Incentives and Income
      Distribution." Tax Policy and the Economy, 1998: 83-119.

Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K.C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan. "The Under-Reporting of Transfers
       in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences." NBER Working Paper, no. 15181
       (July 2009).

Mulligan, Casey B. The Redistribution Recession. New York: Oxford University Press,
       forthcoming, 2012.

National Bureau of Economic Research. Marginal Tax Rates, Federal Only. October 15, 2010.
       http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/marginal-tax-rates/af.html (accessed February 8, 2012).

Pear, Robert, and Jennifer Steinhauer. "Tax Cut Extension Passes; Everyone Claims a Win."
       New York Times, February 18, 2012: A16.

Sherman, Arloc. "Poverty and Financial Distress would have been Substantially Worse in 2010
      without Government Action, New Census Data Show." Center on Budget and Policy



                                                                                              28
       Priorities. November 7, 2011. http://www.cbpp.org/files/11-7-11pov.pdf (accessed
       November 21, 2011).

Solon, Gary, Robert Barsky, and Jonathan A. Parker. "Measuring the Cyclicality of Real Wages:
       How Important is Composition Bias?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, no. 1
       (February 1994): 1-25.

United State Department of Agriculture. "Able Bodied Adults without Dependents." Food and
       Nutrition Service. February 16, 2012.
       http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/rules/memo/PRWORA/abawds/abawdspage.htm (accessed
       April 21, 2012).

United States Department of Agriculture. "SNAP-Statewide Able Bodied Adults without
       Dependents (ABAWD) Waivers Effective Immediately for Eligible States." Food and
       Nutrition Service. February 25, 2009.
       http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/rules/memo/2009/022509.pdf (accessed April 21, 2012).

—. "Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)-Able Bodied Adults without
      Dependents Waivers for Fiscal Year 2012." Food and Nutrition Service. May 3, 2011.
      http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/rules/Memo/PRWORA/abawds/waivers_2012.pdf
      (accessed April 24, 2012).

United States Department of Labor. "Unemployment Insurance Program Letter No.14-09."
       Employment and Training Administration. February 26, 2009.
       http://wdr.doleta.gov/directives/corr_doc.cfm?DOCN=2715 (accessed January 18, 2012).

—. "Unemployment Laws and Insurance." Chronology of Federal Unemployment Compensation
      Laws. May 3, 2011. http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/pdf/chronfedlaws.pdf
      (accessed October 28, 2011).

Yelowitz, Aaron S. "'The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation: Evidence
      from Eligibility Expansions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 11, no. 4 (November
      1995): 909-39.




                                                                                             29
