                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS OF THE
                     MONEY-INCOME CORRELATION




                          Ben S. Bernanke




                      Working Paper No. 1842




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                           February 1986




I am grateful to Alan Blinder, John Campbell, Gregory Choi, Angus
Deaton, Stephen King, Allan Meltzer, Frederic Mishkin, Maurice
Obstfeld, and David Romer for valuable comments. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in Economic
Fluctuations and in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #1842
                                                        February 1986




           Alternative Explanations   of the l'bney-Incorre   Correlation




                                   ABSTRACT



     Standard explanations of the bivariate correlation of money and income

attribute this correlation to an inability of agents to discriminate in the

short run between real and nominal sources of price shocks. This paper is an

empirical comparison of the standard explanation with two alternatives: 1) the

"credit view", which focuses on financial market imperfections rather than

real—nominal confusion; and 2) the real business cycle approach, which argues

that the money—income correlation reflects a passive response of money to

income. The methodology, which is a variant of the Sims VAR approach, follows

Blanchard and Watson (1984) in using an estimated, explicitly structural model

to orthogonalize the VAR residuals. (This variant methodology, I argue, is the

more appropriate for structural hypothesis testing.) The results suggest that

the standard explanations of the money—income relation are largely, but perhaps

not completely, displaced by the alternatives.




                                                       Ben S. Bernanke
                                                       Woodrc,w   Wilson School
                                                       PrincetonUniversity
                                                       Princeton, NJ 08544
I. Introduction

     By now it should be unnecessary to motivate a study of the statistical

correlation between the money stock and national income. At least since the

work of Friedman and Schwartz (1963), this stylized fact has been considered

among the most important in macroeconomics; at times, its explication has

nearly defined the field.

     Not too long ago it appeared that there was a developing consensus about

the source of this correlation. Lucas (1972) and his followers, on the one

hand, and the contract theorists (Fischer (1977), Gray (1978), Taylor (1980)),

on the other, developed models which have, conceptually, quite different

starting points; yet, operationally, the two approaches have much in common.

Both models ascribe the money-income correlation to an inability of agents to

discriminate perfectly in the short run between real and nominal sources of

price shocks. The two approaches agree that the magnitude of the money-income

correlation depends on the relative sizes of the two types of shocks, and both

deny that the authorities have the capacity to exploit this correlation to keep

output persistently above its natural level.   (The contract theorists do differ

from the Lucas school in sometimes advocating activist monetary policy in the

short run.)

     Recently, however, some alternative explanations of the money-income

relationship have emerged (or, more accurately, have been revived, since

antecedents abound). I consider two of these in the present paper. The first

approach, the "credit view", focuses on financial market imperfections rather

than real-nominal confusion as the source of the correlation. Shocks to credit

markets, whether due to monetary policy or some other source, have (it is

argued) effects on real output; since money and credit move together, this

shows up as a relation between output and money.
                                     -2—




    The second approach, the "real business cycle view," takes the position

that money is passive, and that it is correlated with output only because

agents increase their demand for transactions services when output or expected

future output is high. Advocates of this position can point to recent findings

that the money-income correlation is largely a correlation between income and

inside money, rather than the base; and that the money-income correlation is

greatly reduced when nominal interest rates (which presumably contain

information about future output) are controlled for.

     To explore these alternative explanations, I use a variant of the Sims

(1980a) vector autoregression methodology. This variant differs from the usual

VAR approach in the way that it orthogonalizes the estimated VAR residuals into

the "true" underlying structural disturbances: Instead of extracting the

disturbances via the standard Choleski decomposition (a procedure sometimes

treated as neutral, but which in fact embodies strong assumptions about the

underlying economic structure), the method used here calculates the

disturbances by inverting an estimated, explicitly structural model of the

relation among the contemporaneous VAR residuals. This alternative

methodology, I argue, is more appropriate to use when attempting to

discriminate among structural hypotheses.

     The results that I get tend more to the eclectic than the monistic.    I


present some evidence against recent claims that credit has no role, given

money; for the claim that money has no role, given interest rates, I obtain

mixed results. It seems appropriate to conclude that the traditional view of

the money-income correlation is significantly, but probably riot completely,

displaced by the alternative theories.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses the

alternative VAR methodology. Section III considers the "credit view" as an
                                       —3-



 explanation of the money-income correlation. Section IV examines the real

 business cycle explanation. Section V concludes.



 II. Methodology

      As will be discussed in more detail in the
                                                    applications below, much of the
 new evidence recently advanced on the sources of the money-income correlation

has been obtained by the Sims VAR methodology (see particularly Sims (1980b),

S. King (1982), 1984), and Litterman and Weiss (1985)). In this paper I will

be as concerned with evaluating these recent findings as with presenting

additional results; in particular, I am interested in clarifying what, if

anything, can be learned about structural hypotheses from the
                                                                 analysis of
reduced-form VARs. To facilitate this, this section develops a VAR-type

methodology which is similar in form to the standard approach but which admits

a more explicitly structural interpretation. A comparison of this methodology

with the standard approach raises questions about the value of the latter for

structural interpretation of the data. In subsequent sections I also show, by

comparing empirical results from the two approaches, that these questions are

of great practical importance.

     The alternative VAR methodology presented here is closely related to an

approach developed by Blanchard and Watson (1984). Following their exposition,

let us suppose that    is an n x I vector of macroeconomic variables, observed

at time t, whose joint behavior we wish to study.     (The dimensionality of Y is

typically small: Blanchard and Watson consider a system of four variables. In
                                              -4-




the two applications of the present paper, n =           6.)   Assume that the dynamic

behavior of     is governed by the following structural1 model:



                           2
     (2.1)           Y =         B.Y  .
                                  1 t-i
                                          ÷   Au
                                                t
                      t
                           i=O


where Ut, which I will call the vector of "structural disturbances', is

serially uncorrelated2 and E(uu) =            ,a    diagonal matrix. In the language of

business cycle analysis, the u's are the "impulses" and the B's capture the

"propagation mechanism" of the economy. (2.1) generalizes Blanchard and

Watson's equation (1) by allowing                  A is an n x n non-singular matrix whose

diagonal elements are normalized to equal one but which may have arbitrary

off-diagonal elements.

     Writing the stochastic component of (2.1) as Au, under the assumptions

made, imposes no restrictions relative to the usual Cowles formulation that

takes A1 and allows the contemporaneous covariance matrix of the u's to be

arbitrary.    I have chosen the less familiar representation in order to convey a

 somewhat different interpretation than the usual of the nature of the u's and

 of the sources of correlation between structural equations: Specifically, I




       1
              In this paper I use "structural" in the traditional sense of
              "motivated by an explicit economic theory" rather than in the more
              modern usage, "invariant with respect to a specified class of
              interventions." Thus the models I will estimate are vulnerable to
              the Lucas critique. Note, however, that I do not use my results to
              make conditional forecasts, but only to assess the relative
              importance of certain types of shocks during a given sample period;
              the latter is a valid application. I thank Lars Hansen and Frederic
              Mishkin for raising this point.
       2
              Serial correlation of u could be handled by standard methods. I
              rule this out here only so that the alternative methodology given
              here will be more directly comparable to the conventional VAR
              approach.
                                           -5-
                                                                                         N>
 want to think of the U's   in   (2.1) as "primitive"
                                                        exogenous forces, not directly
 observed by the econometrician     which buffet the system and cause oscillations.
 Because these shocks are
                            primitive, i.e., they do not have common causes, it is
 natural to treat them as
                            approximately uncorrelated (1 diagonal).     However, one
 would not want to restrict
                              individual u's to entering one and only one

 structural equation, in general; thus the matrix A is allowed to
                                                                       have arbitrary
 off-diagonal elements. Under this
                                       interpretation, then, the stochastic parts
 of individual structural
                            equations are allowed to be
                                                           contemporaneously
 correlated in an arbitrary
                              way; however, the correlation between any two

equations arises explicitly because the equations are influenced by one
                                                                        or more
of the same fundamental shocks

     As an example, one element of
                                      u might represent supply conditions in the
world oil industry. This exogenous influence on a given national
                                                                       economy
should be at least
                     approximately uncorrelated with other fundamental

macroeconomic influences, such as the pace of domestic technical or financial

innovation, or the random components of
                                           monetary and fiscal policy. Thus I is
diagonal. However, oil supply conditions might well affect a number of

different structural equations
                              (e.g., both aggregate supply and aggregate
demand). Thus in this case A has
                                 off-diagonal elements and the stochastic
components of different structural equations are correlated.



          Note that, in taking A to be n x n, I am assuming that the number of
           observed macro variables Y and the number of unobserved fundamental
           shocks u are the same. Tk5 is not as restrictive as it
          First, ii the observed macro variables are                appears:
                                                     independent in the
          sample, then (2.1) implies that there must be at least as many
          independent shocks as observed variables.  (Some of the shocks might
          only be measurement errors.) If the number of fundamental shocks
          exceeds the number of observed variables, then the independent
          influences of all of these shocks cannot be identified. However, it
          will always be possible in this case to pick n independent shock
          series and an associated A matrix which imply observational
          equivalence with the true structure.
                                                -6-




                                                         valuable payoff to estimating the
    This discussion suggests a potentially
                                                            (2.1) can be used to obtain time
model (2.1): Given the estimated parameters,
                                          disturbances u. Since this model is supposed
series of estimated fundamental
                                                      to give these estimated shocks fairly
to be structural, it should be possible

specific economic interpretations           (e.g. ,    as shocks to aggregate demand,

                                      reaction functions). As do Blanchard and Watson
aggregate supply, or to policy

in their paper, one could then study (1) the occurrence of specific individual

shocks (as an aid to interpreting economic history), (2) the joint empirical

distribution of the shocks (in order to examine more general hypotheses about

the sources of cycles), and (3) the dynamic response of observed macro

variables to a representative shock of a given type.

     A problem is that (2.1) has potentially a great many unknown parameters.

 Blanchard and Watson note that a computational simplification in estimating
                                                                                 0 (except for
 (2.1) is achieved if we impose no restrictions on the B. for i

 specifying the maximum lag length) and concentrate on modelling contemporaneous

 relationships.4 In this case a reduced form relating Y to its lagged values

 can be written
                                 2
      (2.2)               Yt =   . CY_
                                 1=1
                                                +




                      1
 where C. =    (Ia)       B. and      is a serially uncorrelated vector of residuals.

 The vector       satisfies



                                      +
       (2.3)              yt =   By       Au

               For the models estimated by Blanchard-Watson and in this paper, it
               seems reasonable to impose no restrictions on lag structures. This
               is also what is done in the standard VAR approach. One can imagine
               models based on dynamic economic theories, however, for which
               restrictions on lags would provide important identifying power.
                                       -7—




where I now write simply B instead of B. Once estimated ys are obtained from

a first-stage, unrestricted estimation of (2.2), one may attempt to identify

and estimate the purely contemporaneous structural model given by (2.3).

     Before discussing the details of how (2.3) is estimated, it will be useful

to consider the relation of the foregoing to coventional VAR
                                                               analysis.



     The interpretation of VARs.6 The value of Sims' (1972, 1980a) VAR

methodology for forecasting, or for providing an atheoretical characterization

of patterns in the data (such as might also be given by estimated spectra, or

by Burns—Mitchell reference cycles) is uncontroversial. Much less clear is the

ability of unrestricted VARs to aid in discriminating among structural

hypotheses about the economy. Nevertheless, many recent studies appear to be

operating on the premise that the calculation of Granger-causality tests,

variance decomposition tables, and impulse response functions is helpful for

distinguishing true theories from false ones. It is useful to reconsider this

premise for the case in which (2.1) describes the true structure. Since the

question of what can be inferred from a finding of Granger causality has been

extensively debated (see, e.g., Zellner (1979) and Leamer (1985)), I

concentrate on the interpretation of estimated variance decompositions and

impulse response (IR) functions within this framework. However, it should be



          In this paper I estimate (2.2) as a standard vector autoregression.
          Because of a difference in focus, Blanchard and Watson estimate
          (2.2) by a method that reduces the weight given to outliers.
     6
          Everything in the subsection below is at least implicit in the
          Blanchard-Watson paper, but I believe that an expanded discussion
          and further emphasis are warranted. See Gordon and King (1982) for
          a good related analysis. Also, after writing this paper I became
          aware of work by Cooley and LeRoy (1985), which gives a very nice
          presentation of a number of similar points.
                                       -8—




clear that the interpretation of Granger—causality tests is also affected by

the considerations discussed below.7

     Let us review some basics of how variance decompositions and IR functions

are calculated. The first step is relatively innocuous; it is simply the

estimation of a VAR (like (2.2)) and the obtaining of residuals (the y, in our

notation). However, the more troublesome next step (required to construct

unambiguous variance decompositions or IR functions) is to decompose the y's

into n orthogonal time series. There is perhaps no one correct way to do this.

However, since these new orthogonal series are treated as being economically

meaningful by proponents of the standard VAR methodology, I would argue that

what is really wanted are the U's from equation (2.3). To obtain estimates of

these u's, it appears necessary to use the relevant econometric theory to

identify and estimate the model (2.3). This of course requires a commitment to

a specific structural model (or, perhaps, to a class of models).

     Practitioners of the standard VAR approach do not use the explicitly

structural method just described to orthogonalize the VAR residuals, presumably

because of the view of Sims (1980a) that a sufficient number of credible

identifying restrictions are not typically available. But does the standard

VAR approach in some way achieve a meaningful decomposition of the y's without

assuming a specific structural model? The answer is no: Indeed, the

conventional method of orthogonalization (based on the Choleski decomposition)

is equivalent to assuming a model of the form of (2.3) in which A1 and, for a

specified ordering of the variables, B is a lower-triangular matrix of

projection coefficients. This achieves orthogonalization of the residuals, but

it also has the effect of assuming that the structural model for y is of a




            See Cooley and LeRoy (1985) for a relevant discussion.
                                       -9—




particular form, i.e., strictly recursive-—an assumption which is usually not

motivated by the relevant economic theory. The essential arbitrariness of the

conventional approach is not helped by the usual practice of trying alternative

orderings of the y's: This still restricts attention to recursive
                                                                    models,
which (roughly speaking) occupy a set of measure zero within the set of models

described by (2.3).

     If it is not believed that the true economic model is recursive, then the

orthogonal "shock" series obtained by the conventional approach have no

particular meaning. This outweighs what otherwise would be attractive

arguments that a standardized method of orthogonalization reduces investigator

discretion and thus the scope for "data-mining." There seems to be no

alternative, if one wishes to interpret calculated variance decompositions and

IR functions as giving evidence about the structure of the economy, to

identifying and estimating explicitly structural models of the form (2.3) and

then using the associated u's as the orthogonal decomposition of the y's. In

the next sub-section I discuss how models of the form (2.3) may be estimated;

in the empirical applications below I demonstrate that orthogonalization via an

estimated model, rather than by an assumed recursive structure, can have a

significant effect on the inferences drawn from a VAR-based analysis.



    Estimation of (2.3). Given that the vector of residuals      has been

obtained from a first-stage VAR, the problem of interest is how to estimate the

system of equations (2.3). This system of equations may usefully be thought of




          Of course, assuming a recursive model for y is defensible if one
          actually believes that the structure (2.3) is recursive. However,
          the practice of trying different orderings is consistent only if the
          investigator believes the system to be recursive but does not know
          the causal sequence. This is a very strange sort of prior.
                                     —10-




as a latent variables model; it is closely related to factor models and index

models. In the macro literature, models of this form have been estimated by R.

Hall (1978), Hall and Mishkin (1982), Bernanke (1983a, 1984) and no doubt by

others. (For an estimated macroeconomic index model, see Sargent and Sims

(1977).) All of the papers above estimate lagged as well as contemporaneous

relationships, and there is no reason in principle why prior restrictions on

the lag structure could not be incorporated into the present analysis (e.g.,

they could take the form of restrictions on (2.1) and (2.2)). However, as

noted above, prior restrictions on the lag structures seem relatively less

credible for the models estimated here, and I do not employ them.

     Although overidentified models of the form of (2.3) can be estimated by

maximum likelihood methods (see B. Hall (1979)), in this paper I consider only

just-identified models, for three reasons: First, I will show that

just-identified versions of (2.3) can be estimated by a simple and well-known

method which is computationally much less onerous than general maximum

likelihood with overidentifying restrictions (give the number of unknown

parameters typically involved in systems of any size). Second, overidentified

models will not in general yield perfectly orthogonal u's, so that the problem

of how to order variables in variance decompositions and IR functions

re-emerges (albeit in a relatively minor way, since if the overidentifying

restrictions are not rejected, the departure from orthogonality is small).

Third, in practice one rarely enjoys the luxury of having many substantive

overidentifying restrictions; indeed, some of the assumptions needed to

identify are typically "auxiliary" assumptions, in that they are not strongly

implied by the basic theory.   (For example, it may be assumed that the

disturbances associated with certain structural equations are uncorrelated.)
                                         —11—




 The use of just-identified models in practice thus tends to minimize the number

 of auxiliary assumptions employed.

      The model in Blanchard Watson is just-identified (given that two

parameters are estimated using information from outside the data set), but it

also contains two special features: 1) The assumption that disturbances to the

model's equations are uncorrelated cannot be relaxed (A1 in (2.3)).      2) The

model is "quasi-triangular"; i.e., the equations can be ordered in such a way

that each equation i has exactly i-i unknown parameters.9 These two features

allow the Blanchard-Watson model to be estimated by sequential application of

two-stage least-squares, where the instruments for the i-th equation are the

estimated residuals from equations 1 through i-i.

     I avoid imposing these special features by estimating using the method of

moments; that is, I equate the population moments implied by the theory with

the sample moments of y (where, again, y is the vector of VAR residuals). From

(2.3) it follows that



     (2.4)             uu = A1(I_B)yt4(I_B)'(AHI

Let N =               be the sample covariance matrix of y.

Then averaging (2.4) over the sample and equating population moments and sample

moments yields



     (2.5)             i =

where (2.5) now defines the estimates V = (A, B, i), if the system is

identified.




              Note that recursive systems are quasi-triangular systems, but not
              vice versa.
                                     —12—




    The individual parameters (the non-zero elements of 1) will generally be

identifiable under two conditions: First, the number of estimated parameters

must not exceed the number of distinct covariances in H (an order condition).'°

The number of distinct covariances is n(n+1)/2; thus, in the (6x6) models

estimated below I am able to identify 21 parameters--the 6 diagonal elements of

  and 15 nonzero elements of A and B. The second condition is that the system

of nonlinear equations given by (2.5) have at least one solution. This may

fail: For example consider the model specification in which it is assumed that

the i-th and j-th row of B contain only zeros, for some distinct     and j, and

that non-diagonal elements of the i-th and j-th rows of A are also zero. Then

there are no possible parameter values which yield a non-zero population

covariance for the i—th and j—th elements of y; this prohibits a solution if

the corresponding sample covariance is non-zero.    I think of this second

condition as a rank condition, since if the matrix of partial derivatives of

the distinct population covariances with respect to unknown parameters is

everywhere of full rank, a solution can be typically obtained.

     If all parameters are identified, the estimates are obtainable numerically

in two steps:   1) To find the n(n-1)/2 non-zero parameters of A and B, first

set all below-the-diagonal elements of the symmetric matrix on the

right-hand-side of (2.5) equal to zero.     (Recall that I is constrained to be a

diagonal matrix.) This yields a system of n(n-1)/2 simultaneous equations in

the same number of unknown parameters of A and B. This system is typically

well-behaved and is easily solved. 2) Given the elements of A and B, read off

the estimated non-zero values of I from the diagonal of the matrix on the

right-hand-side of (2.5). This process is computationally very easy: Model



      10
           In the just-identified case the number of estimated parameters
           exactly equals the number of distinct elements of N.
                                      -13—




 estimates presented in this paper were obtained in an
                                                       average (per
 specification) of less than one minute of computing time on a personal

 computer.

     This estimation procedure is numerically identical to Blanchard and

Watson's sequential 2SLS procedure, for the cases where that procedure is

applicable. The estimates are consistent no matter what distributional

assumptions are made (as long as all the relevant moments exist); if an

assumption of normality of the structural disturbances u is added to the

maintained assumption of just-identification, the method-of-moments   (HOFf)

estimates are also numerically identical to the maximum likelihood estimates

(see B. Hall (1979)). Indeed, because the first-stage VAR is also an MOM

estimator, and because we are considering only just—identified models, the

previous statement applies to the full two-stage estimation procedure

(including the estimation of (2.2)), as well as to the estimation of (2.3)

considered in isolation. That is, the parameter estimates obtained by the

two-stage procedure are identical to those one would get by applying FINL to

the original model (2.1).

     I estimated standard errors of the parameters in two ways. First, I

calculated the appropriate asymptotic sampling error of the covariance matrix

of VAR residuals, H, by methods described in Anderson (1958), chapter 8.       Since

the parameter estimates are functions of H, their approximate standard errors

could be computed directly from the standard errors of the elements of H via a

linearization. Second, I estimated standard errors by inverting the

information matrix of the maximum likelihood problem associated with (2.3) for

the case where the u's are independent normals. The first of these methods

explicitly takes into account the two-stage nature of the estimation (i.e., the

standard errors obtained should be approximately equal to those derived by
                                    —14-




applying PINt to (2.1)), while the second method treats (2.3) as the basic

estimation problem and ignores the first-stage VAR. For this reason,

t-statistics derived by the first method are reported below. However, standard

errors obtained by the two methods differed only very slightly.

     Given estimates A, B, and , and the model (2.3), one can construct

structually interpretable decompositions of the VAR residuals into orthogonal

shocks. The implications of.this for the interpretation of VARs are developed

in the two applications below.



III. Honey versus Credit

     In this section I take up the first of the two alternative explanations

for the money-income correlation; namely, that this correlation is in some

sense "really" a correlation between income and credit (at least in part) so

that the strong bivariate correlation of money and output reflects primarily

the collinearity of money and credit.11 Some empirical evidence for the credit

view (where credit is defined very broadly) has been offered in various places

by Benjamin Friedman (see e.g., Friedman (1983)). Counter—evidence is given in

an interesting paper by Stephen King (1984); I will return to the King paper

below.

     To anticipate a bit the next section's discussion of real business cycles:

A possible view of the money-versus-credit issue is that it is unimportant,

because both money and credit are purely endogenous, not causal variables. A

clear recent statement of this may be found in R. King and Plosser (1984): In

the King-Plosser model, financial services (transactions, borrowing) are inputs



           The notion that the money-income correlation is in fact due to the
           relation of some omitted third variable to both money and income
           arises again when we consider the real business cycle hypothesis,
           below.
                                         -15-




into the production process; as with any normal input, financial services are

used more heavily when output is high or is expected to be high. In this

framework, financial aggregates such as money and credit appear to lead output

(or to be contemporaneously correlated with output) because these aggregates

mirror the level of financial services; however, the financial aggregates are

purely passive responders to movements in current output and expected future

output. Roughly, money and credit appear at the bottom of a block-recursive
          12
system.

     If money and credit are passive tails on the output dog, then the issue of

money—versus-credit is of little practical importance, except perhaps for

forecasters. Is the real business cycle view plausible? It does seem likely

to me that on average, much if not most of the relation of income and the

financial aggregates might be due to endogeneity of the aggregates.      (This

turns out to be important for interpreting the empirical results below.)

However, for purposes (say) of policy analysis, there is a big difference

between complete and almost-but-not-quite-complete endogeneity of the financial

aggregates, since it is in those occasional circumstances when the direction of

causality runs from financial aggregates to output that correct policy choice

is most important. Thus, while acknowledging that money and credit are

probably often passive, I shall proceed to consider the possibility that these

variables may sometimes take an active, causal role.

     Some currently standard explanations of how monetary shocks can have real

effects were mentioned in the introduction. Analyses of the macroeconomic



      12
               Here and in the rest of this section I frequently slip into talking
               about the money-income correlation as pertaining to real, as opposed
               to nominal, money (or credit). A positive relation between output
               and real money implies a similar relation between output and nominal
               money if prices are not too countercyclical. See King and Plosser
               for an extended discussion of this point.
                                     —16-




effects of credit shocks are contained in Blinder (1983), Bernanke and Gertler

(1985), and others; for a particularly clear and simple discussion, see Blinder

and Stiglitz (l983).13 Without going into detail, I will here state and

discuss briefly some basic features of the canonical credit—causes-output

story. For theoretical reasons (see below), by !Icreditt! I will mean

specifically customer loans granted by intermediaries, not bonds or other

auction-market instruments, despite Friedman1s results that broader measures of

credit track output more closely.

     The argument for credit appears to have two major and two auxiliary

premises. The two major premises are:

     1) Some assets of financial intermediaries (specifically, their customer

loans) are imperfect substitutes for non—intermediary assets; in particular,

only intermediaries are willing to hold the liabilities of certain borrowers.

     2) There are shocks which affect the cost and availability of funds to

financial intermediaries; there are also shocks to the cost of the

intermediation process itself.

     Imperfect substitutability of intermediary and non-intermediary assets

(Premise 1) is supposed to arise because of imperfect information in credit

markets (see Blinder and Stiglitz). Intermediaries specialize in the provision

of credit to borrowers who, because of high screening and monitoring costs,

cannot easily obtain funds by issuing securities on the open market. Because

moral hazard problems prevent intermediaries from credibly conveying the

information they have about their assets, non-intermediaries will purchase




      13
           There is also some interesting related work on the general functions
           of financial intermediation in the real economy. See particularly
           Townsend (1983) and Boyd and Prescott (1983).
                                      —17—



 these assets only at a discount, if at all.'4 Nor will non-intermediaries

 often make new intermediary-type loans, both because of their cost disadvantage

 in making such loans and because of the unfavorable
                                                       signal projected by
potential borrowers who have not been able to obtain loans from intermediaries.

The result is that, if intermediaries become for some reason unable or

unwilling to make new loans, certain types of borrowers may find it very

difficult to obtain credit, at least in the short run,

     That intermediary assets are to some degree nonsubstitutable with other

assets would seem hard to deny. (See Fama (1985) for some direct evidence on

this question.) The key issue, which can only be resolved empirically, is one

of degree: If the capacity of some intermediary or set of intermediaries to

make loans is reduced, how quickly and with what premium will alternative

lenders fill the gap? This question is often of direct policy importance: For

example, it has been debated whether regulations that permit savings and loans

improved access to sources of funds have any effect on the housing industry

(Jaffee and Rosen (1979), Hendershott (1981)). The effect on housing will be

larger, the harder it is for builders to find alternative mortgage lenders.

     The shocks that may hit the intermediation system (Premise 2) are of

several sorts. Blinder and Stiglitz emphasize the effects of changes in

monetary policy (e.g., draining of reserves, changes in reserve requirements).

A second major category of possible shocks is those due directly or indirectly

to financial regulation: the disintermediation that occurred when market

interest rates exceeded regulation Q ceilings, the introduction of money market

certificates, changes in regulations concerning portfolio composition, credit


     14
          New instruments such as mortgage-backed bonds do not invalidate this
          statement. These instruments are made feasible only by very high
          rates of collateralization and by government and institutional
          guarantees against default. See Bernanke and Gertler (1985), p. 38.
                                        —18—




controls, usqry   ceilings,   etc. A third type of possibility is changes in the

public demand for intermediary liabilities (e.g., deposits), when these changes

are for some reason (regulatory or otherwise) not easily offset by issuance of

alternative liabilities (such as certificates of deposit).15 Fourth, we may

treat as shocks financial innovations (e. g., new lending instruments) or

technical changes (computerization) that affect the cost and scope of the

intermediation process.

     If we are willing to construe "credit shocks" broadly, there is a fifth

category of shock to include; namely, shocks to the solvency and

creditworthiness of borrowers. Consider an event like the deflation of the

1930s or the combined disinflation and exchange rate appreciation that afflicts

farmers and other exporters in the 1980s. Since the forcing of bankruptcy

proceedings is a punitive measure designed to provide the individual borrower

an incentive for effort ex ante, in an ideal debt contract the probability of

bankruptcy would be independent of the occurrence of events like these which

are clearly out of the borrower's control. Evidently, debt contracts do not

have this property, since bankruptcy rates are sensitive to aggregate phenomena

like the business cycle. When the rate of insolvency is generally high, it

becomes much riskier for intermediaries to make new loans, even for

intrinsically worthwhile projects; a typical response to this situation is for

intermediaries to employ tighter and more costly screening procedures, or to

retreat from new credit extension entirely. Arguably, then, imperfectly

indexed debt contracts and the institution of bankruptcy can lead, under some




      15
           An extreme example of this last category is financial panics, when
           rapid declines in deposits may affect the capacity of intermediaries
           to function normally. See Bernanke (1983b).
                                     —19—




circumstances, to a lower level of lending and investment then would be

justified by "fundamentals" (e. g., in an Arrow-Debreu economy).16

     Together, Premises 1 and 2 imply that "credit shocks" will have real

effects on the economy. For example, a rise in market interest rates above the

regulation Q ceiling may induce a loss of thrift industry deposits and a

decline in mortgage lending. If 1) this decline can not be offset in the short

run by alternative lenders, and 2) if the fall in construction iA not replaced

in the short run by other types of spending, then the resulting fall in

aggregate demand may contribute to a recession.17 Then credit and output will

be correlated for two reasons: first, because of the endogeneity of credit

over the cycle (the dominant effect?); and second, because occasional shocks to

the credit intermediation process have a causal relation with output.

     I mentioned that there are also two "auxiliary premises" to the

credit-causes-output story. These are the existence of equilibrium credit

rationing (Jaffee and Russell (1976), Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), Blinder and

Stiglitz, Blinder (1984a, 1984b), S. King (1984)) and of sticky prices (Blinder

and Stiglitz, Blinder (1984a)). Although many of the cited references treat

these two hypotheses as central, neither is in fact strictly necessary to

motivate real effects of credit shocks. They do, however, help at certain key

points: The existence of credit rationing may explain how credit shocks affect

output without inducing large swings in lenders' interest rates. Sticky prices




      16
           For an early discussion of the effects of "debt-deflation" on the
           economy, see Fisher (1933). Also see Bernanke (1981, 1983b).

           I consider the view that the transmission mechanism for credit is
           via aggregate demand to be the more plausible. However, aggregate
           supply effects are possible; see Blinder (1984a).
                                     -20-




may be essential to a model in which open-market operations in particular have

real effects via credit markets.18



     Evidence for the Credit-Shock Model. There has been little systematic

empirical work on the relation of credit and output. The cited paper by

Friedman, plus several others he has written, finds the strongest relationship

between credit and output when very broad measures of credit (measures which,

unfortunately, are rather hard to justify theoretically) are used; he finds

much less correlation between output and measures of intermediary credit.19

Particularly damaging to the credit hypothesis are results obtained by S. King

(1984). Using commercial and industrial (CM) loans made by commercial banks

as his measure of credit, King employed standard VAR techniques to show that 1)

credit has little addtional predictive power for GNP when measures of money are

included, but money is a powerful output predicter; and 2) the decomposition of

the forecast variance of output at a four-year horizon shows little role for

credit shocks, while money, again, plays an important role. Observing that

these results obtain in monthly as well as quarterly data, King concluded that

the credit-oriented explanation of the money-income relation has little

empirical support.



      18
           A possible alternative model motivating real effects of open market
           operations, that does not assume a sticky price level, could be
           based (I conjecture) on the fact that deposits and loans are set in
           nominal terms and on the hypothesis that people adjust nominal
           deposit and credit balances only gradually in response to shocks (a
           buffer stock model). Note also that if we exclude open market
           operations as a source of credit shocks (and there is some evidence
           for this given below), this eliminates only one type of shock from
           the list that has been offered.
      19
           Porter and Offenbacher (1983) use VAR techniques to question the
           strength of the credit-output relationship for even Friedman's
           favored measure of credit. They are careful not to draw structural
           inferences, however.
                                          —21—




     There are two possible problems with King's results. The first is that

his measure of credit is not sufficiently inclusive (indeed, he presents

evidence that "other" commercial bank loans may have more predictive power for

GNP than do C&I loans). The second, discussed below, is the general criticism

of the standard VAR methodology already raised in Section II.

     To see if the narrowness of Kingts credit measure was a problem, J

performed a standard VAR analysis using two alternative (more inclusive) credit

variables: the log of total commercial bank loans, in nominal terms (CB), and

the log of the sum of loans made by commercial banks, savings and loans, and

mutual savings banks, also nominal (C). The results were quite similar in the

two cases; I report only the outcomes using C. The other variables in the VAR

were the logs of real Gill' (Y), the GNP deflator (P), real defense spending (G),
                                     20
the monetary base (B), and Ml (N).         As a check for robustness, and for other

reasons discussed below, I estimated the VAR system both in log-levels (with a

constant and a trend) and in log-differences, i.e., rates of growth (with a

constant). The data are quarterly, from 1953:1 to 1984:IV; since I allowed

four lags for each variable, the sample begins in 1954:1 for the level data and

1954:11 for the differenced data.21

     Results of this exercise are contained in Tables 1, 2, and 3. These

tables tend to confirm King's findings. Table 1 shows that credit is

marginally predicted at the .05 level by real output, defense spending, and Ml;

it marginally predicts no other variable at the .10 level. GNP is predicted at




      20
           The data appendix contains more discussion of data and sources.
           Recent research suggests that an interest rate should be included in
           this system. I consider this separately in the next section.
      21
           The data were deseasonalized. Inclusion of seasonal dummies, to
           allow for possible problems with the deseasonalization procedures,
           did not affect the results.
Table 1. Tests of Marginal Predictive Power of Row Variables for Column
          Variables.




a. Log—Levels, 1954:1 — 1984:IV

             Y             P              G           B            N              C

Y          .000          .402           .745        .813         .612         .000
P          .237          .000           .585        .189         .136         .198
G          .012          .169           .000        .862         .612         .020
B          .106          .265           .448        .000         .303         .250
N          .003          .723           .328        .605         .000         .042
C          .196          .781           .261        .877         .830         .000




b. Log—differences, 1954:1 — 1984:111


            Y             P               G           B            N              C

Y          .000         .289            .584        .708         .282        .001
P          .033         .000            .682        .799         .266        .233
G          .014         .217            .024        .893         .300        .003
B          .139         .011            .848        .018         .904        .059
N          .010         .086            .331        .623         .012        .001
C          .125         .201            .956        .926         .265        .827




Entry (i,j) is the significance level of the F-test of the hypothesis that 4
lags of variable i can be excluded from the regression predicting variable j. A
low value indicates rejection of this hypothesis.
Table 2. Correlation Matrix of Residuals




a. Log—levels, 1954:1 — 1984:IV


           Y            P            G       B      N      C

Y         1.00
P          .13        1.00
0          .41        -.05         1.00
B          .07         .15         -.05     1.00
N          .23         .08          .09      .49   1.00
C          .49         .23          .06      .04    .12   1.00




b. Log-differences, 1954:11 - 1984:IV


            Y           P               G     B      N     C


Y         1.00
P          .07        1.00
G          .04        -.08         1.00
B         —.00          .01        —.27     1.00
M         -.19        -.21         -.44      .48   1.00
C          .48         .42         -.51      .13    .34   1.00
Table 3. Analysis of Dynamics Based on Standard Choleski Decomposition,
          Log—levels, 1954:1 - 1984:IV




a. Decomposition of the Variance of Output




       Innovation     Y          P            G          B           M           C
          to
Quarter!
2                   95.8        0.8          0.7        2.1         0.2         0.3
4                   79.4        3.7          1.3        2.1        13.0         0.5
8                   68.6       14.1          1.9        1.9        12.8         0.8
12                  63.3       17.0          1.7        1.6        14.9         1.4
Entries show percentage of forecast variance of Y at different horizons
attributable to innovations in column variables. Ordering is as shown.




b. Response of Output to Innovations


       Innovation    Y           P            G          B           N           C
           to
Qua rter/
1                   1.06         .00          .00        .00         .00         .00
2                    .88        -.13         —.12        .20         .07        -.08
3                    .70        —.21          .14        .16         .40         .09
4                    .36        —.24         -.08        .02         .50         .06
5                    .32        —.30         -.12        .04         .18        —.03
6                    .09        -.33         -.13        .06        -.08        -.06
7                   —.05        -.35          .00       —.00        -.16        -.06
8                   -.18        -.31         —.03        .02        —.12        -.08
9                   -.21        —.28         —.01        .04        —.19        -.11
10                  -.28        —.25         -.00        .04        —.21        -.11
11                  -.31        -.25          .06        .01        —.25        -.10
12                  -.32        -.22          .07        .01        —.24        —.09

Entries show the dynamic response of Y to a one-standard-deviation shock in each of
the column variales. Quarter 1 is the contemporaneous quarter. All entries are
multiplied by 10 .
                                     —22—




the .01 level by Ml, at slightly worse than the .01 level by defense spending,

and, in the differenced case, at the .05 level by the GNP deflator. Neither

the monetary base nor Ml are marginally predicted by any other variable.    (It

is surprising that Ml is not predicted by the base.) In the differenced

version, the base predicts the GNP deflator.

     Table 3, which displays results for the log—level case only, is equally

bad news for the credit hypothesis.22 For the ordering shown, shocks to prices

and money explain most of the forecast variance of GNP not explained by shocks

to GNP itself, at the four-, eight-, and twelve-quarter horizons. (These seem

to me to be the correct horizons to use in a study of the effects of money on

output, rather than the four-year horizon used in most other papers.) Similar

results were obtained for the log-differenced case, and also when credit was

put before money, or before money and the base, in the ordering of variables.

In the impulse-response function shown in the bottom half of Table 3, shocks to

money are seen to have large effects on output during the first year especially

(the entries in the table may be interpreted as elasticities), while the impact

of credit shocks to output net nearly to zero during the first year and become

negative thereafter. The only ray of hope for the credit hypothesis is in

Table 2, which shows that the conditional contemporaneous correlation of credit

with output is higher than that of any other variable with output, in both the

level and differenced versions.

    Thus the standard VAR method, as found by King, shows a strong dominance

of money over credit, even when broader measures of credit are used. However,

in Section II above I criticized the standard method, especially the variance




     22
          Table 3 is based on the Choleski decomposition of the variance
          matrix of residuals; that is, it assumes the standard recursive
          structure for the model yBy+Au.
                                            -23-




decomposition and impulse—response exercises, because of their dependence on

the assumption that the model relating the VAR innovations is recursive.

      To test the dependence of the results on this assumption, I estimated the

following illustrative model, in the form of (2.3). G, B, N, C, P, and Y below

refer now to the innovations in each variable as estimated by the same VAR

which underlies the results in Table 1—3. The model is:




      (3.1)          G =

      (3.2)          B = 1G+P2M+3P+D4Y+u2

      (3.3)          C =

      (3.4)          Fl =        +         +         +

      (3.5)          P =         +

      (3.6)          Y =             +              +               +         +
                            12           D13(C-P)        14(t4-P)       1u5       u6


Equations (3.1)-(3.6) are in the form yBy+Au, where the 's are elements of B

and     is the single non-diagonal element of A. As before, the "structural

disturbances'1 u are assumed to be uncorrelated; this assumption, admittedly

strong, at least allows us to specify the elements of the B matrix in a

relatively unrestricted way.

      Equation (3.1) postulates that the innovation to military spending G

within a quarter is a structural disturbance; that is, it is not correlated

with any of the other u's. Note that this assumption, which will be maintained

throughout the paper, does not say that G is uncorrelated with the other

observable variables — B, C, N, etc; quite the contrary. (3.1) is also weaker

than assuming exogeneity of military spending (total spending, not the VAR
                                      -24-




innovation), since it puts no restrictions on the behavior of the forecastable

part of the variable.

      (3.2) is the monetary authority's reaction function; the monetary base is

permitted to respond within the current quarter to innovations in G, N, P, or

Y.   I do not allow the base to respond to innovations in credit, which I think

is descriptively correct; however, the results are unchanged if money is

treated symmetrically and is dropped from (3.2). (3.3) and (3.4) allow nominal

credit and Ml to respond endogenously to within-quarter innovations in the

base, prices, or output. (3.5) is an aggregate supply curve, relating

innovations in prices and output.   (3.6) is a reduced form aggregate demand

equation, which relates output to military spending (a major component of

fiscal policy, chosen because it should be relatively exogenous) and which

permits both shocks to real credit and shocks to real money to affect aggregate

demand.

     The six structural equations contain fourteen non-zero elements of the

matrix B to be estimated. Since I am able to estimate fifteen non-zero

elements of A and B (plus the six variances of the u's) in a just-identified

6 x 6 system, I am free to specify one more parameter. I use this extra degree

of freedom to add the term a1u5 to (3.6); this has the effect of allowing a

non-zero correlation between the disturbances to the model's two principal

behavioral equations.

     Equations (3.1)-(3.6) were jointly estimated by the methods described in

Section II. The results for log-level data are in Table 4a, for

log-differenced data in Table 4b. (It seemed important to estimate the model

both ways, given, recent controversies about the need for differencing time

series models; see, e. g., Mankiw and Shapiro (1985). It is reassuring on this

score that the two sets of estimates are quite similar. The similarity of the
Table 4a. Estimated Money-Credit Model; Log-levels




(1)    G =
                u1



(2) B= - .021G+ .146F1-s- .272P+ .060Y+u2
                      (—0.87)                 (0.11)         (1.35)             (0.17)




(3)    C =             .060B            +     .716P + .128Y                 +
                      (—0.47)                 (2.18)         (0.81)




(4)    H =           .3908      -           .044P      +   .181Y        ÷
                     (0.27)                 (-0.08)        (1.55)




(5)    P =      - 0.03Y             +
                 (—0.50)



(6)    Y =           .127 G +               .439 (C-fl - .079 (H-P) +               .849 05 +
                     (5.09)                   (2.68)             (—0.27)            (1.88)



a2 =   1.08                                                 =    .039                        a2 = .061
 1
       (7.87)                                                   (0.92)                             (5.04)



        .042                                                = .009                           a =    .068
       (2.33)                                                   (6.09)                             (3.91)



Data are in log—levels, quarterly, 1954:1 -                             1984:IV.
t—statistics are in parentheses.
Table 4b. Estimated Money-Credit Model; Log-Differences




(1)       G =
                   u1



(2)       B = - .018G             +   .104M      +    .269P +
                        (—0.73)       (0.07)          (1.18)
                                                                     .122Y+u2
                                                                     (0.29)



(3)       C = - .146 B + .435                P   +    .019 Y + u
                        (-1.15)       (1.15)          (0.10)




(4)       H =           .441B          .093P +
                        (0.33)        (-0.24)
                                                       .190Y+u4
                                                       (1.37)




(5)       P =           .059
                    (0.80)
                               Y+u5


(6)       Y         .109 G +          .514  (C-P)            .116 (M-P) -       .007         + u6
                                                                                        U5
                    (4.41)               (2.17)                (—0.41)        (—0.01)




 1
      =    1.12                                         =    .046                   2 =       .066
          (7.84)                                            (0.95)                           (4.09)



a2          .042                                     a2 = .008                      a =       .082
           (3.38)                                           (7.57)                           (5.53)




Data are in log differences, quarterly, 1954:11 -                        1984:IV.
t-statistics are parentheses
                                      -25-




results also reduces concern one might have about heteroskedasticity over time

in the u's.)

      A disappointing feature of the estimation outcome is that t-statistics are

generally low; apparently there is a relatively large region of the parameter

space which implies a covariance matrix for the VAR innovations similar to that

found in the data. Nevertheless, there are some interesting results. For

example, while money innovations are positively related to base innovations, as

one would expect, credit is unrelated, if not negatively related, to the base

(equations 3 and 4). This raises the possibility that open market operations

are not particularly important for explaining changes in outstanding credit.

Also, the within-quarter aggregate supply curve (equation 5) appears flat;

there is little relation between innovations to P and innovations to Y. Most

striking, though, are the results for the aggregate demand equation (equation

6): Aggregate demand innovations within a quarter strongly depend on

innovations in G and in real credit; they do not depend at all, or depend

negatively, on innovations to real money. While one should be very cautious in

interpreting these estimates, they certainly do give some encouragement to the

credit view.23

      The effect of orthogonalizing via the estimated model (instead of the

recursive model/Choleski decomposition) on the results of the usual exercises

is shown in Table 5. Results for the log—levels specification only are given.

I   use the expression "innovation to X" as a short-hand for "innovation to   the




       23
            The strong impact of credit in the aggregate demand equation was a
            robust finding. For example, (1) exclusion of post—1979 data, (2)
             exclusionof post-1973 data, and (3) exclusion of periods in which
            regulation Q was binding all tended to raise the t-statistic on the
            credit variable, sometimes substantially. The result was also not
            affected by the use of nominal rather than real measures of money
            and credit.
Table 5. Analysis of Dynamics Based on Estimated Money-Credit Model, Log-levels,
          1954:1 — 1984:IV




a. Decomposition of the Variance of Output


     Innovation     Y         P           G         B          N          C
         to
Quarter!
2                 71.7       3.6        13.2       1.3        0.3        9.9
4                 58.9       3.0        14.5       1.1       11.7       10.9
8                 53.3      12.4        12. 1      1.1       11.4       9.6
12                46.4      18.4        10.4       1.3       13.1       10.5
Entries show percentage of forecast variance of Y at different horizons
attributable to innovations in estimated equations associated with each of the
column variables.



b. Response of Output to Innovations


      Innovation    Y        P           G          B          N          C
         to
Quarter!
1                  .86      .25         .44       -.04       -.06        .36
2                  .83     -.08         .27       -.16       - .04       .26
3                  .55     -.03         .43       -.07        .38        .32
4                  .38     -.15         .10       -.07        .47        .21
5                  .39     -.22         .06       —.00        .16        .12
6                  .21     -.30        —.05       —.06       -.08       -.02
7                 —.04      .36         .02       —.02       -.17       -.04
8                 —.04     -.35        —.07       —.04       -.12       -.10
9                 —.08      .32        —.06       -.07       -.17       -.15
10                —.15      .31        —.09       —.09       -.20       -.17
11                —.20      .31        —.05       —.06       -.24       —.18
12                —.22      .29        —.05       -.06       —.22       —.18

Entries show the dynamic response of Y to a one-standard deviation shock in the
estimated equations associated with each of the column varab1es. Quarter 1 is the
contemporaneous quarter. All entries are multiplied by 10
                                      -26-



equation in Table 4a in which X is the dependent variable." Although this

assignment of innovations to variables to some degree reflects only a

normalization, it seems reasonable to treat, in particular, the innovations to

equations (1)-(4) as representing "own shocks" (i.e., after elimination of the

endogenous component) to G, B, C, and H respectively. Note also that the

results are independent of the ordering of the variables, which is not true in

the standard case.

     Table 5 looks rather different from Table 3(which uses the standard

decomposition). The contribution of "Y shocks" to the forecast error in Y

(output) is less--which makes sense, since tly shocks" are now being interpreted

primarily as aggregate demand shocks. Much of this difference is made up by

the greater effect of military spending shocks. Most relevant to the present

discussion, credit shocks (which were a minuscule part of forecast error in

Table 3) now make about the same contribution to the variance of the forecast

error in output as do Ml shocks.

     In the IR functions, the effect of Ml on output is found to be important

in the third through fifth quarters, much as in Table 3.   (Thus, although money

shocks have little contemporaneous effect on output, they remain influential at

a lag of six months to a year.) In strong contrast to Table 3, however, in

Table 5 credit shocks are found to have an immediate strong impact on output,

with the effect lasting for a year or more.

     This analysis suggests two conclusions. First, it appears that credit

shocks are important for output, the inability of the standard VAR methodology

to find this being due to its failure to separate correctly the "truly

exogenous" component of credit Cu3) from its endogenous part.24 Second, the


      24
           Note that this failure also robs the standard Granger causality
                       .




           tests of Table I of any particular structural meaning.
                                     —27—




new estimates do not imply that the credit channel has replaced the monetary

channel; instead, money and credit are parallel forces of approximately equal

importance. Thus the puzzle of the monetary transmission mechanism remains.

     A potentially important objection (suggested by the King-Plosser paper)

can be made to the above conclusions, as follows: The model described by

equations (3.1)-(3.6) allows for an endogenous response of money and credit to

contemporaneous shocks in prices and output; however, it does not capture the

possibility that money and credit may also respond to new information

(information not fully described as a function of shocks to current variables)

which agents have about future prices and output. Under this interpretation,

the disturbances from equations (3.3) and (3.4) are better thought of as

measuring this new information, rather than as exogenous shocks to credit and

money. It would thus not be surprising that these estimated disturbances help

forecast output.

     It is probably hopeless, in general, to try to use time series methods

(and no further information) to distinguish the hypothesis "X causes Y' from

the hypothesis "Y is exogenous, and K moves in anticipation of movements in V."

Fortunately, recent work on real business cycles suggests some more specific,

and perhaps testable, models. These are considered in the next section.



IV. Real Business Cycles: Money versus Interest Rates

     Some very interesting recent papers (see especially Black (1982), Kydland

and Prescott (1982), and Long and Plosser (1983)) have focused attention on the

idea of 1'real business cycles." Real business cycle theory is an attempt to

show that the principal features of cycles (persistence, patterns of

co-movement) can be adequately modelled in a framework of dynamic, competitive

general equilibrium, in which all shocks are taken to be "real" (i.e., to
                                         -28—




tastes or technology). In particular, this approach denies that nominal

shocks, e. g., to the money supply, are of any significance in the

determination of real fluctuations.25

     Obviously, an important element of the real business cycle research

program is to reconcile the claim that nominal shocks don't matter with the

empirically observed correlations of real and nominal magnitudes——correlations

that are not predicted, for example, by the traditional classical model. From

a theoretical perspective, the best-known recent attempt to achieve this

reconciliation is the previously mentioned work by IL King and Plosser.

Following early antecedents such as Tobin (1971) and Black (1972), King and

Plosser argue that the money-output correlation reflects purely endogenous

changes in money holdings, made in response to changes in current or expected

future output. Although some points of their analysis could be criticized

(e. g. ,   there   is no tight explanation of the relation between transaction

services and the level of demand deposits, and the model does not yield a very

strong prediction of price procyclicality) the overall framework is not

implausible.

     What is the evidence for the real business cycle (hereafter, RBC) view of

the money-income correlation? King and Plosser document one important fact,

noted earlier by Stephen King (1982), in showing that income is much more

strongly correlated with inside money, or the money multiplier, than with

outside or base money. This is clearly encouraging for real business cycles.

There are some caveats: First, King and Plosser do find a small degree of

correlation between the base and output. Second, in general it should be




      25
             It is of course not logically necessary to exclude a role for money
             shocks from a model dominated by real propagation mechanisms.
             Kydland (1983) integrates the two approaches.
                                          -29-




recognized that the lack of correlation does not rule out a causal link. For

example, if    the   Fed is attempting to use the base to stabilize the economy,

this   may complicate the interpretation of the time series relationship between
the    base and output. 26
       A second piece of favorable evidence, to which I will give a good deal of

attention, was documented by Sims (198Gb), following some earlier work by Mehra

(1978). Using monthly data, Sims showed that the addition of a short-term

nominal interest rate (the rate on 4-6 month prime commercial paper) to a VAR

system also including industrial production, wholesale prices, and Ml, had the
effect of virtually eliminating the marginal predictive power of money for

output (i.e., industrial production), at least for the postwar period.27 The

interest rate, in contrast, has significant predictive power for output in the

four-variable system, a positive innovation in interest rates being followed

about six months later by a smooth decline in output.

        Sims' own interpretation of this finding was in the spirit of the REC

approach.     His theory is that interest rate innovations reflect primarily new

information about future profitability. A decline in expected future




         26
              An example, based on a comment in Sims (1972), is as follows:
              Assume a pure monetarist model, where output depends on inside money
              and a forecastable error, and where money depends on the base plus a
              forecastable error. The base is set one period in advance. If the
              base is set to minimize the variance of output, then output and
              inside money will be correlated with each other, but both output and
              inside money will be uncorrelated with current and lagged values of
              the base. (However, output and inside money will predict future
              values of the base.) With imperfect optimization or partial
              endogeneity of the base, the time series relation of output and the
              base could be complex. See Buiter (1984) for an extensive analysis.
         27
              Money retained its predictive power for output in the interwar
              sample. Because of the importance of financial panics and
              international capital movements during the interwar, Sims argued,
              however, that this finding has little relevance for contemporary
              macroeconomic analysis.
                                      -30-




profitability, given current profitability, lowers the prices of capital assets

and raises current yields. If people are on average correct in their

expectations, then an innovation to interest rates will be followed sometime

later by a decline in the economy, as found in the data. The behavior of the

money stock reflects a fall in money demand in anticipation of lower output, as

in the King-Plosser story. The leading behavior of interest rates (and money,

in a three-variable system) are expectational, not causal, phenomena. 28

     A recent paper by Litterman and Weiss (1985) reinterprets the Sims finding

somewhat, but in a way also consistent with the RBC approach. Litterman and

Weiss present evidence that (1) the real interest rate is exogenous, i.e., it

evolves without feedback from other macro variables, and (2) the important part

of the nominal interest rate, for the purposes of forecasting output, is the

expected inflation component, not the real interest rate component. As in the

Sims example, interest rates here lead output not for any causal reason but

because interest rates embody information currently available to the public

about future output movements. (In the specific model presented by Litterman

and Weiss, the negative relationship between nominal interest rates and future

output arises because lower future output leads, via the money demand function

and given the money supply process, to higher future prices and higher expected

inflation today.)

    These findings suggest29 a particular variant of the RBC explanation of

the money-income relation: I.e,, that not only is the lead relation of money

to output due simply to the response of money demand to new information about




     28
          A closely related and somewhat more formal analysis of the role of
          interest rates in the explanation of money-income-price correlations
          is contained in King and Plosser.
     29
          But see NcCalluni (1983) for an opposing view.
                                               .
                                       -3'-             4
future   output; but that all of this new information is contained in nominal

interest rates. The evidence of Sims and of Litterman-Weiss favors this view;

below, I use the alternative VAR methodology of this paper to reconsider it.

First, though, I present some evidence from the standard VAR   approach.
     Evidence. Tables 6 through 8 give the results of a standard Sims-type

analysis of a six-variable system including real GNP (Y), the GNP deflator (P),

military spending (G), the monetary base (B), the Ml measure of the money

supply (M), and the (end-of-quarter, prospective) nominal return on three-month

Treasury bills, as in Huizinga and frlishkin (1984) (R). This is the same as the

system studied in Section II, with the interest rate replacing the credit

measure. As before, I estimate one set of equations in log—levels (with a

constant and trend term) and a second in log-differences (with a constant).

Due to data availability, here the last quarter in the sample is 1984:111.

     Most noteworthy about my results is that I do not obtain the outcome that

inclusion of the nominal interest rate eliminates the predictive power of money

for output. In Table 6, interest rates appear to forecast money and prices

well; but the F-statistic for the hypothesis that interest rates marginally

predict output is lower than the corresponding statistic for every variable

except prices in the log-level specification, and for every variable in the

log-differences specification. In particular, money predicts output at the .01

significance level in both specifications.

     The variance decomposition exercise for output (Table 8a), which uses the

standard Choleski decomposition, tells a similar story. While base shocks do

not appear important, money shocks explain a significant fraction of the

forecast variance of output at the 4-, 8-, and 12-quarter horizons. Interest

rate shocks explain relatively less. (The relative contributions of N and R

shocks to the variance of Y are the same if N and R are interchanged in the
Table 6. Tests of Marginal Predictive Power of Row Variables for Column Variables




a. Log—levels, 1954:1 — 1984:111


             Y             P               G           B            H            R

Y          .000          .787            .437        .169         .141         .019
P          .618          .000            .409        .856         .566         .001
G          .021          .067            .000        .697         .409         .507
B          .068          .190            .470        .000         .889         .003
H          .007          .407            .237        .305         .000         .004
R          .078          .021            .844        .290         .001         .000




b. Log—differences, 1954:11 — 1984:111

             Y             P               C           B           N            R

Y          .001          .107            .293        .488         .374         .038
P          .004          .000            .270        .916         .939         .008
G          .005          .117            .000        .934         .477         .788
B          .021          .062            .897        .006         .705         .068
H          .003          .526            .132        .342         .000         .002
R          .952          .001            .425        .211         .000         .000


Entry (i,j) is the significance level of the F—test of the hypothesis that 4 lags
of variable   can be excluded from the regression predicting variable j. A low
value indicates rejection of this hypothesis.
Table 7. Correlation Matrix of Residuals




a. Log—levels, 1954:1 — 1984:111


           Y            P             G       B      M      R

Y        1.00
P          .11        1.00
G          .39         .00          1.00
B          .10         .22          —.05     1.00
H          .34         .25           .03      .50   1.00
R          .36         .12           .16      .08    .17   1.00




b. Log—differences, 1954:11 - 1984:111


           Y            P                G    B      N       R

y         1.00
P          .14        1.00
G          .27        -.01          1.00
B          .08         .16           .01     1.00
H          .27         .24           .05      .56   1.00
R          .29         .11           .09      .10    .21   1.00
Table 8. Analysis of Dynamics Based on Standard Choleski Decomposition,
          Log—levels, 1954:1 — 1984:111



a. Decomposition of the Variance of Output



      Innovation Y              P            G           B           N           R
           to
Quarter!
2                96.1          0.2         0.8          1.1         0.3         1.5
4                82.4          0.5         1.9          1.2        11.6         2.4
8                63.8         10.9         2.2          1.1        12.1         9.9
12               54.6         16.3         2.2          0.9        15.1        10.9


Entries show percentage of forecast variance of Y  at
                                                    different horizons
attributable to innovations in column variables. Ordering is as shown.




b. Response of Output to Innovations


      Innovation Y              P            G          B           N           R
           to
Quarter
1                 1.05          .00          .00         .00         .00        .00
2                  .83         —.06        —.12          .14         .07        .17
3                  .66         —.06          .07         .03         .39        .08
4                  .36         —.08        -.19         -.11         .42      —.18
5                  .31         —.23        —.14         -.08         .16      —.37
6                  .12         -.32        —.09          .02       —.04        -.29
7                  .03         -.38          .04        —.03       —.23        -.21
8                 -.10         -.33          .03        —.01       —.24       '-.22
9                 —.16         —.32          .09         .01       —.24       —.25
10                —.22         -.32          .05         .04       —.23       —.19
11                -.24         -.32          .09         .03       -.29       —.18
12                -.30         —.28          .08         .04       -.28       —.15

Entries show the dynamic response of Y to a one-standard-deviation shock in each of
the column varia?les. Quarter 1 is the contemporaneous quarter. All entries are
multiplied by 10 .
                                      -32-




ordering.) In the estimated impulse-response patterns (Table 8b), money shocks

are followed by relatively large output changes of the same sign at the 3- to

5-quarter horizon. The response of output to an. interest rate shock exhibits a

pattern similar to that found by Sims and by Litterman and Weiss.

     The reason that I failed to obtain the result that inclusion of nominal

interest rates eliminates the effect of money on output, it turns out, is that
                                                             30
I included a trend term, while the previous authors did not.      As S. King

(1982) and Runkle (1985) have already noted, adding a trend significantly

enhances the estimated role for money in predicting output. This was clearly

the case in my data.31 Since I put in the trend term in the first place in the

hope of minimizing conditional heteroskedasticity (which is particularly

problematic for my estimation method), and since I know of no compelling

theoretical argument to take it out, I retain the trend in the principal

estimates reported below. However, I also discuss the effects of eliminating

the trend.

     The above results follow from the standard VAR approach. As was shown in

the previous section, however, the interpretation of VARs through a structural




      30
             The principal results of both Sims and Litterinan-Weiss are obtained
             from VARs using data in log-levels and including a constant, but no
             trend. Litterman and Weiss also report the effect of adding trend
             and trend-squared (footnote 4, p. 132). Although they characterize
             this as leaving their decomposition results "essentially unchanged",
             the percentage of output variance explained by Ml at 24 quarters
             rises from 7.2% to 19.4%.
      31
             With no trend, standard analysis of my six-variable system ascribes
             46% of the variance of output at twelve quarters to interest rate
             shocks, and only 6% of this variance to money shocks. This is
             similar to the Sims/Litterman-Weiss finding. More favorable, among
             the no-trend results, to the view that money matters are that:  1)
             At four quarters, money explains 10% of the forecast variance of
             output, to a bit over 4% for interest rates. 2) The marginal
             predictive power of money for output is significant at the .006
             level, compared to the .040 level for interest rates.
                                           -33—



model of the innovations (the Blanchard-Watson methodology) can give

appreciably different results from the standard approach. To explore this in

the present case, I used the methods described above to estimate the following

"real business cycle" model, suggested by a similar model in Litterman-Weiss.

As in the model in Section III, G, B, R, N, P, and Y are now the innovations

from a first-stage VAR (in log—levels) of a system including military spending,

the monetary base, the nominal 3-month treasury bill interest rate, the Ni

money stock, the GNP deflator; and real GNP (plus constant and trend).

Suppressing the time subscripts, I write the model as:



     (4.1)          G =


     (4.2)          B =
                                                3N ÷
                                G +        +                 +   +
                           B1         2R


     (4.3)          R =    (e)        ÷         +
                                                    u3
                                                         +



     (4.4)          H =


     (4.5)          P =
                           iiR +      1.0?! +            +



     (4.6)             =         + a2u5 ÷



Equations (4.1)-(4.6) require some explanation. Equation (4.1) says that

innovations to military spending are not caused by innovations to other

variables within the quarter, as before. (4.2) is a policy reaction function

that relates innovations in the base to innovations in all the other variables;

   is the "own shock" to the base.
                                             -34-



    Equation (4.3), which specifies how the innovation to the nominal interest

rate is determined, is important for the interpretation of the model.

To motivate (4.3), write the innovation to (the log of one plus) the nominal

interest rate,          as




        (4.7)            Rt rt       t   t




where r is the innovation to (the log of one plus) the real interest and P is

the innovation to (the log of) the price level. P is the innovation, between

t-l and t, in the expectation of the log of the price level as of t+l.

     Now decompose P as



        (4.8)                e   +



where       is the innovation to the expectation of the price level in t+1

knowable given only the variables in the VAR at time t, while Vt represents all

additional new information about              available to agents t. Note that the

series          is directly computable using the first-stage prediction equation for

P; it is just the estimated coefficient on the first lag of each of the

right-hand-side variables times the innovations to each of these variables in

t. Thus (4.8) breaks up the innovation in the expected price level into a part

observable by the econometrician and a part that is unobservable.

     Next we must model the process generating the real interest rate

innovation, r. One possibility would be to follow Litterman-Weiss exactly,

and to treat r as strictly autonomous, i.e., we could write



        (4.9)             r =
                                                    -35-



where w is a white noise process uncorrelated with any of the other structural

disturbances in t. Equation (4.3) could then be written



        (4.3)              R =   (e   -
                                          P) + u3



where



        (4.10)
                           u3 v +

Rather than adopt (4.3Y, however, I allow for the possibility that

contemporaneous real shocks might influence the real interest rate

innovation.32 Specifically, I assume



     (4.11)
                           r=6G+ct1u6+w

thus shocks to real military spending (G) and to real output (u6, see below),

are allowed to affect r, as well as the own shock w. Together with (4.7) and

(4.8), (4.11) implies (4.3), with u3 still defined as in (4.10). Note that, as

G and u6 are both primitive real shocks, uncorrelated with other disturbances,

(4.3) embodies the critical Litterinan-Weiss property that the real interest

rate innovation is independent of any nominal disturbance. Note also that,

under the variant of the RBC model being considered, the disturbance
                                                                         u3 in
(4.3) should embody a great deal of information about future output. Indeed,

under the strongest form of the Sims/Litterman-Weiss hypothesis, given u3 and




        32             .
                                                .         -
                A technical reason for not adopting  (4.3) is that in a model
                including (4.1), adding (4.3)' would violate the rank condition for
                identification.
                                        -36-




all real disturbances, nominal disturbances should have no additional

predictive power for real output.33

     To complete the model specification:      (4.4) is a money supply equation

that allows the quantity of Ml to depend on the base, interest rates, prices,

output, and an own shock u4.   (4.5) is the money market equilibrium equation

written with P on the left-hand side.     (4.6) is a reduced—form equation for

real output. The term a2u5 in (4.6) allows (analogously to the previous

section) for a non-zero covariance between errors to the money market

equilibrium and output equations.34 (I allow output to depend on the money

demand shock in order to give the model a better chance to fit the data, and

because, given the King-Plosser framework, money demand shocks may properly be

thought of as shocks to tastes or technology, i.e., real shocks.)

     Equations (4.1)—(4.6), it should be repeated, form a real business cycle

model, with these features: The real interest rate innovation depends only on

real shocks (to military spending and to real output) and an own shock.

Expected inflation, which forms part of the nominal interest rate, depends in

part on new information not observable by the econometrician. Real output

innovations depend on shocks to military spending and to money demand, and on

an own shock. The price level adjusts flexibly to balance money supply and

money demand, given output and nominal interest rates. Last, but very

important, in this model the correlations of innovations in inside money and



           It would be interesting from this point of view to break up the
           predictive power of u into that attributable to v and that
           attributable to w. nfortunate1y this decomposition is not
           identified.

           The real interest rate should appear in (4.6). However, given that
           we cannot isolate the real and expected-inflation components of the
           composite disturbance u3, the coefficient of the real rate (4.6) is
           not identifiable. The other estimated coefficients in (4.6) should
           be interpreted as reflecting this specification bias.
                                        -37—




the base with those in real output are explained entirely by the endogenous

response of H and B to output, prices, and interest rates; the own shocks to

the base and to money, u2 and u4, have zero contemporaneous effect on output or

real interest rates.

      Estimates of the model for the log-level specification are given in Table

9a, for the log-differenced specification in Table 9b. The results are similar

in the two specifications and are on the whole reasonable, although again

standard errors are large. Interest rates appear to be influenced positively

both by military spending and, rather strongly, by real output shocks. Output

depends positively on military spending and negatively on shocks to the price

determination equation. The base reaction function is very imprecisely

estimated; inside money depends primarily on the base and, to a lesser extent,

on output.

      The money market equilibrium equation is estimated imprecisely, and with

the wrong sign for the nominal interest rate. Interestingly, when I tried

estimating the system using the beginning-of-quarter rather than the

(theoretically correct) end—of-quarter interest rate, this equation was

estimated with the right signs and high t-statistics. No subsequent

conclusions were affected by the use of alternative timing convention, however.

      I also estimated the real business cycle model dropping first post-1979,

then post-1973 data. The qualitative features of the estimates and of the

implied dynamics were not much changed.

      An analysis of the system's dynamics, interpreted via the structural model

in Table9a rather than by an assumed recursive structure, is given in Table

10.   Again,   "innovation to X" is short-band for "innovation to the error term
co;responding   to the equation for which X is the dependent variable."
Table 9a. Estimated Real Business Cycle Model; Log-levels




(1)       G =


(2)       B = - .029G ÷ .011R + .13011                               -       2.93P   +
                    (—0.51)             (0.13)          (0.16)           (-0.41)
                                                                                         .154Y+u2
                                                                                         (0.32)



(3)       R =     (e)        +       .036 G + a
                                     (1.85)
                                                           +    .277 u
                                                               (3.54)
                                                                         6




(4)       N = 1.65B                   .019R -        2.18P       +
                   (2.16)             (—0.14)        (—0.70)
                                                                         .187Y+u4
                                                                         (0.97)




(5)       P = -.131R             +     1.011     -
                   (—1.14)
                                                      .002Y+u5
                                                     (—0.01)




(6)       Y = .123     G          .383 a5 +
                                            a6
                  (4.70)         (—1.60)



cr2 =
 1
          1.10                                        cr2 = .127                         Cr2   = .044
                                                       2
          (7.84)                                               (0.30)                            (7.41)



      =    .118                                       cr2 = .045                          cr = .086
          (2.56)                                               (5.37)                            (5.34)



Data are in log-levels, quarterly, 1954:1 - 1984:111.
t-statistics are in parentheses.
Table 9b. Estimated Real Business Cycle Model; Log-differences.




(1)       0 =
                     u1



(2)       B =         .0800 ÷ -1.64R +                   2.11?!        +     13.SP    -    .OS1Y+u 2
                      (-0.10)           (-0.10)           (0.14)             (0.10)       (-0.11)



(3)       R =        (e)        +     .0240
                                     (1.09)
                                               +    u     +      .275u6
                                                              (3.86)




(4)       N =         1.758      +    -.055R       +     .343P     +        .080Y+u
                     (1.76)          (—0.09)            (0.07)             (0.50)




(5)       P = -.044R             +     1.0?!   -       .O11Y+u
                     (—0.35)                       (—0.47)




(6)       Y    =     .087 G           .045 u5 +
                     (3.11)         (—0.09)



      =       1.06                                      a =       1.82                              = .058
          (7.81)                                                 (0.05)                              (8.00)



      =       .113                                      cr2 = .044                           cr2 = .101
                                                                                              6
          (0.65)                                                 (7.97)                              (7.51)



Data are in log—differences, quarterly, 1954:11 - 1984:111.
t-statistics are in parentheses.
Table 10. Analysis of Dynamics Based on Estimated Real Business Cycle Model,
           Log-levels, 1954:1 - 1984:111




a. Decomposition of the Variance of Output


      Innovation Y           P             G       B             N       R
           to
Quarterj
2                 76.8       9.2       11.5       0.0         0.5       1.9
4                 60.7      21.4       11.2       1.0         3.3       2.5
8                 47.0      19.0       8.4        8.5         7.5       9.7
12                40.6      17.4       6.6       10.6        13.6      11.2
Entries show percentage of forecast variance of Y at different horizons
attributable to innovations in estimated equations associated with each of the
column variables.




b. Response of Output to Innovations


     Innovation       y      P             G           B         N       R
        to
Quarter!
1                     .93   - .26          .41         .00       .00     .00
2                           - .32
                      .75                  .21         .01   —.10         19
3                      46   - . 48         .32     - .06      .14        .13
4                     .30   - .45      - .03       — .16          25    -.13
5                     .27   — .29      - .00       - .24         .02    - .34
6                     .11   —.13       - .02       — .26     - .20      — .28
7                     .03    .08           .06     - .32     - .28      - .22
8                 - .08       13       - .00       - .26     - .28      - .24
9                 -.15       .14           .03     - .24     - .29      — .26
10                - .20      .14       - .02       - .23     - .30      - .20
11                - .22      .20       — .00       - .23     - .33      - .20
12                —   .27              — .03
                             .21                   —.19      —   .31    —.17

Studies show the dynamics response of Y to a one-standard deviation shock in the
estimated equations associated with each of the column varables. Quarter 1 is the
contemporaneous quarter. All entries are multiplied by 10
                                       -38—




     There are a number of interesting differences between Table 10 and Table

8, which uses the standard decomposition; e.g., the results in Table 10 give

military spending a bigger role in determining output. However, for assessing

the variant of the REC hypothesis under consideration, the most important

findings concern the effects of base and inside money shocks on output. Recall

that, as the model is estimated, base and money shocks are measured net of any

contemporaneous endogenous response to prices or output; moreover, by

construction, the own shocks to the base and the money Cu2, u4) are orthogonal

to the nominal interest rate disturbance (u3). The real business cycle

hypothesis would therefore predict that the constructed money and base shocks

should not contribute to the forecast variance of real output. In fact, they

do; at the 8-quarter horizon u2 and u4 explain a total of 16.0% of the

variance of the forecast error for output, and they explain 24.2% of the

variance at twelve quarters.     (The corresponding percentages for the nominal

interest rate shock, u3, are 9.7% and 11.2%.) Moreover, the explanatory power

of shocks to the base is similar to that of shocks to money, in contrast to the

result in Table 8.

     The dynamic response of output to base and money shocks (Table lOb)

weakens the case for money a bit: Ml shocks still positively affect output at

the 3-4 quarter horizon, bat the effect is less pronounced than in Table 8.

Base shocks have a primarily negative effect on output, after a small short-run

positive effect. (The effect of base shocks on output might be explainable in

a combined monetarist-RBC model in which the authorities manipulate the base to

try to dampen expected future output changes.)

    For comparison, I also did the above analysis for the no-trend case.

(Recall that omitting the trend produced much more favorable results to the RBC

hypothesis in the standard VAR   analysis.)   The implied contemporaneous
                                        —39—




 correlations -of the residuals, and thus the estimated model, were very similar

 to the with-trend case, and so are not reported.
                                                        However, the dynamic analysis
 looked rather different (see Table ii).

        With no trend, the results are very much like what was found by Sims and

 Litterman-Weiss (even though here the orthogonalization of the VAR residuals

was done via an estimated structural model). Host
                                                        striking is the finding that

 interest rate innovations explain 47.0% of the variance of output at twelve

quarters, compared to 1.7% for £41.    (The base does a little better than Ml,

explaining 7.7% of the output variance at twelve quarters.)

       Even in this best case for the RBC hypothesis, however, I think some

argument can be made for a role for money. Looking at the
                                                                impulse-response
functions, one can see that Hi shocks still have an important effect on output

at the 3- to 5-quarter horizon. The reason for the dominance of interest rate

shocks at longer horizons appears to be that the effects of interest rate

shocks   are "permanent", while the effects of money on output are estimated to
die   away quickly. But the transitory nature of the real effects of monetary

shocks does not contradict the received view that money works through temporary

real-nominal confusion. We might imagine, therefore, that money shocks are a

source of temporary aggregate demand variation, while interest rate shocks

signal future productivity changes, which are essentially permanent. (The

response of output to its own shock in Table lib seems quite consistent with

the view that real shocks are largely permanent.) This allows some scope for

money, while acknowledging that the real shocks emphasized in RBC models may be

extremely   important.
      Overall, the particular variant of the RBC   we   have been considering does
not   appear to fit the facts completely. Again, this does not rule out a less

restrictive RBC model in which the own shocks to base money and Mi also are
Table 11. Analysis of Dynamics Based on Estimated Real Business Cycle Model,
           Log-levels, 1954:1 - 1984:111; no trend.




a. Decomposition of the Variance of Output


      Innovation Y         P            G         B          M            R
           to
Quarter!
2                 82.4     8.4         8.4       0.0        0.5           0.3
4                 65.2    19.2         7.2       0.9        4.1        3.3
8                 45.1    11.3         3.7       6.7        2.5       30.7
12                34.4     6.9         2.3       7.7        1.7       47.0
Entries show percentage of forecast variance of Y at different horizons
attributable to innovations in estimated equations associated with each   of the
column variables.



b. Response of Output to Innovations


     Innovation    Y        P           G          B         N            R
           to
Quarter!
1                   .98    —.24         .37           .00    .00           .00
2                   .84    —.33         .17       —.00      —.10           .08
3                   .59    —.51         .26       -.07       .18          -.03
4                   .46    —.48        -.10       —.17       .31          —.33
5                   .57    —.34        —.06       —.28       .10          —.63
6                   .51    —.20        —.10       —.31      —.10          —.70
7                   .48    —.02        —.03       -.39      —.13          —.73
8                   .43    —.01        —.08       —.35      —.08          —.81
9                   .46    —.01        —.02       -.34      —.07          -.89
10                  .46    —.01        —.05       —.32      —.08          -.88
11                  .45     .04        —.02       —.33      —.06          - .92
12                  .42     .06        —.05       —.30      —.05          -.94

Studies show the dynamics response of Y to a one-standard deviation shock in the
estimated equations associated with each of the column varables. Quarter I is the
contemporaneous quarter. All entries are multiplied by 10
                                     -40-




interpreted as reflecting information about future output, independent of that

found in nominal interest rates. However, such a model is difficult to

distinguish without further information from a "money matters" model, and I do

not attempt it here.



V. Conclusion

     This paper has used an alternative VAR methodology, based on work of

Blanchard and Watson, consider two alternative explanations of the money-income

correlation: the "credit view" and a variant of the real business cycle

hypothesis. The two alternatives are treated asymmetrically, since the

hypotheses considered are (1) that credit shocks explain nothing and (2) that

real effects explain everything. Evidence is found against both hypotheses

(although in case (2) the strength of the evidence depends a great deal on

one's views about the use of trends). It seems likely that a complete macro

model must allow for all three sorts of influences--credit market, real, and

monetary--in order to explain the data. For policy-makers, the conservative

course is to continue to use care to avoid destabilizing shocks to credit

markets and to the money supply.

     Because the methodology is relatively untested and because there is room

for disagreement about model specification, the results of this paper about

specific hypotheses should be considered tentative. The paper does

demonstrate, however, that the structural interpretation of VARs can be very

sensitive to the model that one assumes (implicitly or explicitly) is relating

contemporaneous residuals. Further applications of the VAR methodology should

take this into account.
                                        -41-




                                    Data Appendix




Data are quarterly, seasonally adjusted, and cover the period 1953:1 to 1984:IV

(except for the interest rate, which was available up to 1984:111). As

described in the text, in the estimation all variables were in log-level or

log-differenced form.



Real GNP   (Y),   the GNP price deflator (F), and real defense spending (G) are

from NIPA. The Ml money stock (H) and the monetary base (B) series for 1959:1

on were provided by the Federal Reserve; H corresponds to the average Ml stock

over the last month of the quarter, B to the monetary base recorded during the

last week of the quarter. For 1953:1 to 1958:IV, the quarterly series for Ml

and the monetary base from Banking and Monetary Statistics were spliced to the

post-1958 series. The credit variable (C) is the sum of commercial bank loans,

mortgages held by S&Ls, and mortgages plus "other loans" held by mutual savings

banks, all for the last month of the quarter and all from the

Federal Reserve Bulletin. The nominal interest rate (R) is the three-month

prospective Treasury bill rate at the end of the quarter (actually, for the

first day of the next quarter), as computed from U.S. Treasury bill prices

obtained from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) at the

University of Chicago. I thank Frederic Mishkin for providing the interest

rate data and for useful advice.
                                   REFERENCES


Anderson,  T. W.
       (1958)    Introduction to Multivariate Statistical Analysis. New York;
                 Wiley & Sons.


Bernanke, Ben
      (1981)     Bankruptcy, Liquidity, and Recession. American Economic
                 Review, 71: 155—159.



      (1983a) On the Sources of Labor Productivity Variation in U.S.
              Manufacturing, 1947—1980. Review of Economics and Statistics
              65: 214-224.



      (1983b) Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
               Propagation of the Great Depression. American Economic
               Review, 73: 257-76.



      (1984)     Permanent Income, Liquidity, and Expenditure on Automobiles:
                 Evidence from Panel Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
                 99: 587—614.


                 and Mark Gertler
      (1985)     Banking in General Equilibrium. NBER Working Paper No. 1647.


Black, Fischer
      (1982)     General Equilibrium and Business Cycles. NBER Working Paper
                 No. 950.



      (1972)     Active and Passive Monetary Policy in a Neo—Classical Model.
                 Journal of Finance, 27: 801-814.


Blanchard, Olivier and Mark Watson
      (1984)   Are Business Cycles All Alike? NEER Working Paper No. 1392.


Blinder, Alan
      (1984a) Credit Rationing and Effective Supply Failures. Manuscript,
              Princeton University.
     (1984b) Notes on the Comparative Statics of a Stiglitz-Weiss Bank.
             Manuscript, Princeton University.


                 and Joseph Stiglitz
      (1983)     Money, Credit Constraints, and Economic Activity. American
                 Economic Review, 73: 297-302.


Boyd, John and Edward Prescott
      (1983)   Financial Intermediaries. Manuscript, Minneapolis Federal
               Reserve Bank and University of Minnesota.


Buiter, William H.
      (1984)   Granger -    Causality   and Policy Effectiveness. Economica 51:
                 15 1—62.



Cooley, Thomas F. and Stephen F. LeRoy
      (1985)   Atheoretical Macroeconomics: A Critique. Journal of
               Monetary Economics, 16: ??-??.


Fama, Eugene
      (1985)     What's Different About Banks? Journal of Monetary Economics,
                 15: 29-40.


Fischer, Stanley
      (1977)   Long-term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
               Money Supply Rule. Journal of Political Economy, 85:
                 191—205.


Fisher, Irving
      (1933)     The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions.
                 Econometrica, 1: 337-357.


Friedman, Benjamin
      (1983)   The Roles of Money and Credit in Macroeconomic Analysis. In
               James Tobin, ed., Macroeconomics, Prices, and Quantities.
               Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.


Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz
      (1963)   A Monetary History of the United States. Princeton:
               Princeton University Press (for NBER).
Gordon, Robert and Stephen King
      (1982)   The Output Cost of Disinflation in Traditional and Vector
               Autoregressive Models. Brookings Papers on Economic
               Activity, 1: 205-244.


Gray, Jo Anna
      (1978)      On Indexation and Contract Length. Journal of Political
                  Economy, 86:


Hall, Bronwyn
      (1979)     Moments: The Moment Matrix Processor, User's Manual, Version
                  1.1.



Hall, Robert
      (1978)     Some Evidence on the Sources of Economic Fluctuations.
                 Manuscript, Stanford University.


                and Frederic Nishkin
      (1982)      The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory Income:
                  Estimates from Panel Data on Households. Econometrica, 50:
                  461—481.


Hendershott, Patric
      (1980)   Real User Costs and the Demand for Single-Family Housing.
               Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 401-452.


Huizinga, John and Frederic Mishkin
      (1984)   Inflation and Real Interest Rates on Assets with Differing
               Risk Characteristics. Journal of Finance, 39: 699—712.


Jaffee, Dwight and Kenneth Rosen
      (1979)   Nortgage Credit Availability and Residential Construction.
               Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 338-376.


Jaffee, Dwight and Thomas Russell
      (1976)   Imperfect Information, Uncertainty, and Credit Rationing.
               Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90: 651-666.


King, Robert and Charles Plosser
      (1984)   Money, Credit, and Prices in a Real Business Cycle.
               American Economic Review, 74: 363-380.


King, Stephen
      (1982)     Interest Rates and the Transmission of Monetary Fluctuations
                 to Output and Prices. Manuscript, Northwestern University.
___________Monetary Transmission: Through Bank Loans, or Bank Liabilities?
      (1985)  Manuscript, Stanford University.


Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott
      (1982)   Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations. Econometrica, 50:
                  1345—1370.


Kydland, Finn B.
      (1983)   The Role of Honey in a Competitive Theory of Business
               Fluctuations. Working Paper .E-83-lO, Hoover Institution,
               Stanford University -



Learner, Edward
      (1985)      Vector Autoregressions for Causal Inference. In K. Brunner
                  and A. Meltzer, eds., Understanding Monetary Regimes.
                  Amsterdam: North Holland.


Litterinan, Robert and Laurence Weiss
      (1985)      Money, Real Interest Rates, and Output: A Reinterpretation
                  of Postwar U.S. Data. Econometrica 53: 129—156.


Long, John and Charles Plosser
      (1983)   Real Business Cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 91:
               39-69.


Lucas, Robert, Jr.
      (1972)   Expectations and the Neutrality of Money. Journal of
                  Economic Theory, 4: 103-124.


McCalluin, Bennett T.
       (1983)   A Reconsideration of Sims' Evidence Concerning Monetarism.
                  Economics Letters, 13: 167—71.


Mankiw, N. Gregory and Matthew Shapiro
      (1985)   Trends, Random Walks, and Tests of the Permanent Income
               Hypothesis. Journal of Monetary Economics, 16: 165-74.


Mehra, Yash P.
       (1978)     Is Money Exogenous in Money-Demand Equations? Journal of
                  Political Economy, 86, Pt. 1: 211—28.


 Porter, Richard D. and Edward K. Offenbacher
       (1983)   Empirical Comparisons of. Credit and Monetary Aggregates with
                Vector Autoregressive Methods. Economic Review (Federal
                Reserve Bank of Richmond), 69:   16-29.
 Runkle, David
       (1985)      Vector Autoregression Reality. Brown University, Department
                   of Economics working paper No. 85-86.


 Sargent, Thomas and Christopher Sims
       (1977)   Business Cycle Modelling Without Pretending to Have Too Much
                  A Priori Economic Theory. In Sims, ed., New Methods in
                  Business Cycle Research. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank.


Sims, Christopher
      (1972)   Money, Income, and Causality. American Economic Review
                  62: 540-552.



       (1980a) Macroeconomics and Reality. Econometrica, 48: 1—48.



      (1980b) Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles:
              Monetarism Reconsidered. American Economic Review, 70:
                  250—257.


Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss
      (1981)   Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information.
               American Economic Review, 71: 393-410.


Taylor, John
      (1980)      Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts. Journal of
                  Political Economy, 88: 1—23.


Tobin, James
      (1971)      Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc? in Essays in
                  Economics, Vol. 1: Macroeconomics, Amsterdam:
                  North-Holland.


Townsend, Robert
      (1983)   Financial Structure and Economic Activity. American
               Economic Review, 73: 895-911.


Zeliner, Arnold
      (1979)     Causality and Econometrics. In K. Bruziner and Meltzer, eds.,
                 Three Aspects of Policy and Policymaking: Knowledge, Data
                 and Institutions. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Number       Author                           Title                          Date

1718     Zvi Griliches and       R&D and Productivity Growth: Comparing       12/85
         Jacques Mairesse        Japanese and U.S. Manufacturing Firms

1779     Behzad T. Diba and      Rational Bubbles in Stock Prices?            12/85
         Herschel I. Grossman

1780     William H. Branson      The Dynamic Interaction of Exchange          12/85
                                 Rates and Trade Flows

1781     Martin Feldstein        The Second Best Theory of Differential       12/85
                                 Capital Taxation

1782     Tadashi Yamada          The Crime Rate and the Condition             12/85
                                 of the Labor Market
                                 A Vector Autoregressive Model

1783     Tadashi Yamada          A Multinominal Logistic Approach to the      12/85
         Tetsuji Yamada and      Labor Force Behavior of Japanese
         Frank ChaIoupka         Married Women

1784     William H. Branson      Expected Fiscal Policy and the Recession     12/85
         Arminio Fraga and       of 1982
         Robert A. Johnson

1785     Robert E. Hall          The Relation Between Price and Marginal      1/86
                                 Cost in U.S. Industry

1786     N. Gregory Mankiw       The Allocation of Credit and Financial       1/86
                                 Collapse

1787     Joshua Aizenman         Monopolistic Competition, Relative Prices    1/86
                                 and Output Adjustment in the Open Economy

1788     N. Gregory Mankiw       The Equity Premium and the Concentration     1/86
                                 of Aggregate Shocks

1789     charles FL Nelson and   Long-Term Behavior of Yield Curves           1/86
         Andrew F. Siegel

1790     Martin Feldstein        U.S. Budget Deficits and the European        1/86
                                 Economies: Resolving the Political
                                 Economy Puzzle

1791     Martin Feldstein and    The Effect of Federal Tax Deductibility      1/86
         Gilbert Metcalf         in State and Local Taxes and Spending

1792     Martin Feldstein        Supply Side Economics: Old Truths and        1/86
                                 New Claims

1793     Robert J. Barro and     A Reformulation of the Economic Theory       1/86
         Gary S. Becker          of Fertility

1794     Robert J. Barro         Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy     1/86
                                 with Incomplete Information
