                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          NEW TOOLS FOR THE ANALYSIS OF POLITICAL POWER IN AFRICA

                                              Ilia Rainer
                                           Francesco Trebbi

                                        Working Paper 18424
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18424


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2012




George Mason University, Department of Economics, irainer@gmu.edu; and University of British
Columbia, Department of Economics, and NBER, ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca, respectively. The authors
would like to thank Matilde Bombardini and Patrick Francois for useful comments and the many external
consultants who contributed to the ethnic classification. Tom Cornwall, Mara Goodman, Lisa Wang,
and Yilei Yang provided outstanding research assistance. We are grateful to the National Bureau of
Economic Research Africa Success Project and to the Initiative on Global Markets at Chicago Booth
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Ilia Rainer and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
New Tools for the Analysis of Political Power in Africa
Ilia Rainer and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 18424
September 2012
JEL No. H1,O38,O55

                                             ABSTRACT

The study of autocracies and weakly institutionalized countries is plagued by scarcity of information
about the relative strength of different players within the political system. This paper presents novel
data on the composition of government coalitions in a sample of fifteen post-colonial African countries
suited to this task. We emphasize the role of the executive branch as the central fulcrum of all national
political systems in our sample, especially relative to other institutional bodies such as the legislative
assembly. Leveraging on the impressive body of work documenting the crucial role of ethnic fragmentation
as a main driver of political and social friction in Africa, the paper further details the construction
of ethnic composition measures for executive cabinets. We discuss how this novel source of information
may help shed light on the inner workings of typically opaque African political elites.


Ilia Rainer
Department of Economics, MSN 3G4
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030-4444
irainer@gmu.edu

Francesco Trebbi
University of British Columbia
1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z1
Canada
and NBER
ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca
1         Introduction

        The study of autocratic and weakly institutionalized regimes has long been plagued
by scarcity of reliable information useful for furthering their understanding (Tullock, 1987).
Lewis (1978) appropriately states that “It is more diﬃcult to study dictatorships than democ-
racies because the internal politics of the former are deliberately hidden from the public view”.
This paper identifies in the ethnic composition of the executive branch an important and
systematic source of information on the dynamics of power sharing within a sample of fif-
teen sub-Saharan African countries. Since independence from European colonization, Benin,
Cameroon, Cote d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia1 ,
Nigeria, Republic of Congo, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Togo, Kenya, and Uganda have all ex-
perienced widely diﬀerent political dynamics and often deep political crises. They have also
been characterized by the constant presence of some form of ruling elite, either military or
civil, which we study.
        The paper discusses how the study of the ethnic composition of the executive branch is
at the same time a transparent, exhaustive, and informative snapshot of the power sharing
conditions of each specific country. We discuss how other institutional features of the country,
for instance its de jure political form or the structure of the legislative branch would be less
reliable or informative in the case of Africa. We also discuss the appropriateness of focusing
on ethnic diversity –as opposed to political party structures– as the unit of analysis for
our sample. Finally, we carefully document the specific complications of the analysis and
data construction for each specific country, in order to provide an ordinate discussion of the
available information.
        Theories of autocratic regimes and rationalizations of specific case studies have been
proven informative (on the origin and leadership transitions in dictatorships see Acemoglu
and Robinson, 2001 and 2005; Wintrobe, 1990 and 1998; Bueno de Mesquita et al., 2003, on
the role of minimum winning coalitions; and Tullock, 1987). However, what seems lacking
    1
        Liberia was an American protectorate, but never formally a colony.


                                                       1
is systematic evidence of how autocracies operate internally and why certain public policy
outcomes are observed. Few recent studies have explicitly set this goal empirically or at
least anecdotally (for example, Bueno de Mesquita et al., 2003, work on the selectorate and
Mulligan and Tsui, 2008, and Svolik, 2009, on contestable autoritarian states; also Boix and
Svolik, 2010; Arriola, 2009; Geddes, 2003; Gandhi, 2008; Magaloni, 2010), but they have
been somewhat limited by scarcity of information and methodological limitations (Clarke
and Stone, 2008).
   Ours is not the only attempt at capturing power sharing relations in Africa. Recent
noticeable advancements on the empirical front have been made. The Ethnic Power Relations
data set by Wimmer, Cederman, and Min (2009) is a prominent example. Relative to
this recently available resource on ethnic groups’ participation to power, our work presents
advantages and disadvantages. In primis, we do not rely on experts’ assessments, but on
hard information to measure the participation to higher government of each ethnic group.
This is arguably more objective, but probably misses nuances that experts may pick up in
terms of weak versus strong participation. We also dispose of artificial clustering of the
data into coarse subdivisions (e.g. EPR codes access to power as a seven-point categorical
variable: monopoly, dominant, senior partner, junior partner, powerless, etc...). We present
a lower coverage of 15 versus 35 sub-Saharan EPR countries, but our information is at
the individual minister level and not just at the ethnic group level, a dimensions suitable
to answering diﬀerent questions (e.g. the strategic role of political turnover even within
ethnic groups). Finally, we present a much finer ethnic classification relative to Wimmer,
Cederman, and Min (2009) and much closer to the standard ethno-linguistic classifications
in the political economy of development (Alesina et al., 2003 and Fearon, 2003). We believe
this is more apt at capturing the finer details of ethnic coalition building and shifting typical
of post-colonial Africa. Another related empirical contribution is the Minorities at Risk
project by Gurr (1993), studying the politico-economic conditions of 233 communal groups
in 93 countries. The drawback of MAR is that it only focuses on a very selected subset of


                                               2
ethnic groups. For instance, relative to the 37 ethnic groups we identify for Tanzania, only
1, the Zanzibaris, appears in MAR.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses briefly the main features
of the African political systems included in our analysis. Section 3 discusses the role of the
executive branch in African countries and its usefulness as a tool for the measurement of
power sharing agreements in African polities. Section 4 focuses on the role of ethnicity and
political parties. Section 5 presents our main protocol for data collection and describes the
ministerial data and the process of compilation of ethnic information based on main ethnic
subdivisions in the literature. Section 6 presents our conclusions.



2     Political Systems in Africa: A Brief Overview

    An appealing feature of executive cabinets, which we discuss in detail below, is that they
appear to play a relevant role both in democracies and autocracies. This is particularly
relevant for the African case. In our sample of 15 countries each observed for about 45 years,
less than 14 percent of all country-year observations belong the democratic classification of
Polity IV. As of 2011, after a durable and stable wave of democratization in the 1990s, ac-
cording to the African Elections Database (africanelections.tripod.com) only Benin, Ghana,
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Tanzania can be considered functioning electoral democracies,
while Guinea, Kenya, and Nigeria better satisfy the condition of emerging democracy, with
free but tainted elections and persistent lack of competition in the political process. In 2011
Freedom House classifies as ‘not politically free’ Cameroon, the Republic of the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Cote d’Ivoire, Gabon, and as ‘partly free’ Guinea, Kenya,
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Togo, and Uganda. In essence, across both space and time,
nondemocracies constitute most of our sample. This automatically rules out the use of
electoral results as a way of assessing relative strength of political blocs in such countries.
    Other de jure features of the political systems, such as the form of government (pres-



                                               3
idential, parliamentary, or hybrid regimes) or the role of electoral rules (majoritarian or
proportional representation) may also be relevant to the analysis of power sharing in Africa
(see Persson and Tabellini, 2007 and Aghion, Alesina and Trebbi, 2004 for a broad analysis),
but we will not consider them here. Our sample is, in fact, almost completely dominated by
presidential and semi-presidential regimes with first-past-the-post (simple or runoﬀ) electoral
rules and very little time variation.



3     Government Power in Africa

    Autocratic personal rule, with accentration of power in the leader’s position, is a common
feature of African politics. The roles of Head of State and Head of Government often
coincide in the same, leading, individual. Examples of leaders with substantial tenure are
also frequent in Africa. Uganda’s president Museveni has been ruling the country for two
decades. President Mubutu ruled what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
32 years. Omar Bongo of oil-rich Gabon maintained a tight grip on power for four decades.
President Mugabe has maintained control over Zimbabwe since the early 1980’s. Presidents
in Angola, Cameroon, and Guinea have also ruled for two decades. These patterns identify
in the eyes of many observers the executive branch as the single most powerful branch
of government, in fact the only one to really matter (Barkan, 2008). The analysis of the
role of African leaders in distributive politics (Franck and Rainer, 2010; Diamond, 2008;
Kudamatsu, 2009) has also emphasized this feature.
    However, the executive branch is something more than the leader alone. In the words
of Lewis (1978), discussing the ministerial appointments of Portugal’s dictator of 36 years,
Antonio Salazar: “Regardless of how powerful dictators are, the complexities of modern
society and government make it impossible for them to rule alone” and “the recruitment
of personnel into top political positions” allows “to chart the evolution of a dictatorship”.
We address this issue below. A discussion of the legislative branch as an alternative is also



                                              4
provided.


3.1      The Role of the Executive Branch in Africa

      While the study of the allocation of government posts in parliamentary democracies
appears relatively mature (Merlo, 1997; Diermeier and Stevenson, 1999; Diermeier, Eraslan,
and Merlo, 2003; Diermeier and Merlo, 2004; Ansolabehere, Snyder, Strauss, and Ting, 2005;
Snyder, Ting, and Ansolabehere, 2005, and citations therein), less is known about the role
of members of the executive branch in nondemocracies. African studies detailing specific
instances of cabinet ethnic composition in commentaries about dynamics of power sharing
abound. Khapoya (1980) focuses on the Moi transition in Kenya, Horowitz (1985) on Congo
and Uganda, Langer (2004) on Cote d’Ivoire, Kifordu (2010) and Osaghae (1989) focus on
Nigeria, Posner (2005) on Zambia, but systematic evidence is not available. This seems
unfortunate, as cabinet appointments appear informative on many fronts.
      One can begin from the observation that ministerial cabinets are a common feature of
both autocratic and democratic regimes2 , reducing sample selection and censoring issues.
This is an important feature for countries that experience frequent transitions in and out of
democracy.
      Secondly, in both autocracies and democracies, ministers are responsible for implement-
ing some form of government policy, albeit not necessarily in the public interest. In both
institutional instances, ministerial cabinets may be employed to reward with powerful posi-
tions political allies of the leader, but are also a potential source of checks and balances or
rivalry for the leader (see Myerson, 2008, for an interesting model in the case of autocracies;
Egorov and Sonin, 2011, for a theoretical model of autocratic cabinets’ loyalty/competence
makeup). Even very recently it is reported in Uganda (Platas, 20113 ) that:

      “After coming to power, Museveni needed to demonstrate that his was an inclusive, coali-
  2
    Cabinet allocation is also common in military juntas, even if the formal title ‘minister’ may not be
employed.
  3
    The Independent "Why Museveni keeps more westerners, Baganda in cabinet" Jan 19, 2011.

                                                   5
tion government, not one run exclusively by his small circle of his kith and kin. Had he given
top positions exclusively to his fellow westerners, he would have isolated himself and become
vulnerable to attempts to grab power by those groups who were marginalized. The potential
threat from Buganda was particularly strong. As the largest ethnic group in Uganda and
one located at the political and financial heart of the country, the Baganda were not a group
Museveni could aﬀord to exclude. As a token of goodwill, he restored kingdoms and appointed
Baganda to some of the top government positions.”

      This quote illustrates well the balancing of power achieved through the allocation of
cabinet posts. Even in the case of the most monolithic and powerful autocratic regimes (e.g.
Zaire’s feared regime of Mobutu Sese Seko), cabinet posts are not entirely absent and the
role of cabinet appointments in the redistribution of political spoils seems systematic. In his
study of cabinet expansion as a tool of patronage distribution in sub-Sarahan Africa, Arriola
(2009, p.1347) underscores that: “All African leaders have used ministerial appointments to
the cabinet as an instrument for managing elite relations”.
      The makeup of the executive matters for patronage allocation.4 Rents are attached
to cabinet positions, rents that can be either appropriated by the ethnic elites themselves
(Kasara, 2007) or redistributed to the general population in each ethnic group. For instance,
Thompson (2000: 115) states of the Cote d’Ivoire: “for a local community to really bene-
fit, they had to promote one of their own into the cabinet itself. Ministers of construction
and town planning, for example, frequently awarded their home towns lucrative development
schemes.” Tangri (1999) argues that the primary means through which governments deliver
patronage in Africa is through ‘parastatal’, or state owned enterprises. Tangri also argues
that the most important positions of delivering patronage are the government economic
ministries and the heads of key parastatals (e.g. government oil companies), although these
positions may be occupied by the same individual. He goes on to state: “Ministers, mili-
tary leaders, and senior civil servants have all intervened in the aﬀairs of public enterprises,
  4
      Arriola (2009) oﬀers a discussion.


                                               6
usually without having to account for their actions.” Burgess et al. (2010) present comple-
mentary evidence of the role of cabinet ethnic allocation for infrastructure transportation
projects in Kenya.
   There is a general sense in the literature that the allocation of cabinet seats to various
groups matters for the actual allocation of power in Africa and it is not simply ‘window
dressing’. First, even when the ethnic makeup of the government is not interpreted under
a purely clientelistic view, the allocation is rarely seen as pro forma. For instance, Roessler
(2011) asserts that: “To boost their national legitimacy, subdue growing ethnoregionalism,
and extend the regime’s societal control, rulers sought to build ethnically inclusive govern-
ments in which appointees from rival ethnic groups would play a role similar to that played
by tribal chiefs during colonialism, acting as intermediaries between regime and society to
facilitate the transfer of local information and mobilize support for the regime.” Second, it
is hard to reconcile the large value attributed to some of these posts in the literature with
a view of pure window dressing in the allocation of cabinet positions. Window dressing
would not explain why ministers are such powerful gate keepers vis-a-vis both domestic and
international players. For instance, Moody-Stuart (1997) reports that all players in African
politics are available to be bought, with cabinet ministers being the first tier below the head
of state in terms of influence, and roughly ten times as expensive as the next highest level,
permanent secretaries. Third, window dressing is starkly in contrast with the role of insiders
in providing a large share of the threats to leadership stability (see Myerson, 2008, for a
theoretical interpretation; for empirical evidence using data of conspirators in coups and re-
bellions in Africa see Roessler, 2011). Indeed, the problem does not seem to be that cabinet
appointments carry too little power, but too much. For instance Roessler (2011 and citations
therein) reports that “Two of Africa’s longest-serving leaders, Mobutu Sese Seko, the pres-
ident of Zaire between 1965 and 1997, and Hastings Banda, the president of Malawi from
1964 to 1994, created ‘atmosphere[s] of perpetual musical chairs’ by their frequent reshuﬄing
of ministers in and out of the government[...] as it prevents clients from amassing too much


                                              7
power within their respective ministries.”
   Finally, cabinet appointments cover a vast variety of issues and are suited to describing
how the loci of power diﬀer across countries or shift within countries. Certain African
countries rely on natural resources, others more on agriculture, and so on. One could choose
to consider the full set of ministerial posts available or only a subset of commonly selected
‘top’ portfolios, such as the Ministry of Finance, Interior, or Defence. The African continent
is so heterogenous that information as comprehensive as possible is necessary. The Ministry
of Tourism is considered powerful in Kenya, but not so in the vast majority of our sample.
The Ministry of Natural Resources plays an important role in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, but a much lesser one in The Gambia.


3.2    The Role of the Legislative Branch in Africa

   A critical point of discussion is why we focus on the executive versus the legislative branch
of government in Africa. There are several reasons for this choice.
   A first and unambiguous response, as simply stated in Barkan’s (2008) analysis of recent
strengthening of legislatures in certain Africa polities, is that “African legislatures legislated
only in the narrow sense–passing into law proposals prescribed by the executive, but not
meaningfully participating in the creation of these proposals. Nor did lawmakers engage in
oversight of the executive branch.” In essence, legislatures in African countries have his-
torically engaged mostly in rubber stamping activity, playing distant second fiddle to the
executive branch and mostly providing an eager cadre of back-benchers competing for the
patronage associated to ministerial appointments. This is evident from the weakness as-
sociated to legislative bodies in our sample of African countries, as reported by surveys of
experts. Fish and Kroenig (2009), for instance, construct a parliamentary powers index
(PPI) score by country aimed at assessing the overall institutional strength of the national
assembly. Relative to the sample of parliamentary democracies considered in Ansolabehere




                                                8
et al. (2005), reporting an average PPI score in 2007 of 0735 , African countries in our sample
present national assemblies with almost half the strength (mean PPI 038). In particular,
the legislative branch’s influence over the executive (Inflexec) is measured at an average of
21 out of 9 possible points of strength in our sample of 15 African countries, or very low,
making the executive branch the fulcrum of political power.
        Second, especially in Africa, the focus on the executive does not fail to capture the typi-
cal interpretation of the legislator as representative of specific constituent interests. In fact,
Arriola (2009) reports that “A cabinet minister in Africa is considered ‘a kind of superrepre-
sentative’ who is expected to speak for the interests of co-ethnics, as well as channel resources
to them.”
        A third reason for why legislatures may be less useful to the analysis of power sharing in
Africa is that the legislative body is not typically present under military rule. Parliaments are
typically disbanded, censoring the type of information available in such instances. Military
councils and juntas are often present in Africa (e.g. Nigeria, Ghana), making this censoring
issue a potentially severe limitation.
        Fourth, it would be also important to notice the issue of feasibility. Even in the restricted
set of available legislatures, the amount of biographical information to collect concerning
individual ethnicity of national assembly members (usually numbering in the hundreds)
would be daunting.



4         The Role of Ethnicity and Political Parties in Africa

        It is hard to understate the role that ethnicity plays in African politics (Bayart, 1993)
and its eﬀects on a vast set of socioeconomic outcomes. The detrimental role of ethnic
fragmentation on African economic performance has been amply documented (Bates, 1981;
Easterly and Levine, 1997; Posner, 2004; Montalvo and Reynal-Querol, 2005). Similarly well
    5
    Iceland and Luxembourg do not have a Parliamentary Powers Index (PPI) falling below the PPI sampling
threshold of a population of at least a half-million inhabitants.


                                                    9
documented is the role of ethnic diversity in fostering clientelism, corruption, and nepotism
(Berman, 1998; Posner, 2005; Kasara, 2007; Frank and Rainer, 2009; Burgess et al., 2010)
and civil conflict (Horowitz, 1985; Fearon and Laitin, 2003). Given that such a large share
of relevant political, economic, and social outcomes has been associated to ethnic diversity
in post-colonial Africa, it appears natural to center any attempt at measuring distribution
of power around this dimension.
   However, such choice requires further discussion. The standard unit of observation in
the study of cabinet formation pivots around the concept of political party (Ansolabehere et
al., 2005). In fact, much of the analysis of coalition formation in parliamentary democracies,
which explicitly studies the allocation of government posts, employs a political party as the
unit of observation. In addition, there is also interesting research on the unconventional
role of political parties in autocracies (Geddes, 2003; Gandhi, 2008; Magaloni, 2010 for a
discussion), which bears the question of why not focusing on political parties in our sample
as well.
   There are three main reasons for the choice of studying ethnic and linguistic groups in
cabinets relative to party aﬃliation.
   First, in all our sampled countries but Tanzania other scholars have clearly recognized
“political objectives, alliances or disputes” to be “framed in ethnic terms” (see Wimmer,
Cederman, and Min, 2009). For large part, African politics, more or less directly, can be
parceled into ethnic issues and demands.
   Second, ethnic diversity allows for a more fine-grained analysis of power sharing dynamics
in conditions of single-party rule or dominant-party systems, a frequent feature of African
polities. In such cases focusing on parties would be too coarse. For instance, in our sample
Benin experienced single-party rule between 1975 to 1990 (People’s Revolutionary Party of
Benin), the Republic of the Congo between 1969 and 1990 (Congolese Party of Labour),
Gabon between 1969 and 1990 (Gabonese Democratic Party), Guinea between 1958 and
1984 (Democratic Party of Guinea — African Democratic Rally), Kenya between 1982 and


                                             10
1991 (Kenya African National Union), Liberia between 1878 and 1990 (True Whig Party),
Sierra Leone between 1978 and 1991 (All People’s Congress), and Togo during 1962-1963
(Party of Togolese Unity) and 1969-1991 (Rally of the Togolese People). According to Salih
(2003), also within our sample, Cameroon, Cote d’Ivoire, Tanzania, and Uganda exhibited
a single major party dominating the political scene for a prolonged period of time.
    Third, even when multi-party systems are present, ethnic groups appear to be the rele-
vant political unit of observation, with political parties often representing a single or multiple
allied blocs. Parties cutting across ethnic lines and national political parties are rare, al-
though some exceptions exist such as the now defunct KANU in Kenya. Norris and Mattes
(2003) report that based on data from Afrobarometer in twelve Sub Saharan African coun-
tries “the results in the analysis of systematic survey evidence serves to confirm the common
assumption that ethnic-linguistic cleavages do indeed structure party identification in many,
although not all, of the African societies under comparison”. Southall (2005) reports similar
considerations. So does the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance’s
report on political parties in Africa (IDEA, 2007). With respect to the case of Nigeria, Ki-
fordu (2010) notices that “ethnic elite notables across regions continued to dominate political
party structures and access political oﬃce with relative autonomy.”



5       The Ethnic and Political Information

    This section illustrates the information available, along both the ethnic and the political
dimensions relevant to our study, for each country in our sample.


5.1     Benin

5.1.1    Governments

    Our data for Benin contains information from 45 lists of governments starting from the
government in May 1960 headed by Hubert Maga and ending with the government in August

                                               11
2004 headed by Mathieu Kerekou. Our data includes at least one list of government for every
calendar year between 1960 and 2004, except for 1969 and 1975. In two calendar years the
data includes more than one list of government. In 1968 it includes the lists of governments
in both April and August, while in 1970 it includes the lists of governments in both March
and November. The two 1968 governments are headed by diﬀerent leaders — Alphonse
Alley and Emile Derlin Zinsou respectively. The two 1970 governments are also headed by
diﬀerent leaders — Paul Emile de Souza and Hubert Maga. The ministerial composition of
these governments is also quite diﬀerent. Thus, in these particular cases, using two lists of
governments per year does not create a duplication problem. Overall, our data for Benin
contains information about the governments that were headed by 10 out of 15 leaders who
ruled the country between 1960 and 20046 . Only the short-term governments of Christophe
Soglo in 1963-1964, Tahirou Congacou in 1965, Maurice Kouandete in 1967 and 1969, and
Justin Ahomadegbe in 1972 are not represented.


5.1.2      Ministers

           In addition to the country’s presidents (and occasional vice-presidents, prime min-
isters or deputy prime-ministers), the vast majority of Benin’s ministers in our dataset are
literally listed with the title of “minister”. In some years, the Europa publications also list
one or two “secretaries of state” (in 1962 and 1963) or a “secretary-general to the president”
(in 1995) as members of government. These individuals are also included in our data. A very
special case is the list of government in March 1970, which includes only three individuals:
Paul-Emile de Souza (President of the Directory), Maurice Kouandete and Benoit Sinzogan
(Members of the Directory). This military triumvirate ruled Benin between December 1969
and May 1970, and its members divided among themselves all the ministerial portfolios such
as Interior, Security, Defense, Information and Planning, Foreign Aﬀairs Justice, National
Education, Economy, Finance and Cooperation.
  6
      We count a new nonconsecutive term in oﬃce of the same leader as a new leader.



                                                    12
        Even putting this special case aside, the total number of ministers in Benin’s gov-
ernments varies over time. It fluctuates between 10 and 16 during the 1960s and the 1970s,
rises to about 22 in the early 1980s, drops back to about 16 in the late 1980s, and fluctuates
again between 18 and 22 during the 1990s and the early 2000s.
   Overall, our data for Benin contains 730 records of government-ministers with the average
of 16.22 ministers per government. Our data has information for 209 individual ministers
with each minister appearing on average in 3.49 lists of governments.


5.1.3   Ethnic groups

        Our list of Benin’s ethnic groups consists of 15 ethnic categories, including the resid-
ual “Other” category. Table 1 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the country’s
population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include. The ethnic
categories that we use in Benin are more disaggregated than those used by Alesina et al.
(2003), who list 8 ethnic groups, or Fearon (2003) who lists only 5 ethnic groups.
   With respect to the southern groups, we follow Alesina et al. (2003) and create separate
categories for Fon, Adja and Aizo, rather than putting them in a single Fon category as in
Fearon (2003). We then separate Goun (with the related groups of the south-eastern Benin)
from Alesina et al.’s Fon category, and Mina (with the related groups of south-western
Benin) from their Adja and Aizo categories. Both Goun and Mina (also called Popo) are
often considered to be distinct ethnic groups (see, for example, Murdock (1959)), and we
therefore prefer to present them as such.
        With respect to the northern ethnic groups, we follow Alesina et al. (2003) and create
separate categories for Bariba and Somba instead of putting them in the same Bargu category
as in Fearon (2003). In addition, we list several smaller northern groups, such as Yom, Lukpa,
Dendi, Boko and Anii, which are probably subsumed into the “Other” category under Alesina
et al.’s classification. These groups are all reasonably large as percent of Benin’s population,
and they are presented as distinct ethnic groups in Benin’s 2002 Population Census.


                                              13
        As a result of the classification strategy that we use, our residual “Other” category
is significantly smaller than the corresponding categories of Alesina et al. and Fearon (3.4
percent of population versus 7.7 percent and 6 percent respectively).


5.1.4   Ethnicity of Ministers

        In addition to the WBIS and a variety of internet sources, major sources that helped
us identify the ethnic origin of Beninese ministers included Agossou (2002), Amoussou-Yeye
(1999), Hazoume (1972) and République du Bénin (2008). We also employed two local
consultants with expertise on Benin’s political history. In the end, we were able to establish
the ethnicity of 729 of 730 government-ministers in our data.
        Our discussions with the consultants raised several general issues. First, a number of
ministers in our dataset were described as “Afro-Brazilians” by some sources but as having
a diﬀerent ethnicity (Fon, Yoruba, Mina or Goun) by other sources. Our consultants agreed
that the Afro-Brazilians in Benin tend to have two ethnic identities. They also agreed that
since the Afro-Brazilian category does not appear in Benin’s 2002 Population Census, we
should not use this category either, and should instead classify all the Afro-Brazilians in
our data according to their other ethnic identity (i.e. as Fon, Yoruba, Mina or Goun). We
followed this advice.
   Second, several ministers on our list were alternatively described as either Bariba or Dendi
by diﬀerent sources. Our consultants explained that these ministers belong to families who
were originally Bariba but moved to the Dendi-populated areas. As a result, these ministers
now speak Dendi and are sometimes considered Dendi. We decided to classify these ministers
as Bariba based on their original ethnicity.
   Third, as discussed above, some ethnic classifications define the Fon category very broadly
so that it includes not only Fon (in the narrow sense) but also smaller southern groups such
as Adja, Aizo, Goun or Mina. Therefore, we were a bit concerned that some of the ministers
described as Fon by our sources could have actually belonged to these smaller ethnic groups.


                                               14
To address this issue, we asked our consultants to verify the ethnic identity of all ministers
described as Fon by our sources. In most cases, the consultants agreed with our original Fon
classification, but in one case we needed to reclassify a minister as Aizo.


5.2     Cameroon

5.2.1   Governments

   Our data for Cameroon contains information from 44 lists of governments starting from
the government in May 1960 headed by Ahmadou Ahidjo and ending with the government
in August 2004 headed by Paul Biya. Our data includes at least one list of government
for every calendar year between 1960 and 2004, except for 1969 and 1975. In one calendar
year the data includes more than one list of government: in 1968 it includes the lists of
governments in both April and August.
   Since the list of government in August 1968 is fully identical (in terms of the ministers’
names and titles) to the list of government in March 1970, it is reasonable to assume that
in 1969 the government also had the same ministerial composition. Therefore, it may be
possible to use the list of August 1968 as a substitute for the missing list of 1969. By doing
so, one can avoid using two similar (albeit not identical) lists of governments in 1968 and at
the same time impute a list of government for 1969.
   Cameroon had only two leaders between 1960 and 2004, and the governments of both
leaders are included in our data. Specifically, we have 22 lists of governments headed by
Ahmadou Ahidjo (between 1960 and 1982) and 22 lists of government headed by Paul Biya
(between 1983 and 2004).


5.2.2   Ministers

        The lists of Cameroonian governments between 1960 and 1992 have very similar
structure. They typically consist of a president, a vice-president or a prime minister, a large
group of regular ministers, and a smaller group of junior ministers. The regular ministers

                                              15
usually have the titles of “ministers”, while the junior ministers are alternatively called
“deputy-ministers”, “vice-ministers” or “secretaries of state”. During these years, the Europa
publications also list some “deputy prime-ministers”, “directors of the cabinet”, “ministers-
delegate”, “general commissioners”, and “deputy secretaries-general to the presidency” as
members of the government. We include individuals with all these diﬀerent titles in our
dataset of ministers.7
         Despite their structural similarity, the size of Cameroonian governments gradually
increases from 15-22 ministers between 1960 and 1971, to 30-36 ministers between 1972 and
1985, and to more than 40 ministers in 1986 and 1987. It then briefly drops to 32-35 ministers
between 1988 and 1991, but rises back to 40 in 1992.
         In 1993 the Europa publications stopped reporting the names of the junior ministers,
now called “secretaries of state”, probably due to the continuing increase in the number of
regular ministers that they had to list. As a result, for the years between 1993 and 1997, we
no longer include the secretaries of state in our dataset of ministers. Yet, even without the
secretaries of state, the number of ministers in our list remains quite high, between 32 and
35 ministers per government.
         1998 saw a big change in the structure of the Cameroonian governments and the
way that they are presented in the Europa publications. Specifically, for the years between
1998 and 2004, the Europa publications always list a president, a prime-minister, a group
of “ministers of state”, a group of “ministers”, a group of “ministers-delegate”, a group of
“secretaries of state”, and a group of “other appointees with the rank of minister”. Thus, the
lists of governments for these years become very long and consist of more than 50 people per
government. Nevertheless, since all these title-holders are considered members of government
and since their names are fully reported, we include all of them in our dataset of ministers.
         Overall, our data for Cameroon contains 1445 records of government-ministers with
  7
    Our data only includes members of Cameroon’s federal governments. During the 1960s the Europa
publications also list regional cabinets of Eastern Cameroon and Western Cameroon. We do not include
regional ministers in our dataset, unless they also hold positions in the federal government. Provincial
governors, who are also listed in some years, are likewise excluded from our data.


                                                  16
the average of 32.84 ministers per government. Our data has information for 262 individual
ministers with each minister appearing on average in 5.52 lists of government.


5.2.3    Ethnic groups

         Our list of Cameroon’s ethnic groups consists of 21 ethnic categories, including the
residual “Other” category. Table 2 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the
country’s population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include.
         Our ethnic classification for Cameroon is in many ways similar to that of Alesina et
al. (2003), and includes the same major ethnic categories such as Beti-Fang, Fulani, Bassa-
Koko-Doula-Lundu, Maka-Dzem-Kaka, Tikar and Mandara-Matakam. However, we follow
Fearon (2003) and list Bamileke and Bamum as separate ethnic groups instead of using the
aggregate Bamileke-Bamum category as in Alesina et al. Moreover, we disaggregate Alesina
et al.’s large “Other” category, which constitutes 14.5 percent of Cameroon’s population in
their data, into ten or so ethnic groups such as Widekum, Kotoko, Masa-Musgum, Mambila-
Vute, Kanuri, Gbaya, Tiv, Mbam, Banyang-Ekoi etc.
         During the process of disaggregation, we sometimes chose to combine several related
ethnic groups into a single ethnic category in order to avoid dealing with a very large number
of small groups. Thus, we created single ethnic categories for Mbum-Mundang-Tupuri-
Fali-Duru-Vere-Chamba, Masa-Musgum, Mambila-Vute or Banyang-Ekoi. To decide which
groups may be related, we consulted the detailed ethnic and linguistic classifications provided
by Murdock (1959), Murdock (1967) and ethnologue.com.
    We end up with more ethnic categories than either Alesina et al., who list 12 ethnic
groups, or Fearon who lists 10 ethnic groups.8 In addition, our residual “Other” cate-
gory is much smaller than in these alternative classifications, representing only 1 percent of
Cameroon’s population.
    8
      Unlike Alesina et al. or us, Fearon creates some of his ethnic categories based on very broad geographic
or linguistic aggregations of smaller groups. For example, his ethnic classification includes Northwest, South-
west, Kirdi, and Eastern Nigritic categories.



                                                      17
5.2.4   Ethnicity of Ministers

        In addition to the WBIS, some of the more important sources that we used to
determine the ethnicity of ministers in Cameroon included Anyangwe (2009), Menthong
(1998), Olson (1996), ethnonet-africa.org and peuplesawa.com.
        In some cases we could not find explicit information about the minister’s ethnicity,
but were nevertheless able to assign the minister to an ethnic group based on other avail-
able information. For example, we know that Joseph Yunga Teghen (secretary of state for
education during the 1990s and the early 2000s) is a politician from Momo division of the
North-West province. We also know that he served as the president of Metta Cultural and
Development Association. Since Metta is a Widekum subgroup and since Momo division is
predominantly populated by Widekum, we classify this minister as Widekum.
        Likewise, we know that Boniface Tata Sakah (deputy minister of public health in
the early 1960s) was born in Bui division of the North-West province. In addition, we know
that he was a prominent anthropologist who extensively studied the Nso people. Since Bui
division is also populated by Nso and other Tikar subgroups, we classify Sakah as Tikar.
        In the case of Nana Aboubakar Djalloh (secretary of state for transport between
1998 and 2004), we know that he was born in Ngaoundere, the capital of the Adamawa
region. This fact by itself does not provide a clear indication of Djalloh’s ethnicity because
Ngaoundere is populated by several ethnic groups such as Fulani, Mbum, Duru and Gbaya.
However, Djalloh is a very common Fulani last name (both in Cameroon and elsewhere in
Africa), which allows us to classify this minister as Fulani.
        Overall, using both explicit ethnicity information and other evidence, we were able
to establish the ethnic identity of 1395 of 1445 government-ministers in our data.




                                              18
5.3     Congo-Brazzaville

5.3.1   Governments

   Our data for Congo-Brazzaville contains information from 45 lists of governments starting
from the government in May 1960 headed by Fulbert Youlou and ending with the government
in August 2004 headed by Denis Sassou Nguesso. Our data includes at least one list of
government for every calendar year between 1960 and 2004, except for 1969 and 1975. In
two calendar years the data includes more than one list of government. In 1968 it includes
the lists of governments in both April and December, while in 1970 it includes the lists of
governments in both January and November.
   The government of December 1968 is the first government headed by Marien Ngouabi.
Although the Europa publication formally dates this government by December, 31 1968,
Ngouabi himself only became president on January, 1 1969. It can therefore make sense
to redefine this government as the government of January 1969 and only use the April
government (still headed by Alphonse Massamba-Debat) for 1968. Although the two 1970
governments are both headed by Marien Ngouabi, their ministerial composition is quite
diﬀerent. Thus, using both of these governments in the analysis should not create much
duplication.
   Overall, our data for Congo-Brazzaville includes governments headed by 7 out of 8 leaders
who ruled the country between 1960 and 2004. Only the short-lived government of Alfred
Raoul, who served as acting head of state after the 1968 coup d’état (and before Ngouabi’s
assumption of the presidency) is not represented.


5.3.2   Ministers

        Between 1960 and April 1968, the Congolese governments have a simple structure.
They consist of a president, a group of “ministers” (most senior of which sometimes also bear
the titles of “vice-president”, “premier” or “vice-premier”), and a few occasional “secretaries



                                              19
of states” and “ministers-delegate”. The holders of all these titles are included in our dataset
of ministers. During this period, the size of government varies between 8 and 17 ministers
per government.
        In the first decade after the 1968 coup (between December 1968 and 1978), the struc-
ture of the government becomes more complex and typically includes two governing bodies.
The smaller of the two bodies is alternatively called the “Executive of the National Council
of the Revolution”, the “Political Bureau of the Congolese Workers’ Party” or the “Military
Committee of the Congolese Workers’ Party”. In some years, the members of this body
hold specific ministerial portfolios and have the titles of “secretaries” or “commissioners”.
In other years, they are simply listed as “members” of that body. The larger of the two
bodies is alternatively called the “Council of Ministers” or the “Council of State”. Most of
the members of this body have the titles of “ministers”, but there are also a few “deputy
ministers” or “secretaries of state”.
   We include members of both governing bodies (which sometimes overlap) in our dataset
of ministers, and the size of government during this period is typically about 20 ministers
per government. However, the government has only 12 ministers in 1972 and as many as 26
ministers in 1974 (when it actually consists of three distinct bodies — the Political Bureau,
the Council of State and the Council of Ministers).
   Between 1979 and 2004, the structure of the Congolese governments is again rather
simple. In these years, the Europa publications typically list a president, a prime minister,
and a large group of “ministers”. More junior “secretaries of state” or “ministers-delegate”,
and an occasional “head of president’s oﬃce” are also listed in some years. All these listed
title-holders are included in our dataset of ministers. The size of government varies between
18 and 28 in 1979-1991, briefly drops to 12 in 1992, and varies again between 21 and 33 in
1993-2004.
   Overall, our data for Congo-Brazzaville contains 918 records of government-ministers with
the average of 20.4 ministers per government. Our data has information for 240 individual


                                              20
ministers with each minister appearing on average in 3.83 lists of government.


5.3.3   Ethnic groups

        Our list of ethnic groups in Congo-Brazzaville consists of 10 ethnic categories, in-
cluding the residual “Other” category. Table 3 shows the names of these groups, the percent
of the country’s population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include.
   The southern part of Congo-Brazzaville is inhabited by ten ethnic groups all of which
belong to the large Kongo ethnic cluster and together constitute half of the country’s pop-
ulation. Some ethnic and linguistic classifications, such as Alesina et al. (2003) and Atlas
Narodov Mira (1964), subsume all these groups under a single Kongo ethnic category. Other
classifications, such as Fearon (2003), use a more disaggregated approach and create several
ethnic categories where each category incorporates only some of the ethnic groups involved.
   Based on our reading of Congolese history and the discussions that we have had with a
prominent Congolese political historian whom we hired as our consultant, we also decided
to follow the more disaggregated approach. Specifically, we divide all the groups of the
Kongo cluster into three ethnic categories: Vili-Yombe-Kabinda, Lari-Kongo-Sundi (where
the name “Kongo” is used in the narrow sense and refers to one of the constituent subgroups
of the bigger cluster) and Bembe-Dondo-Kamba-Kugni. Our Vili-Yombe-Kabinda category
is the same as Fearon’s Vili category. However, unlike Fearon, we prefer to group Kongo and
Sundi with Lari rather than with Bembe, Dondo, Kamba and Kugni.
        With respect to the non-Kongo ethnic groups, our ethnic classification is very sim-
ilar to that of Alesina et al. and includes Teke, Mbochi, Punu, Mbete, Sanga and Maka
categories. However, since all of our ethnic categories incorporate many small groups, we
depart from Alesina et al. by bringing the small Bobangui group into the Mbochi category
and the small Kota group into the Mbete category instead of listing them separately.




                                            21
5.3.4   Ethnicity of Ministers

        In addition to the WBIS and various online sources, some of the more important
sources that helped us to determine the ethnicity of ministers in Congo-Brazzaville were
Bazenguissa-Ganga (1997), Clark (2008), Gauze et al. (1973), Missié (2008), Rupture-
Solidarité (1999). As mentioned above, we also employed an expert on Congo’s political
history as our consultant. Overall, we were able to establish the ethnicity of 909 of 918
government-ministers in our data.
        As we explained above, the word “Kongo” has two possible meanings. It can be
either used broadly as a name of the entire Kongo cluster, or narrowly as a name of only
one of the constituent ethnic groups. Therefore, it was diﬃcult for us to know whether
a minister described as Kongo by our sources should be assigned to the Lari-Kongo-Sundi
ethnic category (based on the narrow definition) or to one of the other two categories that
also include groups of the Kongo cluster (based on the broad definition). To address this
issue, we asked our consultant to provide us with more detailed ethnicity information for all
ministers described as Kongo by our sources.


5.4     Cote d’Ivoire

5.4.1   Governments

   Our data for Cote d’Ivoire contains information from 45 lists of governments starting
from the government in May 1960 headed by Felix Houphouet-Boigny and ending with the
government in August 2004 headed by Laurent Gbagbo. Our data includes at least one
list of government for every calendar year between 1960 and 2004, except for 1975. In one
calendar year the data includes more than one list of government: in 1970 it includes the lists
of governments in both April and October. The two governments in 1970 are both headed
by Felix Houphouet-Boigny. They also have exactly the same ministerial composition, both
in terms of the ministers’ names and the portfolios they hold. Therefore, in order to avoid


                                              22
duplication, researchers may want to use only one of these two lists of governments in the
analysis.
   Cote d’Ivoire had four leaders between 1960 and 2004, and the governments headed by
each of these leaders are represented in our data.


5.4.2   Ministers

        In addition to the country’s presidents (and some prime ministers), most of Cote
d’Ivoire’s ministers in our dataset are listed with the title of “minister”. Some (usually
more senior) ministers are listed as “ministers of state”, while other (usually more junior)
ministers have the titles of “ministers-delegate”, “secretaries of state” (in 1972-1974) or “high
commissioners” (in 1996-1998). Occasionally, the Europa publications also list a “director of
the presidential cabinet” (in 1994-1995) or a “resident minister for the autonomous district
of Yamoussoukro” (in 1996-1998) as members of the government. When it happens, the
holders of these titles are also included in our data.
        The size of Ivorian governments in our data varies quite a lot over time. It fluctuates
between 12 and 23 ministers in 1960-1971, between 29 and 41 ministers in 1972-1989, between
21 and 36 ministers in 1990-2001, and between 37 and 43 ministers in 2002-2004. These
fluctuations seem to be driven by true changes in the size of Ivorian governments rather
than by diﬀerences in Europa’s reporting of junior ministers from year to year.
   Overall, our data for Cote d’Ivoire contains 1256 records of government-ministers with
the average of 27.91 ministers per government. Our data has information for 235 individual
ministers with each minister appearing on average in 5.34 lists of government.


5.4.3   Ethnic groups

        Our list of ethnic groups in Cote d’Ivoire consists of 17 ethnic categories, including
the residual “Other” category. Table 4 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the
country’s population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include. The


                                               23
ethnic categories that we use in Cote d’Ivoire are more disaggregated than those used by
Alesina et al. (2003), who list 10 ethnic groups, or Fearon (2003) who lists only 8 ethnic
groups.
   With respect to the groups in the southeast of the country, we decompose Alesina et
al.’s Akan category into Baule, Agni, Attie and Abron ethnic groups. This strategy is
somewhat similar to that of Fearon who also creates a separate Baule category, but groups
Agni together with Attie and does not explicitly mention Abron. In any case, all four groups
are relatively large and are often considered to be distinct (see, for example, Murdock (1959)).
We therefore prefer to present them as such. On the other hand, we follow both Alesina et
al. and Fearon by having a single Lagoon category that brings together many of the small
and related groups of the southeast.
   With respect to the groups in the southwest of the country, we disaggregated the broad
Kru category of Alesina et al. and Fearon into three ethnic categories: Bete-Dida, Ngere-
Wobe and Kru-Grebo-Krahn (where Kru is used in the narrow sense). This is similar to
what is done by Atlas Narodov Mira (1964) and Murdock (1959).
   Following Atlas Narodov Mira (1964) and Murdock (1959), we also disaggregated Alesina
et al.’s Voltaic category into Senufo, Lobi and Kulango ethnic groups. This approach is
partially consistent with that of Fearon, who likewise splits Senufo from Lobi and Kulango.
However, rather than listing them separately, Fearon puts Senufo together with Mande ethnic
groups into his Northerner category, and classifies both Lobi and Kulango as part of his broad
Lobi category.
   With respect to the groups of Mande language family, our ethnic classification is very
similar to that of Alesina et al. In particular, it includes Malinke-Diula (called Mande by
Alesina et al.), Dan, Kweni and Gagu ethnic categories. Following both Alesina et al. and
Fearon we also list a small Lebanese category.




                                              24
5.4.4   Ethnicity of Ministers

        In addition to the WBIS, some of the more important sources that helped us to
identify the ethnicity of ministers in Cote d’Ivoire included Toungara (1995), ethnonet-
africa.org, macotedivoire.info and abidjan.net. We also employed two Ivorian consultants
with expertise on the country’s politics: a veteran political journalist and a prominent po-
litical historian. With the help of our consultants, we were able to establish the ethnicity of
all 1256 government-ministers in our data.
   It was sometimes diﬃcult for us to identify the ethnicity of ministers from the north of
the country. In particular, members of the Malinke, Senufo and Dan ethnic groups often live
in the same geographic areas and have similar last names. As a result, for some northern
ministers, our sources provided inconsistent ethnicity information. For example, Kone is a
very common last name among both Malinke and Senufo. Thus, Ibrahima Kone (minister
of tourism between 1976 and 1980) was described as Malinke by some sources and as Senufo
by other sources. This was also the problem in the case of Bangali Kone (minister of posts
and telecommunication between 1974 and 1980).
   In these and similar cases, we asked our consultants to verify the ethnicity of the ministers
in question, and they provided us with more precise information. In fact, Ibrahima Kone is
apparently a Senufo, and we classify him as such. In contrast, Bangali Kone actually has a
Dan mother and a Malinke father. We therefore classify him as “half Dan, half Malinke”.


5.5     Democratic Republic of Congo

5.5.1   Governments

   Our data for the Democratic Republic of Congo contains information from 44 lists of
governments starting from the government in May 1961 headed by Joseph Kasavubu and
ending with the government in August 2004 headed by Joseph Kabila. Our data includes at
least one list of government for every calendar year between 1961 and 2004, except for 1972


                                              25
and 1974. In two calendar years the data includes more than one list of government. In 1970
it includes the lists of governments in both March and November, while in 1973 it includes
the lists of governments in both January and October.
   Although the two 1970 governments are both headed by Joseph Desire Mobutu, their
ministerial composition is quite diﬀerent. Thus, using both of these governments in the
analysis should not create much duplication. The two governments in 1973 are also headed
by Mobutu. Moreover, the ministerial composition of these two governments is almost
identical. In this case, in order to avoid using two similar lists of governments for the same
year, one could use the list of January 1973 as a substitute for the missing list of 1972
(eﬀectively assuming that the ministerial composition in December 1972 was the same as in
January 1973).
   Overall, our data for the Democratic Republic of Congo contains information about the
governments that were headed by 4 of the 6 leaders who ruled the country between 1960 and
2004. Only the short-lived government of Patrice Lumumba in 1960 and the one-week rule
of Joseph Desire Mobutu in September of the same year are not represented.


5.5.2   Ministers

   Between 1961 and 1966, the Congolese governments consist of a president, a prime min-
ister, occasional “deputy prime ministers” or “vice prime ministers” and a group of “minis-
ters”. The 1966 government also includes one “commissioner”. The holders of all these titles
are included in our dataset of ministers. In some years between 1961 and 1966, the Europa
publications also list a large number of “secretaries of state”. Due to the irregular reporting
of these junior ministers, we exclude them from our data. Even so, the size of government
during this period varies between only 12 ministers in 1965 and 28 ministers in 1962.
   Between 1967 and March 1970, the governments headed by President Mobutu consist of
two governing bodies: Mobutu’s “Presidential Oﬃce” (sometimes also called “Presidential
Secretariat”) and the usual “Council of Ministers”. The Presidential Oﬃce includes a “sec-


                                              26
retary” and 3 or 4 “chief counselors” (sometimes called “directors-general”). The Council
of Ministers typically includes “ministers” (with the most senior of them bearing the title of
“minister of state”) and sometimes “high commissioners with ministerial rank”. The holders
of all these titles are included in our dataset, making the size of government in this period
between 24 and 26 ministers per government. However, in November 1970 and in 1971,
members of Mobutu’s Presidential Oﬃce are no longer listed as part of the government. As
a result, the size of government in these years drops to 19 and 21 ministers respectively.
   Between 1973 and 1980, the Congolese governments have a more complex structure and
include two main governing bodies: the “National Executive Council” and the “Political
Bureau of the Popular Movement of the Revolution”. Members of the National Executive
Council typically have the titles of “state commissioners” and “assistant state commission-
ers” (alternatively called “councilors” and “assistant councilors” in 1973). Members of the
Political Bureau of the Popular Movement of the Revolution are simply known as such. We
include members of both governing bodies (which sometimes overlap) in our dataset of min-
isters. In some years, the Europa publications also list members of the “National Security
Council” as belonging to the government. In 1979 the names of all these members are re-
ported, while in 1980 and 1981 we only know the name of the Council’s “secretary-general”.
These individuals are also included in our data.
   Due their complex structure, the governments between 1973 and 1980 are very large
in size. They count between 36 and 49 ministers in 1973-1977, and then expand to 56-60
ministers per government in 1978-1980. As a result of the rapid increase in the size of the
Political Bureau of the Popular Movement of Revolution (with 37 members in 1980), in 1981
the Europa publications stopped reporting the names of its members (with the exception
of the Politbureau’s “permanent secretary”). Therefore, the size of government in our data
drops to 29 ministers in 1981.
   Between 1981 and 1992, the Congolese governments are again rather simple. In addition
to a president, they typically include a “first state commissioner”, several “deputy first state


                                              27
commissioners”, a large number of “state commissioners” and occasional “general commis-
sioners”. Between 1993 and 1996, the structure of the government remains very similar, but
the ministerial titles change to “prime minister”, “deputy prime ministers” and “ministers”.
In 1981-1996, the size of government varies between 21 and 31 ministers per government.
   Between 1997 and 2004, most of the Congolese ministers in our dataset have the title
of “minister”, although there are also several “vice-presidents” (in 2003 and 2004), a group
of “deputy ministers” (in 1998 and 1999) and a “minister-delegate” (in 2001-2002). During
this period, the number of ministers in a government ranges from 21 in 1997 to 40 in 2004.
   Overall, our data for the Democratic Republic of Congo contains 1354 records of government-
ministers with the average of 30.77 ministers per government. Our data has information for
515 individual ministers with each minister appearing on average in 2.63 lists of government.


5.5.3   Ethnic groups

        Our list of ethnic groups in the Democratic Republic of Congo consists of 30 ethnic
categories, including the residual “Other” category. Table 5 shows the names of these groups,
the percent of the country’s population that they represent and some of the subgroups that
they include. In general, our classification is more detailed than the classifications of Alesina
et al. (2003) or Fearon (2003), who list 13 and 15 ethnic categories respectively. Since
neither Alesina et al. nor Fearon name the specific subgroups that they include in each ethnic
category, it is diﬃcult to establish the exact correspondence between their classifications and
our own. Nevertheless, we will now briefly discuss how our approach may relate to theirs.
   12 of our ethnic categories have the same names as the categories used by Alesina et
al. Some of these categories, such as Luba, Kongo, Chokwe and Lugbara appear to be very
similar across the two classifications. In other cases, Alesina et al’s categories are more
aggregated and include two or more of our categories. For example, Alesina et al.’s Mongo
category seems to include our Mongo category as well as our Tetela category. Likewise, their
Azande category probably includes our Azande and Mangbetu categories; and their Rwanda


                                               28
category may include our Rwanda, Shi and Nande categories.
   We also disaggregate Alesina et al.’s large “Other” category, which constitutes 16.6 per-
cent of the country’s population in their data, into ten or so explicit ethnic categories such
as Yaka, Bemba, Rega, Komo, Ngbandi, Ngbaka, Yanzi etc. Each of these ethnic categories
brings together several small and related subgroups based on the information in Murdock
(1959), Murdock (1967) and ethnologue.com.
   With respect to Fearon’s classification, his Bakongo, Mbandja, Ngandi and Ngbaka cat-
egories seem to be similar to the corresponding categories in our list. Like us (and unlike
Alesina et al.), Fearon also creates separate categories for Mongo and Tetela-Kusu, although
each of these categories appears be more inclusive in his classification than it is in our data.
Interestingly, Fearon decomposes Luba into the regionally-based Luba Kasai, Lulua and Luba
Shaba ethnic categories. Yet, in this case, we prefer to follow the more traditional approach
of Atlas Narodov Mira (1964) and Alesina et al., and present Luba as a single ethnic group.
Fearon also uses two other regionally-based categories. His Kwilu Region category seems to
include parts of our Yaka and Yanzi categories, while his Kivu Province category is probably
related to our Shi category. Finally, with 17.1 percent of the country’s population, Fearon’s
“Other” category is even larger than that of Alesina et al. As explained above, under our
classification it is eﬀectively disaggregated into several explicit ethnic categories.


5.5.4   Ethnicity of Ministers

   In addition to the WBIS and various online sources, the sources that helped us to iden-
tify the ethnicity of ministers in the Democratic Republic of Congo included Artigue (1961),
De Villers and Willame (1999), International Crisis Group (2000), MacGaﬀey (1987), Oma-
sombo and Kennes (2006), Turner (2007), Young (1968, 1979), and diﬀerent volumes of
Études Congolaises and Études Africaines du C.R.I.S.P. We also employed three Congolese
consultants with expertise on the country’s politics: a former minister, a prominent political
historian and a political journalist. Furthermore, we contacted several other ministers on


                                               29
our list and asked them about their own ethnicity. Overall, we were able to establish the
ethnicity of 1349 of 1354 government-ministers in our data.
   Many of the Congolese ministers on our list have diﬀerent European and African names,
and we had to be especially careful in identifying these individuals and searching for their
ethnicity. This issue was particularly common among the ministers of the late 1960s and the
early 1970s, who were “strongly encouraged” to indigenize their names during Mobutu’s
Africanization campaign.    For example, Edouard Bulundwe became Bulundwe Kitongo
Pengemali, Jean Nguza became Nguza Karl-i-Bond, and Etienne Ndongala became Ndongala
Tadi Lewa.
   There is also some controversy about the ethnic origin of two of the country’s presidents.
With respect to President Mobutu, several of the sources in the 1960s erroneously described
him as either Mongo or Ngala. Yet, there is now an agreement that Mobutu was an ethnic
Ngbandi, and we therefore classify him as such. The case of President Joseph Kabila is even
more ambiguous. Oﬃcially, his father is the former president Laurent-Desire Kabila (who
himself had a Luba father and a Lunda mother, and is therefore defined as “half Luba, half
Lunda” in our data) and his mother is a woman named Sifa Mahanya who is reportedly
a Bangubangu (a subgroup of Rega). However, there are plenty of rumors which say that
Joseph Kabila is, at least partially, a Rwandese Tutsi. For example, some people claim that
his actual biological mother is not Sifa Mahanya but a Tutsi woman. Others accept that
Sifa Mahanya may be his real mother but insist that she herself is a Tutsi. Still others
say that Joseph Kabila is an adopted son of Laurent-Desire Kabila and that both of his
biological parents may be Tutsi.( We ultimately decided to rely on the oﬃcial information
about Joseph Kabila’s ethnicity and code him as “1/4 Luba, 1/4 Lunda, 1/2 Rega”.
   Sometimes, our consultants disagreed about the ethnicity of lesser known ministers.
When two of the three consultants provided the same ethnicity, we usually classified a minis-
ter based on this information, ignoring the information given us by the third consultant. For
example, we classified Kparagume Atoloyo (State Commissioner of Social Aﬀairs in 1973)


                                             30
as Azande, even though one of our consultants suggested that he was a Ngombe. Only in
very rare cases, all three consultants disagreed about a minister’s ethnicity. We then as-
signed the minister to each of the three ethnic categories involved. For example, Ngole Iliki
(State Commissioner for Finance and Budget in 1983) was alternatively described as Mongo,
Teke or Sakata (which is a subgroup of Yanzi in our classification) by our consultants. We
therefore, coded him as “1/3 Mongo, 1/3 Teke, 1/3 Yanzi” in our data.


5.6       Gabon

5.6.1      Governments

      Our data for Gabon contains information from 44 lists of governments starting from the
government in May 1960 headed by Leon Mba and ending with the government in August
2004 headed by Omar Bongo. Our data includes at least one list of government for every
calendar year between 1960 and 2004, except for 1975.
      Gabon had four leaders between 1960 and 2004. Both the first and the second terms in
oﬃce of Leon Mba as well as the long rule of Omar Bongo are represented by the inclusion
of their governments in our data.9 On the other hand, we do not have information about
the government of Jean-Hilaire Aubame who was the country’s president for two days after
the 1964 coup.


5.6.2      Ministers

           Over the years, the lists of Gabonese governments have very similar structure. They
typically consist of a president, a vice-president and/or a prime minister, a small group of
senior ministers, a large group of regular ministers, and (in some years) a group of junior
ministers. The senior ministers usually have the titles of “ministers of state”, although there
are also some “deputy prime ministers” or “vice-prime ministers”˙Most of the regular min-
isters are simply called “ministers”, with occasional “secretaries general to the presidency”,
  9
      Remember again that we count a new nonconsecutive term in oﬃce of the same leader as a new leader.


                                                   31
“personal advisors to the president”, “directors of the presidential cabinet” , etc.. The junior
ministers bear the titles of “ministers-delegate” or “secretaries of state”. We include listed
individuals with all these titles in our dataset of ministers.
   The size of Gabon’s governments varies between 9 and 15 ministers in 1960-1967, but
rises to 20 ministers when Bongo comes to power in 1968. Under the rule of Bongo, the
size of government continues to rise from 20-25 ministers in 1968-1974 to 26-34 ministers
in 1976-1983 to 36-43 ministers in 1984-1989. In the early 1990s, Bongo’s governments
become smaller and have less than 30 ministers each. However, in the early 2000s the size of
government rises back to 32-33 ministers. Most of these annual fluctuations in the number
of ministers in our data seem to reflect true changes in the size of Gabonese governments
rather than diﬀerences in Europa’s reporting of junior ministers from year to year.
        Overall, our data for Gabon contains 1173 records of government-ministers with an
average of 26.66 ministers per government. Our data has information for 185 individual
ministers with each minister appearing on average in 6.34 lists of government.


5.6.3   Ethnic groups

        Our list of ethnic groups in Gabon consists of 10 ethnic categories, including the
residual “Other” category. Table 6 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the
country’s population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include.
        Our ethnic classification for Gabon is very similar to the classification used by the
Demographic Health Surveys (DHS) for this country. In particular, our Fang, Kota-Kele,
Njebi-Duma, Shira-Punu-Lumbu, Myene and Tsogo-Kande ethnic categories closely corre-
spond to the similarly-named categories of the DHS. However, following Alesina et al. (2003)
and Fearon (2003), we list Mbete and Teke as separate ethnic groups instead of using the
aggregated Mbete-Teke category of the DHS. In addition, unlike the DHS, we split the small
Vili group from the groups of the Shira-Punu category, which are usually considered to be
quite diﬀerent (see, for example, Murdock 1959).


                                               32
           Our ethnic classification for Gabon is much more detailed than that of Alesina et
al. who list only 5 ethnic categories (including a large “Other” category that accounts for
18.3 percent of the country’s population in their data). In contrast, our classification is a bit
more aggregated than that of Fearon who lists 15 ethnic groups. Specifically, we diﬀer from
Fearon in that we a) unite his Mpongwe, Nkomi and Orungu groups into a single Myene
category; b) unite his his Njebi and Duma groups into a single Njebi-Duma category; and
c) unite his Shira, Punu and Lumbu categories into a single Shira-Punu-Lumbu category.
As explained above, our approach with respect to these groups is consistent with that of
the DHS. It is also in line with the approach of Murdock (1959) who uses relatively broad
definitions of ethnic groups in this part of Africa10 .


5.6.4      Ethnicity of Ministers

       In addition to the WBIS, among the sources that we used to identify the ethnicity of
ministers in Gabon were Lexis-Nexis, Ndombet (2009a, 2009b), bdpgabon.com and various
issues of La Lettre du Continent published by Africa Intelligence. We also employed a
Gabonese consultant with expertise on his country’s politics. Overall, we were able to
establish the ethnicity of 1167 of 1173 government-ministers in our data.
       Given our decision to use separate ethnic categories for Teke and Mbembe, it was some-
times diﬃcult for us to distinguish between the Teke ministers and those belonging to one
of the Mbembe subgroups, especially the Obamba. For example, in the case of Jean-Pierre
Lembouma-Lepandou (Minister of Economy and Finance between 1980 and 1989), one source
refers to him as Teke. But since the majority of our sources describe Lemboumba-Lepandou
as Obamba, we assign him to Mbembe ethnic category. In contrast, in the case of Jacques
Libizagomo Joumas (Minister of Public Works and Construction in 1977-79, and Minister
of Higher Education, Scientific Research and Environment in 1980-81), we were not able to
  10
    Defining Mpongwe, Nkomi, Orungu and other Myene subgroups as separate ethnic groups would also
make it more diﬃcult for us to determine the ethnic identity of the ministers who are described as Myene
by our sources.



                                                  33
determine whether he was a Teke or an Obamba and as a result had to code him as “half
Mbete, half Teke” in our data.
   There is also a related ambiguity with respect to the ethnicity of President Omar Bongo.
The vast majority of sources identify Bongo as Teke. However, some say that although his
mother was a Teke, his father may have been an Obamba. Again, we chose to side with
the majority and defined Omar Bongo (as well as his son, daughter and nephews) as Teke,
rather than as “half Mbete, half Teke”.


5.7     Ghana

5.7.1   Governments

   Our data for Ghana contains information from 45 lists of governments starting from the
government in July 1960 headed by Kwame Nkrumah and ending with the government in
August 2004 headed by John Kufuor. Our data includes at least one list of government for
every calendar year between 1960 and 2004, except for 1975. In one calendar year the data
includes more than one list of government: in 1970 it includes the lists of governments in
both April and October. Both of the governments in 1970 are headed by K.A. Busia. They
also have quite similar (although not identical) ministerial composition. Thus, researchers
who wish to avoid duplication may want to use only one of these two lists of governments in
the analysis.
   Overall, our data for Ghana contains information about the governments headed by
9 of the 10 leaders who ruled the country between 1960 and 2004. Only the short-lived
government of Fred Akuﬀo, who was in power from July 1978 to June 1979, is not represented.


5.7.2   Ministers

   The structure of the Ghanaian governments and the oﬃcial titles held by their members
vary a lot during the 45 years covered by our data. The governments in 1960 and 1961
consist of Nkrumah as a president and a group of “ministers”, counting 15 and 17 members

                                            34
in total. Between 1962 and 1964, “deputy ministers” are also added to the Europa’s lists,
raising the total size of government to 31-34 ministers. In 1965, the last year of Nkrumah’s
rule, the “deputy ministers” are replaced by the “ministers not in cabinet”, which include
two “parliamentary secretaries with rank of minister”, a “special commissioner for Greater
Accra” and an “executive chairman of Accra-Tema City Council” among others. We include
the holders of all these titles in our dataset of ministers.11
       Following the February 1966 coup d’état, Ghanaian governments change their form. In
1966 and 1967, they consist of members of the “National Liberation Committee” (which in-
clude the president and the vice-president) and members of the “National Economic Council
(which include the council’s chairman). In 1968 and 1969, the “National Liberation Com-
mittee” is renamed as “National Liberation Council”, while the titles of “president” and
“vice-president” are replaced by those of the NLC’s “chairman” and “vice-chairman”. Dur-
ing this period, the size of Ghanaian governments rises from 15 ministers in 1966-1967 to
19-23 in 1968-1969.
       The governments headed by Prime Minister Busia in 1970 and 1971 in addition to himself
also include a large group of “ministers” (with an “attorney general” and a few “ministers of
state”) and the country’s president (or the three members of the “presidential commission”
in March 1970). The size of government in these years ranges from 18 to 21 ministers.
       During the rule of Ignatius Acheampong between 1972 and 1978, the governments typ-
ically consist of two governing bodies: the “Supreme Military Council” and the “National
Redemption Council” (with Acheampong himself chairing both councils). Members of the
Supreme Military Council hold the military titles of “chief of defense staﬀ”, “army com-
mander”, “navy commander” and alike. In contrast, members of the National Redemption
Council are simply called “commissioners”, and they hold more traditional ministerial port-
folios. We include the members of both councils in our dataset of ministers. During this
period, the size of government rises from 14 ministers in 1972, to 19 ministers in 1974, and
  11
   In contrast, we always exclude Ghana’s “regional commissioners”, “regional secretaries” or “regional
ministers” from our dataset.


                                                  35
to 25 ministers in 1978.
   The government in 1979 consists of two groups of people. The first group are members
of the “Armed Forces Revolutionary Council”, with Jerry Rawlings serving as the council’s
chairman and the head of state. The second group are “commissioners of state” appointed by
the AFRC. The governments in 1980 and 1981 also consist of two groups of people: members
of the “Council of State” and members of the “Cabinet”. Members of the cabinet include
President Limann, his vice-president and a large group of “ministers”. The total size of
government is 25 ministers in 1979, but 40 and 43 ministers in 1980 and 1981 respectively.
   Between 1982 and 1987, the governments consist of two governing bodies: the “Provi-
sional National Defense Council” and the “Cabinet”. Most members of the PNDC do not
hold any title (except for “Chairman” Jerry Rawlings), while the members of the Cabinet
are formally called “secretaries”. In 1988 a third governing body, the “Provisional National
Defense Council Secretariat”, is added to the government. Its members are also called “sec-
retaries”. In the same year, the Cabinet is renamed as the “Committee of Secretaries”. As a
result of this expansion, the total number of ministers in a government increases from 25-30
ministers between 1982 and 1987 to 33-37 ministers between 1988 and 1992.
   After the transition to a multi-party political system, the structure of the Ghanaian
governments becomes much simpler. Between 1993 and 2004, the governments include a
president, a vice president and members of the “Council of Ministers”, most of whom have
the titles of “ministers” (with a few “senior ministers”, “chiefs of staﬀ” and “presidential
staﬀers”). Although the size of government in this period is relatively small, it gradually
rises from 17-19 ministers between 1993 and 1996, to 22-26 ministers between 1997 and 2002,
to 29 ministers in 2003 and 2004.
   On the whole, our data for Ghana contains 1140 records of government-ministers with
the average of 25.33 ministers per government. Our data has information for 362 individual
ministers with each minister appearing on average in 3.15 lists of government.




                                            36
5.7.3   Ethnic groups

   Our list of ethnic groups in Ghana consists of 22 ethnic categories, including the residual
“Other” category. Table 7 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the country’s
population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include. The ethnic
categories that we use in Ghana are more disaggregated than those used by Fearon (2003)
who lists 13 ethnic groups, or Alesina et al. (2003) who list only 8 ethnic groups. Since
our ethnic classification is quite detailed, it relies on the information provided by Murdock
(1959) and Ghana’s 2000 Population and Housing Census.
   In the south of the country, we decompose Alesina et al.’s large Akan category into
Ashanti, Fanti, Akyem, Anyi, Brong, Nzema Wasa and Asen ethnic groups. This strategy
is somewhat similar to that of Fearon who also creates separate Fanti, Anyi and Nzema
categories, but unites the other five Akan groups into a single Ashanti category. Follow-
ing Fearon, we also split Alesina et al.’s joint Ga-Adangme category into separate Ga and
Adangme ethnic groups.
   In the north of the country, we disaggregate the broad Mossi-Dagomba category of Alesina
et al. and Fearon into Dagari, Dagomba, Nankanse, Kusasi and Mamprusi and Builsa ethnic
groups. Our Konkomba and Bissa categories are quite similar to Fearon’s Konkomba and
Mande categories, while the Sisala-Kasena-Grusi category that we use is not explicitly listed
by either Fearon or Alesina et al.
   In the east of the country, we list Ewe ethnic group and Guang ethnic category (which
unites many small and related groups). This is similar to what is done by Fearon. Finally,
both Alesina et al. and Fearon list Yoruba as one of Ghana’s ethnic groups. However, since
Yoruba is not mentioned in Ghana’s 2000 Population and Housing Census, we exclude this
group from our ethnic classification.




                                             37
5.7.4   Ethnicity of Ministers

        In addition to the WBIS, some of the sources that helped us to identify the ethnic-
ity of ministers in Ghana were Adjei (1994), Allman (1993), Assensoh and Alex-Assensoh
(2001), Baynham (1985, 1988), Bennett (1973), Kennedy (2009), Ladouceur (1979), Nugent
(1995), ghanaweb.com and modernghana.com. We also employed three Ghanaian consultants
(among them a former minister) with expertise on the country’s politics. With the help of
our consultants, we were able to establish the ethnicity of all 1140 government-ministers in
our data.
   We sometimes needed to make an extra eﬀort in order to determine whether a minister
was an Ashanti or whether he belonged to another ethnic group of the Akan cluster. For
example, one of our sources erroneously described Prime Minister K.A. Busia as Ashanti,
and we initially classified him as such. However, further search and the discussions that we
had with our consultants convinced us that Busia was a Brong, and we consequently updated
his ethnic classification.
   In a few cases, our sources disagreed about the ethnicity of a minister, while looking
equally reliable. In these situations, we split the minister’s ethnic assignment among the two
ethnic groups involved. For example, Erasmus Isaac Preko (deputy minister of communica-
tions and work in 1962-1964, minister of fuel and power in 1965) was a member of parliament
for Kwahu North and was described as ethnic Kwahu (subgroup of Akyem) by some of our
sources. One of our consultants, however, insisted that Preko was a typical Ashanti last
name, and that E.I. Preko himself was an ethnic Ashanti assimilated in the Kwahu area.
We, therefore, chose to define E.I. Preko as “half Akyem, half Ashanti” in our data.
   Another interesting feature of the Ghanaian data is a relatively large number of ministers
with mixed ethnic background. When we found that a minister had parents of diﬀerent
ethnicity, we assigned him to both ethnic groups. For example, Alan Kyerematen (minister
of trade in 2003-2004) has a Fanti mother and an Ashanti father; he is therefore defined as
“half Ashanti, half Fanti” in our data. Likewise, President Rawlings is well known to have


                                             38
an Ewe mother and a Scottish father. We therefore code him as “half Ewe, half Other”.


5.8     Guinea

5.8.1   Governments

   Our data for Guinea contains information from 45 lists of governments starting from the
government in April 1960 headed by Ahmed Sekou Toure and ending with the government
in August 2004 headed by Lansana Conte. Our data includes at least one list of government
for every calendar year between 1960 and 2004, except for 1975. In one calendar year the
data includes more than one list of government: in 1969 it includes the lists of governments
in both January and October. Although the two 1969 governments are both headed by
Ahmed Sekou Toure, their ministerial composition is quite diﬀerent. Thus, using both of
these governments in the analysis should not create much duplication.
        Guinea had three leaders between 1960 and 2004. The governments of Ahmed Sekou
Toure and Lansana Conte are extensively covered by our data. However, we do not have
information about the short-lived government of Louis Lansana Beavogui who was the interim
President of the country between March 27 and April 3 of 1984.


5.8.2   Ministers

        Between 1960 and 1968, the Guinean governments always include a president and a
group of “ministers”. In some of these years they also include a group of “secretaries of state”,
a group of “ministers resident” and an occasional “high commissioner”. The holders of all
these titles are included in our dataset of ministers. In this period, the size of government in
our data varies from only 10 ministers in 1960 to as many as 25 ministers in 1962 and 1967.
        Between 1969 and 1978, the governments take a slightly diﬀerent form. They typi-
cally consist of a president, a prime minister (since 1972), a group of senior ministers, and a
group of junior ministers each attached to one of their senior colleagues. Between 1969 and
1971, the senior ministers have the titles of “ministers”, while the junior ministers are called

                                               39
“secretaries of state”. After 1972 the junior ministers also get the titles of “ministers” (with
occasional “minister-delegates to the presidency”, “secretaries-general at the presidency”
and “governors of banks”), while the senior ministers become heads of their ministerial “do-
mains”. All the governments between 1969 and 1978 also include a group of ministers in
charge of Guinean regions. These ministers are alternatively called “ministers delegate to
the regions” (in 1969-1971), “ministers of local development” (in 1972-1976) or “ministers
of rural development” (in 1977-1978). We include the holders of all these titles in our data.
The size of government varies between 33 and 37 ministers in 1969-1976, but rises to 41 and
42 ministers in 1977 and 1978.
        Between 1979 and 1984, the Guinean governments are smaller, ranging from 30 to
32 ministers. They include a president, a prime minister, and a large group of “ministers”
(with an occasional “minister-delegate”, “secretary of state”, “governor of banks”, or “chief
of staﬀ of the armed forces”).
        In 1985, one year after coming to power, Lansana Conte eliminated the post of prime
minister. Between 1985 and 1995, his “Councils of Ministers” tend to include himself as a
president, a small number of “ministers of state” or “ministers delegated to the presidency”,
a large number of “ministers”, and a few “secretaries of state” or “high commissioners”.
Between 1986 and 1991, the Council of Ministers also includes four “resident ministers” for
Guinean regions. In addition, in 1987 and 1988 the Europa publications list members of the
“Military Committee for National Recovery” as belonging to the government. These indi-
viduals are also included in our dataset of ministers. Partially due to the changing inclusion
criteria, in 1985-1995 the size of Guinean governments in our data fluctuates between only
18 ministers in 1992 and as many as 30 ministers in 1988.
        Between 1996 and 2004, the governments typically consist of a president, a prime
minister and a large group of “ministers”. In some of these years there are also occasional
“ministers at the presidency” (alternatively called “general secretaries to the presidency”
or “advisors to the presidency”), “minister-delegates to the prime minister” (alternatively


                                              40
called “secretaries-general of the government”) and “secretaries of state”. In this period the
size of government varies between 22 and 28 ministers.
   Overall, our data for Guinea contains 1213 records of government ministers with the
average of 26.96 ministers per government. Our data has information for 244 individual
ministers with each minister appearing on average in 4.97 lists of government.


5.8.3   Ethnic groups

        Our list of ethnic groups in Guinea consists of 9 ethnic categories, including the
residual “Other” category. Table 8 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the
country’s population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include. Our
classification is slightly more detailed than the classifications of Alesina et al. (2003) or
Fearon (2003) who list 6 and 5 ethnic categories respectively.
        Our ethnic classification for Guinea is in many ways similar to that of Alesina et
al., and includes the same major ethnic categories such as Fulani, Malinke, Susu, Kissi, and
Kpelle. It is possible, however, that some of these categories are a bit more inclusive in our
data. For example, our Malinke category includes not only the main Malinke group but also
the smaller kindred groups such as Sankaran, Konyanka and Koranko. Likewise, our Susu
category includes the small Baga and Landoma ethnic groups which are largely assimilated
into the dominant Susu population.
        Furthermore, we disaggregate Alesina et al.’s large “Other” category, which consti-
tutes 11.6 percent of Guinea’s population in their data, by explicitly listing three additional
ethnic groups: Yalunka, Toma and Mano. As a result, our own “Other” category is much
smaller, representing only 4 percent of Guinea’s population.


5.8.4   Ethnicity of Ministers

   In addition to the WBIS, some of the more important sources that helped us to identify
the ethnicity of ministers in Guinea included Bah (1996), O’Toole and Baker (2005), we-


                                              41
bguinee.net, campboiro.org, guineepress.info and various issues of Africa Confidential. We
also employed a Guinean political historian as our consultant. Overall, we were able to
establish the ethnicity of 1209 of 1213 government-ministers in our data.
        Some ministers in our list have the last names (e.g. Camara, Keita or Toure) and the
first names (e.g. Ibrahima, Mamadou, Sekou) that are very common throughout the region
and can be born by people of diﬀerent ethnicity. In these cases, we had to be especially
careful in our search in order to make sure that our sources referred to the ministers in
question and not to their namesakes. In other cases, the last names of ministers actually
helped us to determine their ethnicity because these names were quite specific to a particular
ethnic group. For example, Bah, Balde and Diallo are typical Fulani last names, and our
search indeed identified all the ministers with these names as ethnic Fulani.
        Several ministers in our data have the last names of Diakite, Sidibe and Sangare.
Our consultant explained to us that people with these names come from the Wassulu region
of eastern Guinea. They are ethnic Fulani who integrated into the indigenous Malinke people
and adopted their language and customs. This explains why our online sources sometimes
describe these ministers as Fulani and sometimes as Malinke. For example, one of our sources
for Abdel Kader Sangare (minister of youth, sports and culture in 2000-2003 and minister of
the environment in 2004) describes him as a Wassulu Fulani who is Malinke by culture and
often considered to be a Malinke. Given this ambiguity, we chose to code all the Diakite,
Sidibe and Sangare in our data as “half Malinke, half Fulani”.


5.9     Kenya

5.9.1   Governments

   Our data for Kenya contains information from 41 lists of governments starting from the
government in April 1964 headed by Jomo Kenyatta and ending with the government in
August 2004 headed by Mwai Kibaki. Our data includes at least one list of government for
every calendar year between 1964 and 2004, except for 1975. In one calendar year the data

                                             42
includes more than one list of government: in 1970 it includes the lists of governments in
both April and December. The two governments in 1970 are both headed by Jomo Keny-
atta. Their ministerial composition is also quite similar (although not identical). Therefore,
in order to avoid duplication, researchers may want to use only one of these two lists of
governments in the analysis.
   Kenya had three leaders between 1964 and 2004, and the governments headed by each of
these leaders are represented in our data.


5.9.2   Ministers

   The Kenyan governments tend to have a simple structure. They usually include a presi-
dent (a prime minister in 1964), a vice-president, a large group of “ministers” and an “attor-
ney general” (between 1965 and 1997). In most years the governments also include a small
number of “ministers of state in the president’s oﬃce” and/or other “ministers of state”. In
1980 and 1981 one “assistant minister” is also listed as a member of the government. We
include all these title-holders in our dataset of ministers.
   During the first 25 years of independence, the size of Kenyan governments rises over time
from 16 and 19 ministers in 1964 and 1965, to 20-22 ministers between 1966 and 1979, to
24-29 ministers between 1980 and 1987, and to 33-34 ministers between 1988 and 1992. The
size of government then falls to 23-26 ministers between 1993 and 2003, but rises again to
30 ministers in 2004.
   In total, our data for Kenya contains 1010 records of government-ministers with the
average of 24.63 ministers per government. Our data has information for 156 individual
ministers with each minister appearing on average in 6.47 lists of government.


5.9.3   Ethnic groups

        Our list of ethnic groups in Kenya consists of 16 ethnic categories, including the
residual “Other” category. Table 9 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the


                                               43
country’s population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include. Our
ethnic classification is significantly more detailed than the classification of Alesina et al.
(2003) who list only 9 ethnic groups. On the other hand, our classification is quite similar
to that of Fearon (2003) who lists 13 ethnic groups.
        11 of the ethnic categories in our list are exactly the same as those used by Fearon.
In fact, we depart from Fearon in only two respects. First, we list Kikuyu, Meru and Embu
as separate ethnic groups instead of merging them into a single ethnic category. Second, we
separate the relatively large Taita group (which represents 1% of Kenya’s population) from
other groups of the residual “Other” category. These modifications are consistent with the
ethnic definitions of the Kenya’s Demographic and Health Surveys and Murdock (1959).


5.9.4   Ethnicity of Ministers

        In addition to the WBIS, some of the more important sources that we used to
determine the ethnicity of ministers in Kenya were Ahluwalia (1996), International Crisis
Group (2008), Khapoya (1980), Lafargue (2009), Throup and Hornsby (1998), mashada.com
and various issues of Africa Confidential. In the end, we were able to establish the ethnic
origin of 1007 of 1010 government-ministers in our data.
        There is an ambiguity regarding the ethnicity of George Saitoti (minister of finance
in 1984-1988, vice-president in 1989-1997 and 1999-2002, minister of planning and national
development in 1998, and minister of education in 2003-2004). Diﬀerent sources describe
Saitoti as either Kikuyu, Masai or mixed Kikuyu-Masai. One of our sources is more specific
and says that Saitoti has a Masai father and a Kikuyu mother. Other sources, however,
maintain that Saitoti is a full-blooded Kikuyu who claims to be a Masai for political reasons.
Given this ambiguity, in our data we code Saitoti as “half Kikuyu, half Masai”.




                                             44
5.10     Liberia

5.10.1    Governments

   Our data for Liberia contains information from 45 lists of governments starting from
the government in 1960 headed by William Tubman and ending with the government in
2004 headed by Gyude Bryant. Our data includes at least one list of government for every
calendar year between 1960 and 2004, except for 1975. In one calendar year the data includes
more than one list of government: in 1970 it includes the lists of governments in both April
and December. The two governments in 1970 are both headed by William Tubman. Their
ministerial composition is also nearly identical. Therefore, in order to avoid duplication,
researchers may want to use only one of these two lists of governments in the analysis.
   Our data includes governments headed by all 10 leaders who ruled Liberia between 1960
and 2004. In particular, even the short-lived governments of David Kpormakpor, Wilton
Sankawulo, Ruth Perry and Moses Blah are represented.


5.10.2    Ministers

         Between 1960 and 1971, the Liberian governments typically include a president,
a vice-president, a large number of “secretaries”, an “attorney-general”, a “postmaster-
general”, and one or more “directors-general” or “directors” (e.g., a “director-general of the
national public health service”). Between 1969 and 1971, they also include a “chairman of
special commission on government operations”. We include the holders of all these titles in
our dataset of ministers. Between 1960 and 1971, the size of government rises from 12-13
ministers in 1960-1963 to 15-17 ministers in 1964-1971.
         In 1972 the titles of “secretaries” are replaced by those of “ministers”. Thus, between
1972 and 1979, the governments usually include a president, a vice president (except in 1972
and 1973), and a large group of “ministers”. In some years, they also include one or two
“ministers of state”, a “chairman of public utilities authority”, a “director of the cabinet”,



                                               45
and a “general secretary of the True Whig Party”. Before 1976, the ministers of justice and
postal aﬀairs are still called an “attorney-general” and a “postmaster-general” respectively.
As before, the holders of all these titles are included in our data. Between 1972 and 1979,
the size of government continues to rise from 17-18 ministers in 1972-1973 to 20-22 ministers
in 1974-1979.
        In the aftermath of the 1980 military coup, Liberian governments change their form.
Between 1980 and 1984, they consist of two governing bodies: the “People’s Redemption
Council” and the “Cabinet”. Some members of the People’s Redemption Council hold oﬃcial
titles such as “chairman” (Samuel Doe), “co-chairman”, “speaker”, “commanding general of
the armed forces” etc., while other members of the PRC are simply known as such. Most
of the members of the Cabinet have the titles of “ministers”, although there are also a few
“directors-general” (or “directors”). We include members of both governing bodies in our
dataset. Due to their dual structure, the governments in this period are quite large, ranging
from 31 to 42 ministers per government.
        In 1985 the People’s Redemption Council is dissolved, and the structure of the
Liberian governments becomes simpler. Between 1985 and 1990, the governments include
a president (a president of interim national assembly in 1985), a vice-president (in 1989
and 1990), a large group of “ministers”, a “minister of state for presidential aﬀairs”, and a
“director-general of the cabinet”. In this period, the size of government varies between 20
and 24 ministers.
        Between 1991 and 1993, the governments are much smaller and have only 13 ministers
each. They now include an “interim president” (Amos Sawyer), a group of “ministers” and
two “ministers of state” (“for presidential aﬀairs” and “without portfolio”).
        Between 1994 and 1996, the country is ruled by the Liberian National Transitional
Governments. These governments consist of two bodies: the “Council of State” and the
“Cabinet”. The Council of State has 5 or 6 members, including a “chairman” who is also
the country’s leader. The Cabinet includes a large number of “ministers” and a “minister of


                                             46
state for presidential aﬀairs”. Members of both governing bodies are included in our dataset.
The transitional governments have between 23 and 25 ministers per government.
          Between 1997 and 2004, the structure of Liberian governments is again rather simple.
They include a president (an “interim president” in 2003 or a “chairman of the national
transitional government” in 2004), a vice-president (a “vice-chairman” in 2004), a large
number of “ministers”, and 1 to 3 “ministers of state”. The size of government is 18 ministers
in 1997 and 21 to 24 ministers in 1998-2004.
   Overall, our data for Liberia contains 938 records of government-ministers with the aver-
age of 20.84 ministers per government. Our data has information for 272 individual ministers
with each minister appearing on average in 3.45 lists of government.


5.10.3     Ethnic groups

          Our list of ethnic groups in Liberia consists of 15 ethnic categories, including the
residual “Other” category. Table 10 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the
country’s population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include.
          The ethnic categories that we use for Liberia are exactly the same as those used by
Fearon (2003). Our ethnic classification is also very similar to the classification of Alesina et
al. (2003), with the only diﬀerence that we list Mandingo and Vai as separate ethnic groups
instead of uniting them into a single ethnic category.
   Notice that our Americo-Liberian category is rather broad and includes not only the
descendants of African-American settlers but also those of repatriated Afro-Caribbean and
Congo slaves. Nowadays, the term “Congo” is sometimes applied to all these groups of
people.


5.10.4     Ethnicity of Ministers

   In addition to the WBIS, some of the more important sources that helped us to identify
the ethnicity of ministers in Liberia were Aboagye (1999), Ellis (2001), Kappel et al. (1986),


                                               47
Lowenkopf (1976), Osaghae (1996) and theperspective.org. We also employed a prominent
Liberian historian (and a former minister himself) as our consultant. With his help, we were
able to establish the ethnicity of 929 of 938 government-ministers in our data.
   Before the 1980 military coup, Liberian politics was dominated by the Americo-Liberian
political elite. However, some members of this elite had mixed ethnic origin, and we tried to
reflect it in our data. For example, we found that both Joseph Rudolph Grimes (secretary of
state in 1960-1971) and Charles Dunbar Sherman (secretary of treasury in 1960-1966) had
an Americo-Liberian father and a Vai mother. As a result, we coded these ministers as “half
Americo-Liberian, half Vai”.
   The case of Gyude Bryant (chairman of the National Transitional Government in 2004)
was in some sense the opposite. While the online sources described Bryant as Grebo, our
consultant informed us that he actually had a Grebo father and a “Congo” mother. We
therefore classified Bryant as “half Americo-Liberian, half Grebo”.
   It was sometimes diﬃcult for us to know whether a minister was an ethnic Gio (a group
also known as Dan) or whether he was a member of the neighboring Mano group. For
example, with respect to Roberts Norwann (member of People’s Redemption Council in
1980) and Losay Kendor (minister of national security in 2004), our consultant was able to
tell us that they belonged to one of these groups, but could not provide us with more detailed
ethnicity information. We therefore coded both of these ministers as “half Dan, half Mano”.


5.11     Nigeria

5.11.1   Governments

   Our data for Nigeria contains information from 44 lists of governments starting from
the government in May 1961 headed by Abubakar Tafawa Bolewa and ending with the
government in August 2004 headed by Olusegun Obasanjo. Our data includes at least one
list of government for every calendar year between 1961 and 2004, except for 1975. In one
calendar year the data includes more than one list of government: in 1970 it includes the lists

                                              48
of governments in both April and December. The two governments in 1970 are both headed
by Yakubu Gowon. Their ministerial composition is also quite similar. Therefore, in order
to avoid duplication, researchers may want to use only one of these two lists of governments
in the analysis.
   Overall, our data for Nigeria includes the governments headed by 11 of the 12 leaders
who ruled the country between 1961 and 2004. Only the short-term government of Murtala
Ramat Mohammed who ruled the country in late 1975 and early 1976 is not represented.


5.11.2    Ministers

         Between 1961 and 1965, the Nigerian governments include a prime minister (who is
the country’s main political leader), a “governor-general and commander-in-chief” (in 1961-
1963) or a “president” (in 1964-1965), a large group of “ministers” and a smaller group
of “ministers of state”. The size of government in this period varies between 25 and 33
ministers.
         In 1966 and 1967, the first two years of the military rule, the governments consist
of a) members of the “Supreme Military Council”, b) members of the “Federal Executive
Council”, and c) “permanent secretaries” of the various “ministries”. The head of state
presides over both Councils and their membership significantly overlaps. In total, each of
these two governments has 29 members.
         Between 1968 and 1979, the Nigerian governments continue to include the “Supreme
Military Council” and the “Federal Executive Council”. As before, the Supreme Military
Council has a “president” (called “chairman” in some years) and a group of regular “mem-
bers”. During the rule of Obasanjo in the late 1970s, it also has a “vice-president”. The
Federal Executive Council, on the other hand, consists of a large number of “commissioners”.
Members of both Councils are included in our dataset of ministers. The size of government
ranges between 19 and 21 ministers in 1968-1974, but rises to 38-43 ministers during the
Obasanjo’s years in power.


                                             49
        Between 1980 and 1983, the governments have a simpler structure. They include
a president, a vice-president and a group of “ministers”, with a total of 26-27 government
members each year. Between 1984 and 1992, the Nigerian governments again consist of
two governing bodies: the “Armed Forces Ruling Council” (called the “Supreme Military
Council” before 1996) and the “National Council of Ministers” (called the “Federal Executive
Council” before 1996). The Armed Forces Ruling Council has a large number of “members”,
including the country’s president. The Federal Executive Council includes a president, a
vice-president (called “chief of general staﬀ” in 1986-1989) and a group of “ministers”. As
before, we include members of both governing bodies in our data. The governments have 33
ministers in 1984-1985 and between 40 and 47 ministers in 1986-1992.
        The Interim National Government of 1993 has 32 ministers, including the “head of
the government”, a large number of “secretaries” and “secretaries of state”, an “administra-
tor of the Federal Capital Territory”, a “chairman of the National Planning Commission”,
and three “National Assembly liaison oﬃcers”. Between 1994 and 1998, the governments
have a dual structure again. They consist of the “Provisional Ruling Council” (with “chair-
man”, “vice-chairman” and ordinary “members”) and the “Federal Executive Council” (with
a large number of “ministers” and “ministers of state”, and an occasional “secretary to the
government”). The governments in this period are very large, ranging between 47 and 60
ministers in size.
        Between 1999 and 2004, the Nigerian governments always include a president, a
vice-president, and a large number of “ministers”. A small number of “ministers in the
presidency” and/or “ministers of state” are also listed as part of the government in some of
these years. The size of government in this period varies between 29 and 34 ministers.
        Overall, our data for Nigeria contains 1499 records of government-ministers with the
average of 34.07 ministers per government. We have information for 473 individual ministers
with each minister appearing on average in 3.17 lists of government.




                                            50
5.11.3   Ethnic Groups

   Our list of ethnic groups in Nigeria consists of 17 ethnic categories, including the residual
“Other” category. Table 11 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the country’s
population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include.
   We often needed to combine several related ethnic groups into a single ethnic category
in order to avoid dealing with a very large number of small groups. To decide which groups
may be related, we consulted the detailed ethnic and linguistic classifications provided by
Morrison et al. (1989), Murdock (1959), and ethnologue.com. Despite our rather aggregate
approach, our ethnic classification for Nigeria is more detailed than the classifications of
Alesina et al. (2003) and Fearon (2003), who list 12 and 7 ethnic categories respectively.
   11 of our ethnic categories are very similar to the corresponding categories used by Alesina
et al. Among them are such major ethnic groups as Yoruba, Igbo, Hausa, Fulani, Ibibio,
Kanuri, Edo and Tiv. We, however, depart from Alesina et al. by disaggregating their large
“Other” category (with 8.1 percent of population in their data) into separate Idoma, Igbirra,
Gbari, Chamba and Angas ethnic groups, each of which represents more than one percent
of Nigeria’s population.


5.11.4   Ethnicity of Ministers

   In addition to the WBIS, we used a large number of sources to identify the ethnicity
of ministers in Nigeria. These sources included Falola and Genova (2009), Nigeria (1967),
Ogbontiba (1997), Siollun (2009), Sklar (1963), wikipedia.org, and allafrica.com. We also
employed two Nigerian consultants with expertise on the country’s politics: a political his-
torian and a veteran political journalist. Overall, we were able to establish the ethnicity of
1486 of 1499 government-ministers in our data.
   The Hausa and Fulani people of northern Nigeria are sometimes collectively referred to
as Hausa-Fulani. We therefore had to be particularly careful in order to distinguish between
the ministers from these two groups. For example, Muhammadu Buhari (Chairman of the

                                              51
Supreme Military Council in 1984-1985) is sometimes described as a Hausa-Fulani, and
some sources even call him a Hausa. Yet the vast majority of sources indicate that Buhari
is actually a Fulani, and we classify him as such in our data.
   In a small number of cases, we knew that a minister was a Hausa-Fulani, but could not
clearly determine whether he was a Hausa or a Fulani. In these circumstances, we defined
the minister as “half Hausa, Hausa Fulani”. For example, this was the case with Ishaya
Audu (minister of external aﬀairs in 1980-1983) and Usumani Maitambari (minister of state
in 1963-1965).
   We had similar diﬃculties with a few ministers from Kwara State, who were described
as Yoruba by some sources but as Fulani by other sources. Again, we chose to classify
these ministers as “half Yoruba, half Fulani”. We followed this approach with Ibrahim
Gambari (minister of foreign aﬀairs in 1984-1985) and Tunde Idiagbon (member of the
Supreme Military Councl in 1984-1985).
   In some cases we could not find explicit information about a minister’s ethnicity, but
were nevertheless able to assign the minister to an ethnic group based on other available
information. For example, we know that Alhaji Hashim Adaji (minister of state in 1963-
1965) is a politician from the Igala area. We also know that he attended elementary school
in the area and later worked for the Igala Native Authority. Furthermore, Adaji appears to
be a common Igala last name. Thus, it seems safe to assume that Hashim Adaji is an ethnic
Igala, and we assign him to Idoma-Igala ethnic category.


5.12     Sierra Leone

5.12.1   Governments

   Our data for Sierra Leone contains information from 45 lists of governments starting
from the government in 1960 headed by Milton Margai and ending with the government in
2004 headed by Ahmad Tejan Kabbah. Our data includes at least one list of government
for every calendar year between 1960 and 2004, except for 1972 and 1975. In two calendar

                                             52
years the data includes more than one list of government. In 1970 it includes the lists of
governments in both April and November, while in 1973 it includes the lists of governments
in both January and December.
   The two governments in 1970 are both headed by Siaka Stevens. Their ministerial com-
position is also quite similar (albeit not identical). Therefore, in order to avoid duplication,
researchers may want to use only one of these two lists of governments in the analysis. The
two governments in 1973 are also headed by Stevens. The ministerial composition of these
two governments is also somewhat similar (many of the same ministers are included but
they often hold diﬀerent portfolios). In this case, in order to avoid using two similar lists of
governments for the same year, one could use the list of January 1973 as a substitute for the
missing list of 1972 (eﬀectively assuming that the ministerial composition in December 1972
was the same as in January 1973).
   Overall, our data for Sierra Leone contains information about the governments headed by
9 of the 12 leaders who ruled the country between 1960 and 2004. Only the few days in power
of David Lansana and Ambrose Patrick Genda (both in March 1967) and the three-month
rule of Julius Maada Bio (in early 1996) are not represented by their governments.


5.12.2    Ministers

         Between 1960 and 1970, the governments of Sierra Leone tend to include a prime
minister (with a “deputy prime minister” in 1961 and 1962), a “governor-general” (or an
“oﬃcer administering for governor-general” in 1968), a large number of regular “ministers”,
a few “ministers” or “resident ministers” for provinces, two paramount chiefs (sometimes
with the titles of “ministers without portfolio” or “ministers of state”), and a “leader of the
House and government business” (also as a “minister of state”). We include the holders of
                                   12
all these titles in our dataset.        The short-lived 1967 government of Andrew Juxon Smith
has a very diﬀerent structure. It includes a “chairman”, a “deputy chairman”, ordinary
  12
     One exception to this rule is Sir Maurice Dorman, the Governor-General of Sierra Leone in 1960 and
1961. We exclude Dorman from our dataset because he was a British colonial oﬃcial.


                                                  53
“members” and a “secretary-general” of the “National Reformation Council” as well as a
group of “secretaries” in charge of governmental “departments”. The total size of government
is only 12 ministers in 1960, but ranges between 16 and 21 ministers in 1961-1970.
        Between 1971 and 1991, the governments typically include a president, a vice-
president (a “first vice-president” and a “second vice-president” after 1977), an “attorney-
general” and a large group of “ministers”. In some of these years, they also include three
“resident ministers” (alternatively called “regional ministers” or “ministers of states for
provinces”), several “ministers of state” and an occasional “leader of the House”, or “secretary-
general of the APC”. In 1971-1991, the size of government fluctuates between 20 and 33
ministers per government.
        The governments of Valentine Strasser in 1992-1995 and Johnny Paul Koroma in 1997
consist of two governing bodies. The first governing body is called the “Supreme Council
of State” under Strasser and the “Armed Forces Revolutionary Council” under Koroma. It
includes a “chairman”, a “vice-chairman” (or a “deputy chairman”) and regular “members”
(with occasional “principal liaison oﬃcers” and a “secretary-general”). The second governing
body is called the “Council of Secretaries”. It includes a “chief secretary of state” and a group
of “secretaries of state”. We include members of both governing bodies (which sometimes
overlap) in our dataset of ministers. In these years, the total size of government varies
between 31 and 40 ministers.
        The governments of Ahmad Tejan Kabbah in 1996 and in 1998-2004 have a simpler
structure. They typically include a president, a “vice-president” (except in 1996), a large
number of “ministers”, 2-3 “ministers of the regions”, and a few occasional “ministers of
state”. In total, these governments have as few as 17 ministers in 1998-1999 and as many as
28 ministers in 2002 and 2004.
        Taken as a whole, our data for Sierra Leone contains 1109 records of government-
ministers with the average of 24.64 ministers per government. We have information for 288
individual ministers with each minister appearing on average in 3.85 lists of government.


                                               54
5.12.3    Ethnic groups

         Our list of ethnic groups in Sierra Leone consists of 14 ethnic categories, including
the residual “Other” category. Table 12 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the
country’s population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include. Our
ethnic classification is very similar to the classifications of Alesina et al. (2003) and Fearon
(2003), who list 13 and 11 ethnic groups respectively.
         We use exactly the same ethnic categories as Alesina et al. but add a small Yalunka
ethnic group to our list. As compared to the classification of Fearon, 11 of our ethnic cate-
gories are similar to his. However, we list three additional ethnic groups: Fulani, Mandingo
and Yalunka.


5.12.4    Ethnicity of Ministers

   In addition to the WBIS, the sources that helped us to identify the ethnicity of ministers
in Sierra Leone included Ayissi and Poulton (2006), Cartwright (1970, 1978), Cox (1976),
Fyle (2006), wikipedia.org, thepatrioticvanguard.com, news.sl and apctimes.com. We also
employed a former Sierra Leonean minister as our consultant. With his help, we were able
to establish the ethnicity of all 1109 government-ministers in our data.
   Many ministers in Sierra Leone (including several of the country’s main political leaders)
have mixed ethnic backgrounds, and we tried to reflect this fact in our data whenever we
had the relevant information. For example, our sources indicated that Andrew Juxon-Smith
(chairman of the National Reformation Council in 1967) had Creole, Sherbro and Mende
ancestry, and we coded him as “1/3 Creole, 1/3 Sherbro, 1/3 Mende”. Likewise, Siaka
Stevens (prime minister and president in 1968-1985) had a Limba father and a Vai mother,
while Ahmad Tejan Kabbah (president in 1996 and 1998-2004) had a Mandingo father and
a Mende mother. We therefore defined Stevens and Kabbah as “half Limba, half Mende”
and “half Mandingo, half Mende” respectively.



                                              55
5.13        Tanzania

5.13.1      Governments

       Our data for Tanzania contains information from 40 lists of governments starting from
the government in April 1965 headed by Julius Nyerere and ending with the government in
August 2004 headed by Benjamin Mkapa.13 Our data includes at least one list of government
for every calendar year between 1965 and 2004, except for 1972 and 1974. In two calendar
years the data includes more than one list of government. In 1970 it includes the lists of
governments in both April and November, while in 1973 it includes the lists of governments
in both January and December.
       The two governments in 1970 are both headed by Julius Nyerere. Although the No-
vember government has five more ministers, a large number of ministers appear in both
governments. Thus, in order to avoid duplication, researchers may want to use only the
November government in the analysis. The two governments in 1973 are also headed by
Nyerere. The ministerial composition of these two governments is also quite similar. In this
case, in order to avoid using two similar lists of governments for the same year, one could
use the list of January 1973 as a substitute for the missing list of 1972 (assuming that the
ministerial composition in December 1972 was the same as in January 1973) or the list of
December 1973 as a substitute for the missing list of 1974 (assuming that the ministerial
composition in December 1973 was the same as in January 1974).
       Tanzania had three leaders between 1965 and 2004, and the governments headed by each
of these leaders are represented in our data.


5.13.2      Ministers

           In addition to the country’s presidents, first and second vice-presidents, prime min-
isters and deputy prime-ministers, most members of the Tanzania’s governments throughout
  13
    We also collected data about the ethnicity of ministers in Tanganyika before its unification with Zanzibar
in 1964. However, since the ethnic composition of the Tanganyika’s and the Tanzania’s governments is not
directly comparable, we exclude the Tanganyika’s governments from our dataset.


                                                     56
the years have the titles of “ministers”. In some years, there are also several “ministers of
state” or “junior ministers”. All these individuals are included in our data.
         The size of Tanzania’s governments varies between 16 and 22 ministers in 1965-1971,
and between 24 and 32 ministers in 1972 and 1991. It then briefly falls to 20-21 ministers in
1992-1995, before rising back to 26-27 ministers in 1996-1998 and 29-30 ministers in 1999-
2004.
   Overall, our data for Tanzania contains 1016 records of government-ministers with the
average of 25.4 ministers per government. We have information for 158 individual ministers
with each minister appearing on average in 6.43 lists of government.


5.13.3    Ethnic groups

   Our list of ethnic groups in Tanzania consists of 37 ethnic categories, including the
residual “Other” category. Table 13 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the
country’s population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include. Our
ethnic classification is significantly more detailed than the classifications of Alesina et al.
(2003) and Fearon (2003) who list 18 and 23 ethnic groups respectively.
   Some of our ethnic categories are very similar to those used by both Alesina et al. and
Fearon. These categories include Ha, Haya, Yao, Gogo, Iramba, Masai and Luo. Following
Fearon, we list Nyamwezi and Sukuma, and Chagga and Pare as separate ethnic groups
instead of uniting them into Nyamwezi-Sukuma and Chagga-Pare categories as in Alesina
et al. We also split Alesina et al.’s inclusive Hehe and Nyakyusa categories into separate
Hehe and Bena, and Nyakyusa and Kinga ethnic groups respectively. In contrast, we follow
Alesina et al. and list the Swahili ethnic group instead of using Fearon’s narrower regional
categories such as Zanzibar Island and Pemba Island.
   An important advantage of our ethnic classification is that we disaggregate the large
“Other” categories of Alesina et al. and Fearon, which constitute 15 and 20 percent of
Tanzania’s population in their respective datasets. As a result, we explicitly list several


                                              57
ethnic groups which are absent from at least one of these alternative classifications. These
ethnic groups include Rundi, Kuria, Zigula, Luguru, Zaramo, Shambala, Makonde, Makua,
Turu, Rangi, Sagara, Ngindo, Pogora, Nyiha, Fipa, Iraqw and Arabs. Some of these ethnic
categories themselves combine a number of even smaller groups based on the information
provided by Morrison et al. (1989), Murdock (1959, 1967), and ethnologue.com.


5.13.4    Ethnicity of Ministers

   In addition to the WBIS, the sources that we used to determine the ethnicity of ministers
in Tanzania included Bakari (2001), Cliﬀe (1967), Iliﬀe (1979), Lawrence (2009), Mwakikagile
(2006), Nyang’oro (2004) and wikipedia.org. We also employed two Tanzanian consultants
with expertise on their country’s political history. With the help of our consultants, we were
able to establish the ethnicity of all 1016 government-ministers in our data.
         The ethnic origin of Tanzania’s third president, Benjamin Mkapa, is quite ambiguous.
Some of our sources describe Mkapa as ethnic Ngoni. Other sources indicate that he is
a Makua. Still other sources claim that Mkapa is actually a Machinga (a subgroup of
Makonde). Given this ambiguity, we asked our consultants to use their political contacts
in Tanzania and verify Mkapa’s ethnicity. In the end of their research, both consultants
independently concluded that Mkapa was an ethnic Makua, and we therefore coded him as
such in our data.
         We classify the vast majority of ministers from Zanzibar as ethnic Swahili. We mean
this term to include the indigenous population of Zanzibar and Pemba islands as well as the
descendants of former slaves (regardless of their ethnic origin). All these people sometimes
call themselves Shirazi and together constitute the bulk of Zanzibar’s population. They also
tend to have some Arab blood due to their intermingling with members of the ruling Arab
elite before the Zanzibar revolution of 1964. In contrast, our Swahili category is meant to
exclude more recent immigrants from mainland Tanzania to Zanzibar and the small groups
of pure Arab or Indian descent.


                                             58
         For example, Abeid Karume (president of Zanzibar and first vice-president of Tanza-
nia in 1965-1971) was the son of a slave woman from Ruanda-Urundi. We therefore classify
him as Swahili. In contrast, Tanzania’s second president, Ali Hassan Mwinyi, is an ethnic
Zaramo who was born in the mainland but moved to Zanzibar in his youth and made his
political career there. As a recent immigrant from mainland Tanzania, Karume is coded
as Zaramo in our data. Similarly, we classify two Zanzibari politicians as ethnic Nyamwezi:
Omar Ramadhan Mapuri (minister of state in the prime minister’s oﬃce in 2001-2003, minis-
ter of home aﬀairs in 2004) and Abubaker Yusuf Mgumia (minister of tourism in 1991-1992).
Both Mapuri and Mgumia have Nyamwezi parents, but lived and worked in Zanzibar.


5.14        Togo

5.14.1      Governments

   Our data for Togo contains information from 45 lists of governments starting from the
government in June 1960 headed by Sylvanus Olympio and ending with the government
in August 2004 headed by Gnassingbe Eyadema. Our data includes at least one list of
government for every calendar year between 1960 and 2004, except for 1975. In one calendar
year the data includes more than one list of government: in 1970 it includes the lists of
governments in both April and December. The two governments in 1970 are both headed
by Gnassingbe Eyadema. They also have exactly the same ministerial composition, both
in terms of the ministers’ names and the portfolios they hold. Therefore, in order to avoid
duplication, researchers may want to use only one of these two lists of governments in the
analysis.
   Our data for Togo includes the governments headed by 3 of the 4 leaders who ruled the
country between 1960 and 2004. Only the government of Kleber Dadjo who served as an
interim president of Togo in early 1967 is not represented.




                                             59
5.14.2    Ministers

         Between 1960 and 2004, the governments of Togo always include a president and
a group of “ministers”. In some years, they also include a “vice-president” (in 1966) or a
“prime minister” (in 1992-2004), one or two “ministers of state” (in 1960-1962 and 1996-
1998) and an occasional “secretary of state”, “minister-delegate”, “high commissioner” or
“special advisor to the president”. The holders of all these titles are included in our dataset
of ministers.
         The Togolese governments grow in size over time. They have between 8 and 12 min-
isters in 1960-1971, between 13 and 15 ministers in 1972-1977, between 15 and 19 ministers
in 1978-1991, between 19 and 22 ministers in 1992-1997, and between 21 and 27 ministers
in 1998-2004.
   In total, our data for Togo contains 757 records of government-ministers with the average
of 16.82 ministers per government. We have information for 199 individual ministers with
each minister appearing on average in 3.8 lists of government.


5.14.3    Ethnic Groups

   Our list of Togo’s ethnic groups consists of 20 ethnic categories, including the residual
“Other” category. Table 14 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the country’s
population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include. We list more
ethnic groups than either Fearon (2003) or Alesina et al. (2003) who list 12 and 6 ethnic
groups respectively.
   Even so, our ethnic classification for Togo is quite similar to the classification of Fearon
and includes the same major categories such as Ewe, Kabre, Tem, Moba, Gurma, Basari,
Nawdm (also called Losso), Aja, Akposso and Konkomba. We depart from Fearon in only
two respects. First, we split his Ouatchi-Mina category into separate Ouatchi and Mina
ethnic groups, which are often considered to be distinct (see, e.g. Murdock (1959)). Second,
we significantly reduce the size of Fearon’s residual “Other” category (from 19.5 percent

                                              60
of the country’s population in his data to 5.5 percent in our data) by explicitly listing the
following 7 ethnic groups: Fon, Lama, Ana, Fulani, Akebu, Anufo and Ngangam.


5.14.4      Ethnicity of Ministers

   Besides the WBIS, the main sources that helped us to identify the ethnicity of ministers
in Togo were Brown (1980), Marguerat (2001, 2003), diastode.org, iciLome.com, and various
issues of Africa Confidential and La Lettre du Continent. In addition, we employed two
Togolese consultants: a former minister and a veteran political journalist. With the help of
our consultants, we were able to establish the ethnicity of all 757 government-ministers in
our data.
   There is some controversy about the ethnic origin of two of the country’s presidents. With
respect to Nicolas Grunitzky, it is well known that his father was Polish, but the ethnicity of
his mother remains ambiguous. Some sources say that Grunitzky’s mother came from Ana
(Yoruba) royal family in Atakpame, while other sources claim that she was a Kabre or even
an Ewe. We asked the opinion of our consultants on this issue and both of them indicated
that Grunitzky’s mother was an Ana. Therefore, we coded Grunitzky as “half Ana, half
Other”. In the case of Sylvanus Olympio, some sources misleadingly describe him as Ewe,
because he led a pan-Ewe political movement which aimed at uniting the main Ewe group
with the related Ouatchi, Mina, Fon and Aja peoples. Yet, Olympio is known to be an ethnic
Mina, and we classify him as such in our data.
   Olympio’s example raised a more general concern that some of our sources could have
used the term “Ewe” too broadly to describe the ministers who were actually ethnic Ouatchi,
Mina, Fon or Adja. To address this issue, we asked our consultants to verify the ethnic
identity of all ministers described as Ewe by our other sources. In most cases, the consultants
agreed with our original Ewe classification, but a few ministers had to be reclassified as either
Ouatchi or Mina. In a small number of cases, our consultants disagreed whether a minister
was an Ewe or a Ouatchi. We coded these ministers as “half Ewe, half Ouatchi” in our data.


                                               61
5.15     Uganda

5.15.1   Governments

   Our data for Uganda contains information from 42 lists of governments starting from
the government in May 1963 headed by Milton Obote and ending with the government in
August 2004 headed by Yoweri Museveni. Our data includes at least one list of government
for every calendar year between 1963 and 2004, except for 1972 and 1974. In two calendar
years the data includes more than one list of government. In 1970 it includes the lists of
governments in both April and December, while in 1973 it includes the lists of governments
in both January and December.
   The two governments in 1970 are both headed by Milton Obote. They also have exactly
the same ministerial composition, both in terms of the ministers’ names and the portfolios
they hold. Therefore, in order to avoid duplication, researchers may want to use only one
of these two lists of governments in the analysis. The two governments in 1973 are both
headed by Idi Amin. However, the ministerial composition of these two governments is very
diﬀerent, and using both of them in the analysis will not create much duplication. Still,
in order to avoid using two lists of governments for the same year, one could use the list
of January 1973 as a substitute for the missing list of 1972 (assuming that the ministerial
composition in December 1972 was the same as in January 1973) or the list of December
1973 as a substitute for the missing list of 1974 (assuming that the ministerial composition
in December 1973 was the same as in January 1974).
   Overall, our data for Uganda contains information about the governments headed by 6
of the 7 leaders who ruled the country between 1963 and 2004. Only the government of Tito
Okello, who was in power in late 1985 and early 1986, is not represented.




                                            62
5.15.2       Ministers

           Besides the country’s presidents, vice-presidents, prime ministers and deputy prime-
ministers, most members of the Uganda’s governments throughout the years have the titles
of “ministers”. In some years, the governments also include several “ministers of state”,
an “attorney general”, a “secretary to the treasury” or a “deputy minister”. The 1980
government headed by Paulo Muwanga is slightly diﬀerent from the rest. In addition to the
usual “Cabinet of Ministers”, it includes the “Military Commission of the Uganda National
Liberation Front” with its chairman (Muwanga himself), vice-chairman and three ordinary
“members”.
       The size of Uganda’s governments varies between 14 and 21 ministers in 1963-1978, but
then rises to 23 ministers in 1979, 29 ministers in 1980, 33-37 ministers in 1981-1087 and
43-44 ministers in 1988-1990. It then drops to 20-22 minisers in 1991-1998, before rising
again to 24-30 ministers in 1999-2004.
       On the whole, our data for Uganda contains 1037 records of government-ministers with
the average of 24.69 ministers per government. We have information for 205 individual
ministers with each minister appearing on average in 5.06 lists of government.


5.15.3       Ethnic Groups

       Our list of Uganda’s ethnic groups consists of 26 ethnic categories, including the residual
“Other” category. Table 15 shows the names of these groups, the percent of the country’s
population that they represent and some of the subgroups that they include.
       Our ethnic classification for Uganda is almost identical to the linguistic classification of
                                                                     14
Alesina et al. (2003), who list 28 linguistic categories.                 25 of the categories that we use
are exactly the same as those listed by Alesina et al., but we prefer to include the small
Amba and Ruli groups into the “Other” category instead of listing them separately. Our
  14
    Unlike their linguistic classification, Alesina et al.’s ethnic classification for Uganda is not very useful.
It has only 9 ethnic categories, including a very large (30 percent of population) “Other” category.




                                                       63
classification is also similar to (and slightly more detailed than) the ethnic classification of
Fearon, who lists 20 ethnic groups. We include all the groups used by Fearon, but in addition
also list several smaller groups such as Gwere, Nyole, Samia, Ndo, Kumam and Rundi.


5.15.4      Ethnicity of Ministers

    In addition to the WBIS, we used a large number of sources to identify the ethnicity of
ministers in Uganda. Among the more important of them were Hooper and Pirouet (1989),
Jørgensen (1981), Kahigiriza (2001), Kasfir (1976), Kiwanuka (1979), Mutibwa (1992), al-
lafrica.com, observer.ug, ugandansatheart.org and various issues of Africa Confidential. In
the end, we were able to establish the ethnicity of 1034 of the 1037 government-ministers in
our data.
    For a small number of ministers, our sources disagreed about their ethnicity. For example,
Juma Abdalla Oris (who held several ministerial positions between 1975 and 1978) was
alternatively described by our sources as either an Aringa (a subgroup of Lugbara) or a
Madi. In this case, the preponderance of the evidence convinced us that Oris was a Madim
and we coded him as such in our data. When the conflicting sources appeared to be equally
reliable, we chose to split the minister’s ethnic assignment between the two ethnic groups
involved. Thus, we coded Raphael Nshekanabo (minister of public service and cabinet aﬀairs
in 1975-1978) as “half Ankole, half Kiga” and Barnabas Kili (minister of education in 1973-
1978) as “half Kakwa, half Lugbara”.
    To conclude, Table 16 contains the set of summary statistics for all countries.



6     Implications and Conclusions

    A substantial body of research, in particular the influential work of Acemoglu, Johnson,
and Robinson (2001), Acemoglu and Robinson (2005, 2012), has been emphasizing the im-
portance of political and institutional constraints in the process of economic development.



                                              64
One of the main contributions of this stream of research has been to highlight how an
approach solely focused on economic constraints has proven insuﬃcient to the study of eco-
nomic development. Instead, understanding political institutions and equilibria has proven
an extremely useful complement to the economic analysis.

   Our work follows this direction. Fewer regions of the world have experienced deeper
political and economic failures than Sub-Saharan Africa (Easterly and Levine, 1997). Yet
our understanding of African politics and political bargaining processes remains an issue
still impervious to academic researchers and policymakers alike. This is mostly due to
the natural opacity of political systems relying on ‘extractive’ institutions and secretive
elites. Autocracies are not governments notorious for their transparency. At the opposite,
autocracies thrive in the secrecy of their inner operations. This means, for example, that
international organizations or donor countries often negotiate with political counterparties
obeying to incentives and operating within political environments that those international
organizations or donor countries only partially understand. A usable mapping of power
relations within African countries would allow a better delineation of the political fault lines
across ethnicities. This would also help in predicting what type of political equilibria and
alliances one may expect in the future. For these predictive exercises, however, we need data.
Ours is an attempt at providing hard information useful in opening the black box of ethnic
politics in Africa.

   The open research questions for which these data may be relevant are aplenty.

   · Is the nature of African political failures result of systematic exclusion of specific ethnic
enclaves in the population? Or is extractive African politics the result of a skewed redistrib-
utions of rents within ethnic groups (say, between the elite and the rank-and-file within each
group)?

   · Is personalistic autocracy the root cause of many African political failures or there is
something more subtle than sheer ethnic clientelism at play in the tug of war between ethnic

                                               65
constituencies in government and in the opposition?

   · What are the political constraints that autocratic leaders face in their bargaining process
vis-a-vis coalition members and/or vis-a-vis opposition groups in Africa?

   · What type of dynamics are systematically predictive of political collapses or transitions
in African politics? What type of shocks bring down leaders and their ruling co-elites? Can
the telltale signs be detected by changes in power sharing within cabinets beforehand?

   The are also more direct policy questions of relevance for those interested in the process
of economic development that we can begin to study with this data.

   · Which specific ethnic groups are disproportionately more aﬀected by political marginal-
ization and exclusion in African countries?

   · What types of political deals are usually struck between any given set of African ethnic
elites? How that can be of guidance in hindering or favouring specific policy interventions
in the field?

   · What are the economic consequences for the population of political exclusion at the
top?

   · What really happens and what changes in the process of political bargaining within an
African polity when its institutions become more democratic and inclusive? Can one detect
pro-forma changes versus real changes in the process of democratic power sharing?

   The goal of the paper is to provide a complete description and critical discussion of novel
information, which might be useful for future research on the internal political organization
of African emerging democracies, autocracies, and anocracies. Without systematic empir-
ical evidence it is hard to fathom what exactly concepts like “extractive” or “inclusive”
institutions (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012) really mean or imply.


                                              66
   More specifically, this paper presents novel information useful to the analysis of power
sharing among African ethnic elites based on the ethnic composition of ministerial cabinets
since post-colonial independence. We first document the relevance of the executive govern-
ment and its ministers. We discuss the cabinet’s role as a source of patronage and political
rents for its members within African polities, but also as a potential source of internal insta-
bility for national leaders. We critically debate the relative weight of window dressing versus
actual delegation of power in interpreting the cabinet data. We further discuss in detail
the process of ethnic subdivision of the ministerial posts and the complexity of constructing
accurate measurements of the ethnic membership of cabinets in each country in our sample.
   Future research should emphasize the process of power sharing and its consequences on
political stability for Africa. For instance, Morrison, Mitchell, and Paden (1989) underline
the role of power sharing and civil unrest by stating “often a response on the part of com-
munal groups in national populations to elite instability which either fails to bring about a
reapportionment of ethnic representation in government or a redistribution of other goods”,
but systematic empirical evidence remains scant.
   Although by far not a perfect proxy, we believe the use of government posts may provide
useful insights in the inner mechanisms of otherwise relatively opaque political systems.
We plan to present our first insights in Francois, Rainer, and Trebbi (2012a) and Francois,
Rainer, and Trebbi (2012b), which this article complements. Francois, Rainer, and Trebbi
(2012a) presents an analysis of the main patterns of allocation of cabinet positions to the
various ethnic groups and oﬀers a theory of the main constraints in the allocation of political
influence based the threats facing the autocratic leader. Francois, Rainer, and Trebbi (2012b)
focuses instead on the process of political transitions and succession in Africa.




                                              67
REFERENCES
 [1] Aboagye, Festus B, 1999, ECOMOG: A Sub-Regional Experience in Conflict Resolu-
     tion, Management and Peacekeeping in Liberia, Accra, Sedco Publishing

 [2] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. 2001. "The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation" American Economic Review,
     91(5): 1369-1401.

 [3] Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2001. "A Theory of Political Transitions"
     American Economic Review, 91(4): 938-963.

 [4] Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2005. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
     Democracy. Columbia University Press, New York.

 [5] Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail. Random House, New
     York.

 [6] Adjei, Mike, 1994, Death and Pain, Rawlings’ Ghana: The Inside Story, Black Line

 [7] Aghion, Philippe, Alberto Alesina, and Francesco Trebbi. 2004. "Endogenous Political
     Institutions." Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(2), May.

 [8] Agossou, Christian, 2002, “Carte de Localisation au Benin des Partis Politiques Dom-
     inants a Forte Base Ethnique”, Ethno-Net Africa Working Paper

 [9] Ahluwalia, D. Pal, 1996, Post-Colonialism and the Politics of Kenya, New York: Nova
     Science Publishers

[10] Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeshauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat, Romain
     Wacziarg, 2003, “Fractionalization”, Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2): 155-194

[11] Allman, Jean Marie, 1993, The Quills of the Porcupine: Asante Nationalism in an
     Emergent Ghana, University of Wisconsin Press

[12] Amoussou-Yeye, Denis, 1999, “La Dimension Ethnique Dans la Dynamique Socio-
     Politique du Benin du Renouveau Democratique”, African Journal of Political Science,
     4 (1), 127-145

[13] Ansolabehere, Stephen, Snyder, James, Aaron B. Strauss, and Michael M. Ting. 2005.
     "Voting Weights and Formateur Advantages in the Formation of Coalition Govern-
     ments" American Journal of Political Science, 49(3): 550-563.

[14] Anyangwe, Carlson, 2009, “Tribal Cabals and the Monopoly of Political Power in La
     Republique du Cameroun: The Origin of the ‘Essingan’ Mafia and the Auto-Defense
     Militia”, unpublished manuscript

[15] Arriola, Leonardo R. 2009. "Patronage and Political Stability in Africa" Comparative
     Political Studies, 42(10), 1339-62.


                                          68
[16] Artigue, Pierre, 1961, Qui Sont Les Leaders Congolais?, Éditions Europe-Afrique

[17] Assensoh, A.B. and Yvette M. Alex-Assensoh, 2001, African Military History and
     Politics: Coups and Ideological Incursions, 1900-Present, Palgrave Macmillan

[18] Atlas Narodov Mira (Atlas of the Peoples of the World), 1964, Moscow, Glavnoe
     Upravlenie Geodezii i Kartografii

[19] Ayissi, Anatole N. and Robin Edward Poulton, 2006, Bound to Cooperate: Conflict,
     Peace and People in Sierra Leone, United Nations Publications

[20] Bah, Thierno, 1996, Mon Combat Pour La Guinée, Karthala Editions

[21] Bakari, Mohammed Ali, 2001, The Democratization Process in Zanzibar: A Retarded
     Transition, Institut Fur Afrika-Kunde

[22] Barkan Joel D. 2008. "Legislatures on the Rise?" Journal of Democracy 19.2 124-137

[23] Bates, Robert. 1981. Markets and States in Tropical Africa: The Poltical Basis of
     Agricultural Policies. University of California Press.

[24] Bayart, Jean-François. 1993. The State in Africa: The Politics of the Belly. London:
     Longman Publishing Group.

[25] Baynham, Simon, 1985, “Divide et Impera: Civilian Control of the Military in Ghana’s
     Second and Third Republics”, The Journal of Modern African Studies, 23(4), 623-642

[26] Baynham, Simon, 1988, The Military and Politics in Nkrumah’s Ghana, Westview
     Press

[27] Bazenguissa-Ganga, Rémy, 1997, Les Voies du Politique au Congo: Essai de Sociologie
     Historique, Karthala Editions

[28] Bennett, Valerie Plave, 1973, “The Motivation for Military Intervention: The Case of
     Ghana”, The Western Political Quarterly, 26(4), 659-674

[29] Berman, Bruce. 1998. "Ethnicity, Patronage and the African State: The Politics of
     Uncivil Nationalism." African Aﬀairs 97:305-341.

[30] Boix, C. and M. Svolik, 2010. "The Foundations of Limited Authoritarian Government:
     Institutions and Power-sharing in Dictatorships" mimeo, Princeton University

[31] Brown, David, 1980, “Borderline Politics in Ghana: the National Liberation Movement
     of Western Togoland”, Journal of Modern African Studies, 18, 575—609

[32] Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Alastair Smith, Randolph Siverson, and James D. Morrow.
     2003. The Logic of Political Survival. MIT Press, Cambridge.

[33] Burgess, Robin, Remi Jedwab, Edward Miguel, and Ameet Morjaria. 2010. "Our Turn
     To Eat: The Political Economy of Roads in Kenya." mimeo, LSE.

                                          69
[34] Cartwright, John R., 1970, Politics in Sierra Leone, 1947-67, Toronto: University of
     Toronto Press

[35] Cartwright, John R., 1978, Political Leadership in Sierra Leone, Toronto and Buﬀalo:
     University of Toronto Press

[36] Clark, John Frank, 2008, The Failure of Democracy in the Republic of Congo, Lynne
     Rienner Publishers , Boulder, CO

[37] Clarke Kevin A., and Randall Stone. 2008. "Democracy and the Logic of Political
     Survival." American Political Science Review 102: 387—92.

[38] Cliﬀe, Lionel, (ed.), 1967, One Party Democracy: The 1965 Tanzania General Elec-
     tions, Nairobi: East African Publishing House

[39] Cox, Thomas S., 1976, Civil-Military Relations in Sierra Leone: A Case Study of
     African Soldiers in Politics, Harvard University Press

[40] De Villers, Gauthier and Jean-Claude Willame, 1999, République Démocratique du
     Congo: Chronique Politique d’un Entre-Deux-Guerres, Octobre 1996-Juillet 1998,
     Paris: L’Harmattan

[41] Diamond, Larry. 2008. "The rule of law versus the Big Man" Journal of Democracy
     19.2, 138-149

[42] Diermeier, Daniel and Antonio Merlo. 2004. "An Empirical Investigation of Coalitional
     Barganing Procedures" Journal of Public Economics, 88(3-4): 783-797.

[43] Diermeier, Daniel and Randy Stevenson. 1999. "Cabinet Survival and Competing
     Risks" American Journal of Political Science, 43(5): 1051-1098.

[44] Diermeier, Daniel, Hulya Eraslan, and Antonio Merlo. 2003. "A Structural Model of
     Government Formation" Econometrica, 71(1): 27-70.

[45] Easterly, William R. and Levine, Ross. 1997. "Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and
     Ethnic Divisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1997, 112(4), pp. 1203-
     50.

[46] Egorov, G. and Sonin, K. .2011., Dictators and Their Viziers: Endogenizing the
     Loyalty-Competence Trade-oﬀ. Journal of the European Economic Association, 9: 903—
     930

[47] Ellis, Stephen, 2001, The Mask of Anarchy: The Destruction of Liberia and the Reli-
     gious Dimension of an African Civil War, New York: New York University Press

[48] Études Africaines du C.R.I.S.P, 1969-1972, Centre de Recherche et d’Information
     Socio-Politiques

[49] Études Congolaises, 1961-1969, Centre de Recherche et d’Information Socio-Politiques


                                           70
[50] Falola, Toyin and Ann Genova, 2009, Historical Dictionary of Nigeria, Scarecrow Press

[51] Fearon, James D. 2003. "Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country" Journal of Eco-
     nomic Growth, 8(2): 195-222

[52] Fearon, James D., and David D. Laitin. 2003. "Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War."
     American Political Science Review 97:75—90.

[53] Fish M. Steven and Matthew Kroenig. 2009. The Handbook of National Legislatures:
     A Global Survey New York: Cambridge University Press.

[54] Franck, Raphael and Ilia Rainer. 2009. "Does the Leader’s Ethnicity Matter? Ethnic
     Favoritism, Education and Health in Sub-Saharan Africa." forthcoming, American
     Journal of Political Science.

[55] Francois, Patrick, Ilia Rainer, and Francesco Trebbi. 2012a “How Is Power Shared in
     Africa?”, mimeo UBC.

[56] Francois, Patrick, Ilia Rainer, and Francesco Trebbi. 2012b “Government Formation
     in Autocracies ”, mimeo UBC.

[57] Fyle, Magbaily C., 2006, Historical Dictionary of Sierra Leone, Scarecrow Press

[58] Gandhi, Jennifer. 2008. Political Institutions under Dictatorship. New York: Cam-
     bridge University Press.

[59] Gauze, René, Virginia Thompson and Richard Adloﬀ, 1973, The Politics of Congo-
     Brazzaville, Hoover Institution Press

[60] Geddes, Barbara. 2003. Paradigms and sand castles: Research design in comparative
     politics. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

[61] Gurr, Ted Robert. 1993. Minorities at risk, A global view of ethnopolitical conflicts,
     Washington, D.C., United States Institute of Peace Press.

[62] Hazoumé, Guy Landry, 1972, Idéologies Tribalistes et Nation en Afrique: le Cas Da-
     homéen, Présence Africaine

[63] Hooper, Ed and Louise Pirouet, 1989, Uganda, Minority Rights Group Report

[64] Horowitz, D. 1985. Ethnic Groups in Conflict. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
     of California Press.

[65] Iliﬀe, John, 1979, A Modern History of Tanganyika, Cambridge University Press

[66] International Crisis Group, 2000, “Scramble for the Congo: Anatomy of an Ugly War”,
     ICG Africa Report #26, Nairobi/Brussels

[67] International Crisis Group, 2008, “Kenya in Crisis”, ICG Africa Report #137,
     Nairobi/Brussels

                                           71
[68] International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance. 2007. Report on Po-
     litical Parties in Africa. Stockholm.
[69] Jørgensen, Jan Jelmert, 1981, Uganda: A Modern History, Croom Helm
[70] Kahigiriza James, 2001, Bridging the Gap: Struggling Against Sectarianism and Vio-
     lence in Ankole and Uganda, Kampala: Fountain Publishers
[71] Kappel, Robert, Werner Korte and R. Friedegund Mascher, 1986, Liberia, Institut für
     Afrika-Kunde
[72] Kasara, Kimuli. 2007. "Tax Me If You Can: Ethnic Geography, Democracy and the
     Taxation of Agriculture in Africa." American Political Science Review 101: 159-172.
[73] Kasfir, Nelson, 1976, The Shrinking Political Arena: Participation and Ethnicity in
     African Politics, with a Case Study of Uganda, Berkeley University Press
[74] Kennedy, Arthur, 2009, Chasing the Elephant into the Bush: The Politics of Compla-
     cency, Author House
[75] Khapoya, Vincent B., 1980, “Kenya under Moi: Continuity or Change?”, Africa Today,
     27 (1), 17-32
[76] Kifordu, Henry. 2010. "Political Elite and the Vicissitudes of Accountability in Nigeria"
     Politikon, 37(2—3), 287—309
[77] Kiwanuka, Semakula, 1979, Amin and the Tragedy of Uganda, Weltforum Verlag
[78] Kudamatsu, Masayuki. 2009. "Ethnic Favoritism: Micro Evidence from Guinea." IIES
     Working Paper.
[79] Ladouceur, Paul Andre, 1979, Chiefs and Politicians: The Politics of Regionalism in
     Northern Ghana, London: Longman
[80] Lafargue, Jerome, 2009, The General Elections in Kenya, 2007, Mkuki Na Nyota Pub-
     lishers
[81] Langer, Arnim. 2004. "Horizontal inequalities and violent conflict: The case of Côte
     d’Ivoire" CRISE Working Paper No. 13.
[82] Lawrence, David, 2009, Tanzania: The Land, Its People and Contemporary Life, New
     Africa Press
[83] Lewis, Paul H. 1978. "Salazar’s Ministerial Elite, 1932-1968" Journal of Politics, 40:
     622-47.
[84] Lowenkopf, Martin, 1976, Politics in Liberia: The Conservative Road to Development,
     Stanford, Hoover Institution Press
[85] MacGaﬀey, Janet, 1987, Entrepreneurs and Parasites: The Struggle for Indigenous
     Capitalism in Zaire, Cambridge University Press

                                             72
 [86] Magaloni, Beatriz. 2010. "Credible Power-Sharing and the Longevity of Authoritarian
      Rule." Comparative Political Studies 41(4/5):715—741.

 [87] Marguerat, Yves, 2001, “La Voie Royale vers la Promotion et... vers L’Exode : le Rôle
      du Cours Complémentaire de Lomé dans la Formation des Elites Togolaises et la Place
      des Ressortissants du Sud-Est (1922-1945)”, in N. L. Gayibor (ed.), Le Tricentenaire
      d’Aneho..., vol. 2, pp. 587-605

 [88] Marguerat, Yves, 2003, “Les Stratégies Scolaires au Togo à l’Epoque du Mandate
      Français. Le Cours Complémentaire de Lomé et la Formation des Elites Modernes”,
      Cahiers d’Études Africaines, 42(169-170), 389-408

 [89] Menthong, Helene-Laure, 1998, “Vote et Communautarisme au Cameroun: Un Vote
      de Cœur, de Sang et de Raison”, Politique Africaine, 69, 40-52

 [90] Merlo, Antonio. 1997. "Bargaining Over Governments in a Stochastic Environment"
      Journal of Political Economy, 105: 101-131.

 [91] Missié, Jean-Pierre, 2008, “Ethnicité et Territorialité: Deux Modes du Vécu Identitaire
      chez les Teke du Congo-Brazzaville”, Cahiers d’Etudes Africaines, 192, 835-864

 [92] Montalvo J. G. Marta Reynal-Querol. 2005. "Ethnic polarization, potential conflict
      and civil war", American Economic Review, 95 (3), 796-816.

 [93] Moody-Stuart, George. 1997. Grand Corruption: How Business Bribes Damage Devel-
      oping Countries Oxford:World View Publishing.

 [94] Morrison, Donald George, Robert Cameron Mitchell and John N. Paden, 1989, Black
      Africa: A Comparative Handbook, Macmillan Reference

 [95] Mulligan, C. and K. Tsui. 2008. "Causes and Consequences of Political Competitive-
      ness" mimeo University of Chicago.

 [96] Murdock, George Peter, 1959, Africa: Its Peoples and Their Culture History, New
      York: McGraw-Hill

 [97] Murdock, George Peter, 1967, Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary, Pittsburgh: The
      University of Pittsburgh Press

 [98] Mutibwa, Phares Mukasa, 1992, Uganda Since Independence: A Story of Unfulfilled
      Hopes, Hurst

 [99] Mwakikagile, Godfrey, 2006, Nyerere and Africa: End of an Era, New Africa Press

[100] Myerson, Roger. 2008. "The Autocrat’s Credibility Problem and Foundations of the
      Constitutional State." American Political Science Review 102: 125-39.

[101] Ndombet, Wilson-André, 2009a, Partis politiques et unité nationale au Gabon: 1957-
      1989, Karthala, Paris


                                             73
[102] Ndombet, Wilson-André, 2009b, Renouveau démocratique et pouvoir au Gabon, 1990-
      1993, Karthala, Paris

[103] Nigeria, 1967, Unity in Diversity, Federal Ministry of Information

[104] Norris, Pippa and Robert Mattes. 2003. ‘Does Ethnicity Determine Support for the
      Governing Party?’, Afrobarometer Paper no. 26, March.

[105] Nugent, Paul, 1995, Big Men, Small Boys and Politics in Ghana, New York: Pinter

[106] Nyang’oro, Julius E., 2004, “Ethnic Structure, Inequality and Governance of the Pub-
      lic Sector in Tanzania”, United Nations Research Institute for Social Development
      Working Paper

[107] O’Toole, Thomas and Janice E. Baker, 2005, Historical Dictionary of Guinea, Scare-
      crow Press

[108] Ogbontiba, Femi Ade, 1997, The Glory of the Yoruba Race: Past, Present, and Future:
      Challenges of the 21st Century, Global Books & Publications

[109] Olson, James Stuart, 1996, The Peoples of Africa: An Ethnohistorical Dictionary,
      Westport, Conn.: Greenwood

[110] Omasombo, Jean Tshonda and Erik Kennes, 2006, République Démocratique du
      Congo: Biographies des Acteurs de la Transition: Juin 2003-Juin 2006, Centre
      d’Etudes Politiques

[111] Osaghae, Eghosa E. 1989. "The Federal Cabinet, 1951-1984." In Federal Character and
      Federalism in Nigeria, edited by Peter Ekeh and Eghosa Osaghae. Ibadan: Heinemann
      Educational Books.

[112] Osaghae, Eghosa E., 1996, Ethnicity, Class and the Struggle for State Power in Liberia,
      CODESRIA, Dakar

[113] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 2007. The Economic Eﬀects of Constituions.
      MIT Press, Cambridge.

[114] Posner, Daniel 2004. "Measuring Ethnic Fractionalization in Africa." American Journal
      of Political Science, 48: 849—863.

[115] Posner, Daniel and Daniel Young. 2007. "The Institutionalization of Political Power
      in Africa." Journal of Democracy 18(3).

[116] Posner, Daniel. 2005. Institutions and Ethnic Politics in Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press.

[117] République du Bénin, Ministère de la Famille et de l’Enfant, 2008, Répertoire des
      Femmes Leaders au Bénin



                                             74
[118] Roessler, Philip. 2011. "The Enemy Within: Personal Rule, Coups, and Civil War in
      Africa" World Politics, 63(2), 300-46.
[119] Rupture-Solidarité, 1999, Congo-Brazzaville: Dérives Politiques, Catastrophe Human-
      itaire, Désirs de Paix, Karthala Editions
[120] Salih, Mohamed. 2003. African Political Parties: Evolution, Institutionalization and
      Governance. London: Pluto Press.
[121] Siollun, Max, 2009, Oil, Politics and Violence: Nigeria’s Military Coup Culture (1966-
      1976), Algora Publishing
[122] Sklar, Richard L., 1963, Nigerian Political Parties: Power in an Emergent African
      Nation, Princeton University Press
[123] Snyder, James, Michael M. Ting and Stephen Ansolabehere. 2005. "Legislative Bar-
      gaining Under Weighted Voting" American Economic Review, 95(4): 981-1004.
[124] Southall, Roger. 2005. Opposition and Democracy in South Africa. London and Port-
      land: Frank Cass.
[125] Svolik, M. 2009. "Power-sharing and Leadership Dynamics in Authoritarian Regimes",
      American Journal of Political Science, 53(2): 477-494.
[126] Thomson, Alex. 2010. An Introduction to African Politics. Routledge.
[127] Throup, David and Charles Hornsby, 1998, Multi-Party Politics in Kenya: The Keny-
      atta and Moi States and the Triumph of the System in the 1992 Election, Oxford:
      James Currey
[128] Toungara, Jeanne Maddox, 1995, “Generational Tensions in the Parti Démocratique
      de Côte d’Ivoire”, African Studies Review, 38 (2), 11-38
[129] Tullock,Gordon. 1987. Autocracy. Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands.
[130] Turner, Thomas, 2007, The Congo Wars: Conflict, Myth and Reality, Zed Books
[131] Wimmer, Andreas, Lars-Erik Cederman, and Brian Min. 2009. "Ethnic Politics and
      Armed Conflict: A Configurational Analysis of a New Global Dataset." American
      Sociological Review 74(2), 316—37.
[132] Wintrobe, Ronald. 1990. "The Tinpot and the Totalitarian: An Economic Theory of
      Dictatorship." American Political Science Review. 84(3), September : 849-72.
[133] Wintrobe, Ronald. 1998. The Political Economy of Dictatorship. Cambridge: Cam-
      bridge University Press.
[134] Young, Crawford, 1968, Introduction à la Politique Congolaise, Centre de Recherche
      et d’Information Socio-Politiques
[135] Young, Crawford, 1979, Introduction à la Politique Zairoise, Presses Universitaires du
      Zaïre

                                            75
Table 1: Ethnic groups in Benin
                                              Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group                     Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Fon-Maxi                                          Fon            21.1      Fon, Maxi (=Mahi)
Goun                                              Goun           12.9      Goun (with Torri and Seto), Tofinu, Wemenu, Def
Adja                                              Adja            8.7      Adja
Aizo                                              Aizo            4.3      Aizo
Mina-Xwla-Xwela-Saxwe-Kotafon-Watch               Mina            7.8      Mina (=Gen=Guin), Xwla (=Pla), Xwela (=Peda), Saxwe (=Sahoue), Kotafon, Watch
Yoruba-Nagot-Idatcha                             Yoruba          12.3      Nagot, Yoruba, Idaasha, Ije (=Dje), Ife, Mokole, Cabe (=Chabe), Idaca (=Idatcha), Ica (=Itcha
Bariba                                           Bariba           8.3      Bariba (=Batombou)
Boko                                              Boko            0.9      Boko
Fulani                                           Fulani           6.9      Fulani (=Peulh), Gando
Somba                                            Somba            6.2      Ditamari, Berba, Waama (=Wao), Mbelime, Otamari, Gourmantche, Natemba, Miyobe, Ngangam
Yom                                               Yom             1.8      Yoa, Taneka
Lukpa-Tem-Kabye-Lama                             Lukpa             2       Lukpa, Tem (=Kotokoli), Kabye, Lama
Anii-Foodo                                        Anii            0.8      Anii (=Basila=Widji-Widji), Foodo (=Bazentche
Dendi-Djerma-Songhai                              Dendi           2.6      Dendi, Djerma, Songhai
Other                                             Other           3.4      Hausa, Malian, French, Italian
                                                                 100




Table 2: Ethnic groups in Cameroon
                                              Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group                     Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Fulani                                            Fulani           9       Fulani=Fulbe=Peul=Peulh=Peuhl=Fulbe=Foulan
Beti-Fang                                         Fang            19       Beti, Boulou, Fang, Eton, Ewondo, Mvele
Bamileke                                        Bamileke         15.5      Bamileke, people from Nde Division: Bamena, Medumba (=Bangangte)
Bamum                                            Bamum             3       Bamum=Bamoun=Bamoum
Bassa-Koko-Douala-Lundu                           Bassa           14       Bassa, Koko, Douala, Kundu, Kossi, Mbo, Bakweri (=Bakwar=Kpe), Sawa, Babimbi, Ngolo, Oroko, Bafo (=Bafaw), Balon
Maka-Dzem-Kaka                                    Maka             5       Maka, Dzem, Kaka, Bangangtu
Tikar                                             Tikar            7       Nsaw (=Nso), Kom, Fut, Ndob, Fungom, Nsungli (=Wimbum), Ngemba, Awing, Babanki, Mendankwe, Oku (but not Widekum
Widekum                                         Widekum            2       Widekum, Momo (incl. Metta), people from Santa subdivision of Mezam divisio
Mbum-Mundang-Tupuri-Fali-Duru-Vere-Chamba         Mbum             5       Mbum, Mundang, Tupuri, Fali, Duru, Vere, Chamba
Mandara-Matakam                                  Mandara           6       Mandara, Matakam (=Mafa), Margi, Daba, Guidar, Bata, Zoulgo (=Mineo)
Kotoko                                           Kotoko            1       Kotoko
Masa-Musgum                                       Masa             2       Masa, Musgum
Shuwa Arabs                                    Shuwa Arabs         1       Shuwa Arabs
Hausa                                             Hausa            1       Hausa
Kanuri                                            Kanuri           1       Kanuri
Gbaya                                             Gbaya           1.7      Gbaya
Mambila-Vute                                     Mambila           1       Mambila, Vute
Tiv                                                Tiv             1       Tiv
Mbam                                              Mbam            2.5      Mbam, Bafia, Banen, Yambassa
Banyang-Ekoi                                     Banyang          1.3      Banyang, Ekoi (=Ejagham), Anyang, people from Manyu divisio
Other                                             Other            1
                                                                 100




Table 3: Ethnic groups in Congo-Brazzaville
                                              Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group                     Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Lari-Kongo-Sundi                                   Lari          28        Lari, Kongo (proper), Sundi
Bembe-Dondo-Kamba-Kugni                          Bembe           15        Bembe, Dondo, Kamba, Kugn
Vili-Yombe-Kabinda                                 Vili           7        Vili, Yombe, Kabinda. Excludes Lumbu
Teke                                              Teke           17        Ngangoulou, Yaka, Lali, Kukuya
Mbochi-Kouoyu-Bobangui                           Mbochi          14        Mbochi, Kouyou, Bobangui, Likwala, Moyi, Makou
Punu-Lumbu-Duma                                   Punu           4.5       Punu (with Bwisi and Lumbu) and Duma (with Bandzabi and Tsangui
Mbete-Kota                                       Mbete           4.5       Mbete (with Obamba, Ndasa) and Kota (Kele)
Sanga                                             Sanga           5        Bondjo, Bunguili, Munzombo, people from Likouala Province (Impfondo, Enyelle, Betou et
Maka                                              Maka            2        Bomwali, Maka, Dzem, Kwele, Fang
                                                  Other           3        Pygmees, West African, Malian, French
                                                                 100
Table 4: Ethnic groups in Cote d'Ivoire
                                                             Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group                                    Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Baule                                                            Baule          21        Baule
Agni                                                             Agni            9        Agni (=Anyi)
Attie                                                            Attie           4        Attie
Abron                                                            Abron           1        Abron
Lagoon                                                          Lagoon           6        Abe, Abidji, Adioukrou, Avikam, Alladian, Ebrie, Nzema (= Nzima = Apollo), Abure, Mbato, Krob
Bete-Dida                                                         Bete           8        Bete, Dida, Godie, Neyo, Bakwe
Ngere-Wobe                                                       Ngere           5        Ngere (=Guere), Wobe, Nyabwa -- together = We
Kru-Grebo-Krahn                                                   Kru            1        Kru, Grebo and Krahn
Lobi                                                             Lobi            2        Lobi
Kulango                                                         Kulango         2.5       Kulango
Senufo                                                          Senufo          12        Djimini and Tagwana
Dan                                                              Dan            6.5       Dan (=Yakuba)
Kweni                                                            Kweni           3        Kweni (=Guro)
Gagu                                                             Gagu            1        Beng, Mwan, Wan
Malinke-Diula                                                   Malinke         16        Mahou (and people in Bafing Region), Bambara, Koyaka (people from Mankono), Diul
Lebanese                                                       Lebanese          1        Lebanese
Other                                                            Other           1        Senegalese, Antillean, Mossi, French, Italian, Peul, Nigerian
                                                                                100




Table 5: Ethnic groups in the Democratic Republic of Congo
                                                             Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group                                    Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Kongo                                                            Kongo          16        Kongo (speaking either Kongo or Kituba), Yombe, Woyo, Ntandu (=Tandu), Nianga, Ndibu, Besi-Ngombe, Mbom
Yaka-Pende-Mbala-Sonde-Suku-Kwese                                 Yaka           4        Yaka, Sonde, Suku, Pelende, Ngongo (with Songo), Pende, Kwese, Holu, Samba, Mbala (with Hungan
Chokwe                                                          Chokwe          1.4       Chokwe
Lunda                                                            Lunda          0.8       Lunda, Salampasu (with Luntu=Konji), Ndembo (=Ndembu
Luba                                                              Luba          17        Luba-Kasai, Lulua, Luba-Katanga, Mulubakat, Sanga (with Yeke), Hemba, Kanyok, Tshiband
Songe                                                            Songe           3        Songe, Binji, Kuba, Kete, Bindi (=Mbagani
Bemba-Aushi-Tabwa-Seba-Lamba                                    Bemba           2.8       Bemba, Aushi, Tabwa, Seba, Lamba, Lala-Bisa
Rega-Bembe-Zimba-Bangubangu                                       Rega          2.8       Rega (=Lega), Bembe, Buyu, Zimba (incl. Kwange), Bangubangu (incl. Kasenga), Holoho
Komo-Budu-Bira                                                   Komo           2.3       Komo (=Kumu), Budu, Bira, Plains Bira, Ndaka, Amba, Bhele, Mbo, Nyali, Bali, Lik
Teke                                                              Teke           1        Teke
Yanzi-Dzing-Mpuono-Sakata                                        Yanzi          1.7       Yanzi, Dzing, Mpuono(=Bunda=Mbunda=Mbun), Boma, Mfin, Tiene (=Tende), Sakat
Bushoong-Lele-Songomeno                                        Bushoong         0.7       Bushoong (=Kuba), Lele, Wongo, Songomeno, Denges
Mongo                                                           Mongo           7.5       Mongo, Nkundu, Ekonda, Ngando, Lalia, Ntomba, Bolia, Sengel
Tetela-Kusu-Kela-Nkutu                                           Tetela         3.2       Tetela, Kusu, Kela, Yela, Nkutu
Ngala-Ngombe-Budja-Bangi-Ngiri                                   Ngala          7.8       Ngala, Ngombe, Budja, Lusengo, Ngiri (with Baloi, Libinza, Likila, Ndobo), Bangi, Balob
Ngbandi                                                         Ngbandi         0.8       Ngbandi, Yakoma
Ngbaka                                                          Ngbaka          2.1       Ngbaka, Nzili (=Gbanziri)
Mbandja-Banda                                                  Mbandja           1        Mbandja, Banda, Mono
Azande                                                          Azande          2.4       Azande, Nzakara, Barambo, Pambia
Mangbetu                                                       Mangbetu         2.7       Mangbetu, Asoa, Lombi, Efe, Lese, Mamvu, Mangbutu, Mvuba, Mayogo, Bangb
Lendu                                                            Lendu           2        Lendu, Bendi, Ngiti (=Bindi)
Lugbara                                                         Lugbara          2        Lugbara, Ndo, Logo, Avokaya, Keliko, Omo
Alur                                                              Alur          1.4       Alur
Shi-Havu-Fuliru-Hunde-Nyanga                                       Shi          4.8       Shi, Havu, Fuliru, Hunde, Nyanga, Tembo, Joba (=Vira), Kabwari, Nyind
Rwanda                                                          Rwanda           1        Rwandese Hutu, Tutsi and Twa, Mulenge
Nande                                                            Nande          2.3       Nande (=Konjo)
Babwa                                                           Babwa           0.8       Babwa, Ligenza, Ngelima, Pagibete, Kango, Bwela
Lokele-Topoke                                                    Lokele         0.9       Lokele, Topoke, Foma, Lombo, Mbesa, Soko
Enya-Lengola-Mbole-Mituku                                         Enya          0.8       Enya (=Genya), Lengola, Mbole, Mituku
Other                                                            Other           3        Jews, Hema, Zela, Senegalese, Portuguese, Tanzanien, Kaonde, Indian, Mba (=Manga), Kakwa, Kino
                                                                                100
Table 6: Ethnic groups in Gabon
                                   Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group          Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Fang                                   Fang            30       Fang
Mbete                                 Mbete             6       Mbete, Obamba, Ndumu
Kota-Kele                              Kota             8       Kota, Kele, Wumbvu
Njebi-Duma                             Njebi           13       Njebi, Duma, Tsangi
Shira-Punu-Lumbu                       Shira           24       Shira, Punu, Lumbu, Massango
Teke                                   Teke             4       Teke
Myene                                 Myene             5       Mpongwe, Orungu, Nkomi, Galoa
Tsogo-Kande                            Tsogo            3       Tsogo, Bubi, Kande, Pinji
Vili                                    Vili          0.4       Vili
Other                                  Other          6.6       French, Maka, Benga, Senegalese
                                                      100




Table 7: Ethnic groups in Ghana
                                   Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group          Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Ashanti                               Ashanti          15       Ashanti (=Asante), Adansi
Fanti                                  Fanti          11.5      Fanti, Agona
Akyem-Akwapim-Kwahu                   Akyem            8.8      Akyem, Akwapim, Kwahu (=Kwawu), Akwam
Anyi-Sefwi                             Anyi             2       Anyi, Aowin, Sefwi
Brong                                  Brong           5.7      Brong (=Abron=Bono) (with Banda), Ahafo
Nzema-Evalue-Ahanta                   Nzema            2.8      Nzema (=Apollo=Assini), Evalue, Ahanta
Wasa                                   Wasa            1.4      Wasa
Asen-Denkyira-Twifo                    Asen            1.3      Asen, Denkyira, Twifo
Guang                                 Guang            4.4      Akpafu, Lolobi, Likpe, Avatime, Nyingbo, Tafi, Awutu, Efutu, Senya, Cherepong, Larteh, Anum, Gonja, Nkonya, Yefi, Nchumuru, Krac
Ga                                      Ga             3.5      Ga
Adangme                              Adangme           4.4      Adangme, Kroba
Ewe                                     Ewe           12.7      Ewe
Dagari                                Dagari           4.7      Dagari, Birifor, Wali (=Wala), Lobi
Dagomba                              Dagomba           4.8      Dagomba (=Dagbani), Nanumba
Nankanse-Gurense-Tallensi            Nankanse          2.9      Namnam, Nankanse (=Farefare=Frafra), Gurense, Tallens
Kusasi                                Kusasi           2.2      Kusasi
Mamprusi                             Mamprusi          1.1      Mamprusi
Builsa                                Builsa           0.7      Builsa (=Buli)
Sisala-Kasena-Other Grusi              Sisala          2.8      Sisala (=Isala), Kasena, Mo, Vagala, Other groups of Grusi cluster
Konkomba-Moba-Basari                 Konkomba          3.9      Konkomba, Moba (=Bimoba), Basari (=Ntcham). Together these groups constitute Gurma cluster
Bissa                                  Bissa           1.2      Bissa (=Busansi), other Mande (incl. Bambara, Mandingo)
Other                                  Other           2.2      Scottish, Chokossi (=Anufo), Yoruba, Mossi, Hausa, Bowir
                                                      100




Table 8: Ethnic groups in Guinea
                                   Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group          Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Fulani                                 Fulani         39        Fulani, Futa Jalon, Fulakunda, Tukulor, Wassulu
Malinke                               Malinke         29        Malinke, Maninka, Konyanka, Sankaran, Wassulu, Manya, Jahanka, Koranko, Lel
Susu                                    Susu          12        Susu, Baga, Landoma
Yalunka                               Yalunka          1        Yalunka
Kissi                                  Kissi           5        Kissi
Kpelle                                 Kpelle         6.5       Kpelle (=Guerze), Kono
Toma                                   Toma           2.5       Toma
Mano                                   Mano            1        Mano
Other                                  Other           4        French, Lebanese, Koniagi, Sarakole, Wolof, Serer, Senegalais, foreigners from Benin, Gabo
                                                      100
Table 9: Ethnic groups in Kenya
                                                      Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group                             Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Kikuyu                                                   Kikuyu          22        Kikuyu
Meru                                                      Meru           4.5       Meru
Embu                                                      Embu           1.5       Embu
Luhya                                                     Luhya          14        Luhya, Kakamega, Bukusu
Luo                                                        Luo           14        Luo
Kamba                                                    Kamba           11        Kamba
Kalenjin                                                 Kalenjin        10        Nandi, Kipsigis, Keyu, Tugen, Poko
Kisii                                                     Kisii          6.6       Kisii (=Gusii)
Mijikenda                                               Mijikenda         5        Giriama, Duruma, Digo
Turkana                                                  Turkana          2        Turkana
Somali                                                   Somali           2        Somali
Masai                                                     Masai           2        Masai
Boran                                                     Boran           1        Boran
Rendille                                                 Rendille         1        Rendille
Taita                                                     Taita           1        Taita
Other                                                     Other          2.4       Kenyan Arabs, White, Goan
                                                                         100




Table 10: Ethnic groups in Liberia
                                                      Short Name of Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group                             Ethnic Group Population      Included Subgroups
Kpelle                                                    Kpelle        19         Kpelle (=Guerze)
Bassa                                                     Bassa        13.5        Bassa
Grebo                                                     Grebo          8         Grebo
Dan                                                        Dan          8.5        Dan (=Gio=Yakuba)
Mano                                                      Mano           7         Mano
Loma                                                      Loma           5         Loma (=Toma)
Kru                                                        Kru           7         Kru (=Klao)
Krahn                                                     Krahn         4.5        Krahn (=Guere), Sarpo
Kissi                                                     Kissi          4         Kissi
Gola                                                      Gola          4.5        Gola
Vai                                                        Vai          3.5        Vai (=Gallinas)
Gbandi                                                   Gbandi          3         Gbandi (=Bandi)
Americo-Liberians                                    Americo-Liberians   5         Americo-Liberians (incl. settlers from the Caribbeans, "Congo"
Mandingo                                                Mandingo         3         Mandingo, Manya, Konya, Maninka
Other                                                     Other         4.5        Mende, Lebanese, Namibian, Nigerian, Ghanaian
                                                                       100




Table 11: Ethnic groups in Nigeria
                                                      Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group                             Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Yoruba                                                   Yoruba           20       Yoruba (with Ekiti, Akoko), Itsekeri, Egba, Okun (with Bunu, Yagba, Owe, Ijumu, Kabba
Igbo                                                       Igbo           17       Igbo, Anioma, Ogba, Egbema, Ndoni, Ikwere
Hausa                                                     Hausa          21.3      Hausa, Butawa (=Kudawa), Dakarkari, Dukkawa (=Zuru), Gerawa, Kambari, Ninzo, Shangawa, Jarawa, Jerawa (=Gusum, Guzu, Jerew
Fulani                                                    Fulani         11.2      Fulani
Ibibio-Efik-Ejagham                                       Ibibio          6.5      Ibibio, Efik (with Oron), Ejagham (=Yako, Boki, Ekoi, Atam), Annang, Adoni, Ogoni, Mbembe, Agbo, Bendi (with Utugwan
Ijaw                                                       Ijaw           1.5      Ijaw, Kalabari, Okrika
Edo                                                        Edo             3       Edo, Isoko, Urhobo (with Okpe), Esan, Afemai, Etsako (=Kukuruku
Idoma-Igala                                               Idoma           1.9      Idoma, Alago, Yalla, Igala (=Igbala), Afo
Igbirra                                                  Igbirra          1.1      Igbirra
Gbari                                                     Gbari           1.1      Gbari
Nupe                                                       Nupe           1.2      Nupe, Kakanda
Kanuri                                                   Kanuri            5       Kanuri, Bolewa (with Wurkum), Bachama, Dera (=Kanakuru), Karekare, Ngamo, Ngizim, Bade, Tera, Tanga
Tiv-Jukun-Tigon-Mambila                                     Tiv           2.5      Tiv, Jukun (with Kuteb), Tigon, Kaka, Mambila
Bura-Bata-Margi-Matakam-Kapsiki-Gude                       Bura           1.8      Bura (with Babur), Bata (with Njai), Margi (with Kilba), Matakam, Kapsiki (=Higgi), Gude, Fale, Gwoz
Chamba-Daka-Vere-Mumuye-Yungur-Longuda-Jen-Waja          Chamba           1.5      Chamba, Daka (=Dangsa), Vere, Mumuye (with Bali), Yungur, Waja (with Awak), Jen (with Bambuka, Munga
Angas-Katab-Birom-Borrom-Yergum-Mada-Koro-Gwandara        Angas           2.2      Angas (with Ron), Katab, Birom, Borrom, Yergum (=Tarok), Mada (with Eggon, Bijim), Koro (with Yeskwa), Gwandara, Jaba (=Hyam), Gomai (=Ankwai), Irigwe, Kagom
Other                                                     Other           1.2      Shuwa Arabs, German expatriate
                                                                         100
Table 12: Ethnic groups in Sierra Leone
                                          Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group                 Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Temne                                        Temne           30.5      Temne
Mende-Vai                                    Mende           30.5      Mende, Vai (=Gallinas)
Limba                                         Limba            8       Limba
Creole                                        Creole           6       Creole (=Krio), Aku (=Muslim Krio)
Kuranko                                      Kuranko           5       Kuranko
Kono                                          Kono            3.7      Kono
Sherbro-Bullom                               Sherbro           3       Sherbro, Bullom, Krim and Bom
Fulani                                        Fulani           3       Fulani
Susu                                           Susu           2.2      Susu
Kissi                                         Kissi           2.5      Kissi
Loko                                          Loko            2.3      Loko
Mandingo                                    Mandingo           2       Mandingo
Yalunka                                      Yalunka          0.5      Yalunka
Other                                         Other           0.8      Afro-Lebanese, Bandi (from Liberia), Kroo
                                                             100




Table 13: Ethnic groups in Tanzania
                                          Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group                 Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Sukuma                                       Sukuma          14.4      Sukuma
Nyamwezi                                    Nyamwezi          5.2      Nyamwezi, Sumbwa, Konongo, Kimbu, Bungu
Ha                                              Ha            3.5      Ha
Rundi-Shubi-Hangaza-Rwanda                    Rundi           3.2      Rundi, Shubi, Hangaza, Rwanda
Haya                                           Haya           5.9      Haya, Nyambo, Zinza
Kuria-Jita                                    Kuria            4       Ikizu, Ikoma, Kuria, Ngoreme, Suba-Simbiti, Temo, Zanaki, Jita, Kwaya, Kara, Kerew
Zigula                                        Zigula          2.2      Zigula, Ngulu, Kwere, Doe
Luguru                                       Luguru           2.2      Luguru, Kami, Kutu
Shambala                                    Shambala          2.2      Shambala, Bondei
Swahili                                      Swahili           3       Swahili, Shirazi, Tumbatu, Hadimu, Pemba
Zaramo                                       Zaramo            3       Zaramo, Ndengereko, Rufiji
Yao                                            Yao            2.8      Yao, Mwera
Makua                                        Makua            1.2      Makua
Makonde                                     Makonde            3       Makonde, Machinga
Gogo                                          Gogo             4       Gogo, excluding Kagulu
Iramba                                       Iramba            2       Iramba, Isanzu
Turu                                           Turu            2       Turu (=Nyaturu)
Rangi                                         Rangi           1.1      Rangi
Hehe                                           Hehe           2.7      Hehe
Bena                                           Bena           1.9      Bena
Sagara-Kaguru                                 Sagara          1.4      Sagara, Kaguru, Vidunda
Ngindo-Matumbi-Ndendeule                     Ngindo           1.6      Ngindo, Matumbi, Ndendeule
Pogoro-Ndamba-Mbunga                         Pogoro           1.1      Pogoro, Ndamba, Mbunga, Mbanda
Nyakyusa                                    Nyakyusa           3       Nyakyusa
Kinga-Matengo                                 Kinga            2       Kinga, Matengo, Pangwa, Wanjj
Lambya-Nyiha-Nyamwanga                        Nyiha            3       Lambya, Malila, Ndali, Wandya, Nyiha, Safwa, Nyamwang
Fipa-Mambwe                                    Fipa           1.5      Fipa, Mambwe-Lungu, Pimbwe, Rungwe, Tongwe, Bend
Chagga                                       Chagga           3.8      Chagga, Mochi. Machame, Vunjo, Rombo, Rwa (=Meru
Pare                                           Pare           1.3      Pare (=Asu)
Iraqw                                         Iraqw            2       Iraqw (=Mbulu), Kyomi, Gorowa, Burunge, Alagw
Masai                                         Masai           1.3      Masai
Ngoni                                         Ngoni            1       Ngoni (=Magwangara)
Nyasa                                         Nyasa           0.5      Nyasa
Asians                                        Asians           1       Indians (Gujarati, Punjabi, Hindi)
Luo                                            Luo            0.8      Luo
Arabs                                         Arabs           0.7      Arabs
Other                                         Other           4.5      Tatoga, Digo, Bemba, Sandawe, Sangu, Manyema, English, Somal
                                                             100
Table 14: Ethnic groups in Togo
                                    Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group           Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Ewe                                      Ewe            22       Ewe (Adan, Agu, Anlo, Aveno, Be, Gbin, Ho, Kpelen, Togo, Vlin, Vo), Igo (=Ahlon
Ouatchi                                Ouatchi         10.5      Ouatchi
Mina-Xwla-Pedah                         Mina            6.5      Mina, Xwla, Pedah
Aja                                      Aja             3       Aja
Fon-Mahi                                 Fon            1.5      Fon, Mahi
Tem                                      Tem             6       Tem (=Kotokoli)
Kabre-Lugba                             Kabre          14.5      Kabre (=Kabye), Lugba (=Lokpa)
Lama                                    Lama             3       Lama (=Lamba)
Nawdm                                  Nawdm             4       Nawdm (=Losso)
Moba                                    Moba            5.4      Moba
Basari                                  Basari          3.2      Basari (=Ntcham), Akasele (=Tchamba)
Gurma                                   Gurma           3.5      Gurma
Konkomba                              Konkomba          1.2      Konkomba
Ngangam                               Ngangam           0.9      Ngangam
Ana-Nago-Yoruba                          Ana             3       Ana (=Ife), Nago (=Kambole), Yoruba
Akposso                                Akposso           3       Akposso, Adangbe
Akebu                                   Akebu            1       Akebu
Anufo                                   Anufo            1       Anufo (=Chakossi)
Fulani                                  Fulani          1.3      Fulani (=Peulh)
Other                                   Other           5.5      Agnagan, Adele, Polish, Gabonese
                                                       100




Table 15: Ethnic groups in Uganda
                                    Short Name of   Percent of
Long Name of Ethnic Group           Ethnic Group    Population   Included Subgroups
Ganda                                   Ganda          18.1      Ganda
Ankole-Hororo                          Ankole          10.7      Ankole, Hororo
Kiga                                     Kiga           8.4      Kiga
Soga                                    Soga            8.2      Soga
Teso                                    Teso            6.0      Teso
Lango                                   Lango           5.9      Lango
Lugbara-Aringa                         Lugbara          4.7      Lugbara, Aringa
Gisu                                     Gisu           4.5      Gisu (=Masaba)
Acholi                                  Acholi          4.4      Acholi
Rwanda                                 Rwanda           3.2      Rwanda, Bafumbira
Nyoro                                   Nyoro           3.0      Nyoro
Toro                                    Toro            2.9      Toro
Alur                                     Alur           2.4      Alur, Jonam
Konjo                                   Konjo           2.2      Konjo
Karamojong                           Karamojong         2.1      Karamojong
Gwere                                   Gwere           1.6      Gwere
Padhola                                Padhola          1.5      Padhola
Nyole                                   Nyole           1.4      Nyole
Samia                                   Samia           1.3      Samia
Ndo                                      Ndo            1.0      Ndo
Madi                                    Madi            0.8      Madi
Kumam                                  Kumam            0.7      Kumam
Sebei                                   Sebei           0.6      Sebei (=Kupsabiny)
Rundi                                   Rundi           0.6      Rundi
Kakwa                                  Kakwa            0.5      Kakwa, Bari
Other                                   Other           3.3      Indians, Ruli, Amba, English, Nubians, Avukaya, Moru
                                                       100
Table 16: African Cabinets - Summary Statistics by Country
                                                                                                                                 Number of    Percent of
                                                                                                    Total     Average           Government- Government-
                     Time                 Years               Number of Number of     Average Number of Number of Number of Ministers         Ministers
                     Period    Years    with Two   Number of   Leaders Government-     Size of     Unique Governments Ethnic    with Missing with Missing
Country             Covered   Missing Governments Governments in Power   Ministers vernment (# po Ministers per Minister Groups   Ethnicity    Ethnicity
Benin              1960-2004 1969, 1975 1968, 1970    45          10       730          16.22        209        3.49       15        1          0.14%
Cameroon           1960-2004 1969, 1975    1968       44          2       1445         32.84         262        5.52       21        43         2.98%
Congo-Brazzaville  1960-2004 1969, 1975 1968, 1970    45          7        918          20.4         239        3.84       10        9          0.98%
Cote d'Ivoire      1960-2004    1975       1970       45          4       1256         27.91         233        5.39       17        0            0%
Dem. Rep. of Congo 1961-2004 1972, 1974 1970, 1973    44          4       1352         30.73         515        2.63       30        5          0.37%
Gabon              1960-2004    1975                  44          2       1173         26.66         185        6.34       10        6          0.51%
Ghana              1960-2004    1975       1970       45          9       1140         25.33         362        3.15       22        0            0%
Guinea             1960-2004    1975       1969       45           2      1213          26.96        244        4.97        9        4          0.33%
Kenya              1964-2004    1975       1970       41          3       1010         24.63         155        6.52       16        2          0.20%
Liberia            1960-2004    1975       1970       45          10       938          20.84        272        3.45       15         9         0.96%
Nigeria            1961-2004    1975       1970       44          11      1499          34.07        473        3.17       17        13         0.87%
Sierra Leone       1960-2004 1972, 1975 1970, 1973    45          9       1109         24.64         288        3.85       14        0            0%
Tanzania           1965-2004 1972, 1974 1970, 1973    40           3      1016           25.4        158        6.43       37        0            0%
Togo               1960-2004    1975       1970       45          3        757         16.82         199         3.8       20        0            0%
Uganda             1963-2004 1972, 1974 1970, 1973    42          6       1037         24.69         205        5.06       26        3          0.29%
Notes: In the "Number of Leaders in Power" column, we count a new nonconsecutive term in office of the same leader as a new leader.
