                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MATERNAL STRESS AND CHILD OUTCOMES:
                            EVIDENCE FROM SIBLINGS

                                          Anna Aizer
                                         Laura Stroud
                                         Stephen Buka

                                      Working Paper 18422
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w18422


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2012




This work is supported in part by NSF grant # SES 0752755, NIH grants AG023397 and HD043844
and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Anna Aizer, Laura Stroud, and Stephen Buka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Maternal Stress and Child Outcomes: Evidence from Siblings
Anna Aizer, Laura Stroud, and Stephen Buka
NBER Working Paper No. 18422
September 2012
JEL No. I12,I14,I24,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

We study how maternal stress affects offspring outcomes. We find that in-utero exposure to elevated
levels of the stress hormone cortisol negatively affects offspring cognition, health and educational
attainment. These findings are based on comparisons between siblings which limits variation to short-lived
shocks and controls for unobserved differences between mothers that could bias estimates. Our results
are consistent with recent experimental results in the neurobiological literature linking exogenous
exposure to stress hormones in-utero with declines in offspring cognitive, behavioral and motor development.
Moreover, we find that not only are mothers with low levels of human capital characterized by higher
and more variable cortisol levels, but that the negative impact of elevated cortisol is greater for them.
These results suggest that prenatal stress may play a role in the intergenerational persistence of poverty.


Anna Aizer                                           Stephen Buka
Brown University                                     Brown University
Department of Economics                              Department of Epidemiology
64 Waterman Street                                   Box G-S121-2 121
Providence, RI 02912                                 Providence, RI 02912
and NBER                                             stephen_buka@brown.edu
anna_aizer@brown.edu

Laura Stroud
Centers for Behavioral and
  Preventive Medicine
Brown Medical School and
  The Miriam Hospital
Coro West, Suite 500, 1 Hoppin Street
Providence RI 02903
lstroudri@gmail.com
I.     Introduction


Intergenerational correlations in economic status in the US are high (Corak, 2004; Solon,

1999). Boys born to families with income in the bottom quintile of the income

distribution have a 42 percent chance of remaining there as adults and only a five percent

chance of reaching the top quintile. Yet little is known about the mechanisms by which

parents transmit their economic status to their children. In this work we focus on whether

and to what extent exposure to environmental stressors influence offspring outcomes.

       We focus on prenatal exposure to stress as a mechanism by which parents affect

the human capital and, by extension, the economic outcomes of their children for two

reasons. First, poverty is associated with greater levels of stress. The poor, on average,

report a greater number of stressful events in their lives and researchers have observed

higher levels of the biological markers for stress in low socio-economic status adults.

Second, recent evidence in neurobiology based largely on animal experiments suggests

that exogenous exposure to stress in-utero negatively affects the cognitive, behavioral and

motor development of offspring. Given that cognition is an important determinant of

adult human capital and economic status, greater in-utero exposure to stress among the

poor has the potential to explain, in part, the intergenerational persistence of poverty in

the US.

       In this paper we estimate the impact of in-utero exposure to stress on the human

capital accumulation (years of schooling) of adult offspring using a unique dataset with

detailed information on parental characteristics, including prenatal levels of the hormone

cortisol (a marker for stress) and offspring outcomes. Because mothers with greater

stress may differ in unobserved ways from those with lower stress, we include maternal

                                              2
fixed effects to address potential omitted variable bias. In this way, we limit identifying

variation to temporary shocks during the prenatal period that do not persist long term.

When we include maternal fixed effects, we find that exposure to elevated cortisol in-

utero has a negative and significant impact on offspring educational attainment. To better

understand why, we estimate the impact of prenatal stress on two intermediate outcomes:

cognition (verbal IQ) and health (chronic conditions) at age 7. We find that exposure to

prenatal stress negatively and significantly affects offspring IQ and child health at age 7.

We follow with a number of robustness checks and an analysis of whether and how

prenatal stress relates to prenatal and postnatal investments in children.

       Finally, we explore how prenatal stress interacts with maternal human capital.

We find that not only are mothers with less schooling more likely to have high measures

of the stress hormone cortisol (consistent with existing evidence), but that conditional on

cortisol level, the negative impact of cortisol on offspring outcomes is greater for them.

This suggests that mothers with more human capital have greater resources to protect

against the negative effects of stress.

       This work has a number of important implications. First, it provides further

evidence that the prenatal environment has a lasting impact on offspring outcomes. This

is consistent with recent work by economists in this area that has examined the impact of

prenatal nutrition, as proxied by birthweight, (Black, Devereaux and Salvanes, 2007), in-

utero exposure to the flu (Almond, 2006) and low levels of radiation (Almond, Edlund

and Palme, 2008) on short and long term offspring outcomes including cognitive

achievement, disability and mortality. Second, it underscores the importance of maternal

stress, a difficult to measure environmental factor, in determining offspring human



                                              3
capital, consistent with the growing animal literature. These results also help us to better

understand recent findings regarding the negative impact of prenatal exposure to stressful

events (eg, natural disaster, civil conflict) on child outcomes.1 While the authors of these

works often suggest that stress may be one of the mechanisms behind the relationship,

they lack specific measures of maternal stress. Finally, and perhaps most importantly,

the results have implications for our understanding of the various mechanisms by which

parental SES and its corresponding greater average levels of stress can negatively affect

child outcomes and future economic status by negatively influencing the child’s earliest

environmental conditions.2

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II, we provide

background information on the relationship between stress, cortisol, prenatal conditions

and offspring outcomes. In sections III and IV, we describe our empirical strategy and

data, respectively. In section V we present our empirical results, including robustness

checks and section VI includes an exploration of interactions between stress and maternal

human capital. Section VII concludes.



II.     Background on Economic Status, Stress and Prenatal Programming

Related Literature on Early Environment Conditions and Child Outcomes

Work on the intergenerational transmission of economic status in the US has produced

estimates of intergenerational income elasticities on the order of 0.5 with the highest



1
  Examples of the former include Currie and Rossin-Slater (2012), Simeonova (2009) and Glynn et al
(2001) and examples of the latter include Camacho (2008) who looks at land mines, Lauderdale (2006)
who examines pregnancies during the attacks of 9/11 and Mansour and Rees (2011) who examine the
impact of the Intifada on birth outcomes.
2
  Perhaps the most relevant work in this regard is that of Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2011) who
find that exposure to food stamps in-utero increases birth weight.

                                                   4
estimate approaching 0.65 (Solon, 1999; Mazunder, 2005). Most of the existing

theoretical and empirical work that has sought to identify the mechanisms of

intergenerational transmission of economic status has categorized the mechanisms as

either nature (genetic inheritance) or nurture (the environment). With respect to the

latter, the importance of the early childhood environment in affecting long term outcomes

is now well-established (see Almond and Currie, 2010; Heckman and Masterov, 2007 for

excellent summaries). Recently, however, researchers have focused on the role of even

earlier environmental conditions - those found in-utero. For example, Almond (2006) and

Almond, Edlund and Palme (2008) provide convincing evidence of the importance of the

in-utero environment in determining offspring outcomes by estimating negative and

significant effects of in-utero exposure to the flu pandemic of 1917 and low levels of

radiation, respectively, on cognitive achievement, schooling, rates of disability and

welfare receipt. Other related studies include that of Qian and Meng (2009) and Almond,

Edlund, Li and Zhang (2007) who find that in-utero exposure to famine conditions in

China results in diminished adult offspring outcomes (educational attainment, literacy,

health and employment). While this work establishes the importance of the prenatal

environment in affecting long term offspring outcomes, these types of shocks are atypical

and immutable from a policy perspective.

       The present study differs in important ways from previous work estimating the

impact of prenatal conditions on offspring outcomes. First, we focus on exposure to in-

utero stress because recent experimental evidence in the neurobiological literature,

summarized in the next section, has positively identified a biological mechanism by

which exposure in-utero to stress hormones can negatively impact offspring cognition



                                             5
and health. Second, we focus on stress generated by more common circumstances, not

unusual ones such as natural or man-made disasters, so that the results are more

generalizeable. Third, because poverty is associated with higher levels of stress, the

results have important implications for our understanding of the mechanisms behind the

intergenerational transmission of economic status.

SES, Stress and Prenatal Programming

         Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone or glucocorticoid produced by the adrenal

cortex that is often referred to as the "stress hormone" as it is involved in the

physiological response to stress and anxiety and is observed in higher than average levels

in those exposed to greater stress (Wust et. al., 2000; Van Eck et al, 1996). While normal

circulating levels of the hormone cortisol are necessary for a healthy adaptive response to

stress, unusually high (or, in rare cases, unusually low) levels of cortisol have been linked

with multiple pathologies.3

         There is evidence of a socio-economic gradient in stress. Previous research has

found that low income individuals report greater stressful events in their lives

(Dohrenwend, 1973; Marmot and Smith, 1991). Consistent with this, medical

researchers have established higher than average cortisol levels among those of low

economic and social status (Cohen et. al., 2006; Steptoe et al, 2003; Kunkz-Ebrecht,

Kirschbaum and Steptoe, 2003).

         Cortisol is considered a key agent in prenatal programming. Prenatal

programming refers to “the action of a factor during a sensitive period or window of fetal


3
  Elevated cortisol has been implicated in hypertension, cardiovascular disease, insulin resistance, obesity,
diabetes, infection illness and depressive disorder, among others as well as the development of atypical
emotional, behavioral and cognitive functioning (Ousova et al, 2004; Walker et al, 1998; Steptoe et al,
2002; McEwen, 1998; Dawes et al, 1999; Van Goozen et al; 1998).

                                                      6
development that exerts organizational effects that persist throughout life” (Seckl, 1998).

Work based largely on animal studies has established a strong link between exogenous

in-utero exposure to stress/cortisol and poor offspring outcomes. These studies generally

fall into two categories: those that inject cortisol (glucocorticoids) directly into pregnant

animals and those that exogenously expose pregnant animals to an environmental

stressor. Examples of the former include Uno et al (1983) who expose fetal rhesus

monkeys to high concentrations of cortisol and find that they suffer considerable damage

to the hippocampus region of the brain. Welberg, Seckl and Holmes, (2001) likewise

administered glucocorticoids to pregnant rats and found that the offspring of exposed rats

exhibited behavioral inhibition, and impaired coping and learning in aversive situations.4

An example of the latter type of study is Schneider (1992) who subjected pregnant rhesus

monkeys to what they classify as a “mild stressor” and observed impaired motor ability

and delays in learning among the offspring.5 In a follow-up to this study, Schneider, Coe

and Lubach (1992) successfully mimicked the negative impact of this mild stressor by

directly injecting pregnant rhesus monkeys with stress hormones. They observed similar

declines in motor and mental development among the prenatally exposed offspring.

        Because these latter two studies show that even a mild stressor during the prenatal

period results in diminished offspring outcomes similar to exogenous increases in

prenatal cortisol, they are key to our ability to extrapolate findings based on animal

experiments to humans, for whom only non-experimental evidence is available. In

humans, researchers have related exposure to excessive amounts of cortisol in-utero with


4
  They concluded that prenatal programming of the HPA axis was responsible for the outcome based on
studies of the areas of the brain affected.
5
  A mild stressor consists of removal from one’s home cage to be confined to a smaller cage for ten minutes
each day and subjected to three unpredictable noise bursts.

                                                    7
impaired development of the brain and spinal cord (Yu, Lee, Lee and Son, 2004).

Researchers have also linked stress and elevated cortisol in late pregnancy with poor

mental and motor development of human offspring at three and eight months (Huizink et

al, 2003.) But non-experimental studies based on humans suffer from problems of

endogeneity that experimental studies based on animals do not. In the next section we

describe the threats to identification in non-experimental settings and our estimation

strategy in greater detail.



III.    Empirical strategy

        In non-experimental settings, estimates of the impact of maternal stress on

offspring outcomes likely suffer from endogeneity. This is because women with higher

stress levels (as measured by cortisol) may differ in important, unobserved ways from

women with lower stress and these unobserved factors may be responsible for the

negative effects on offspring observed. For example, genes affect baseline cortisol levels

(Wust et al, 2000). If the genetic composition of women with high cortisol is correlated

with other heritable traits (such as IQ) this will bias the estimated impact of cortisol on

offspring cognition. To address this problem, we identify the impact of cortisol on

offspring outcomes using mother fixed effects. In so doing we control for any fixed

unobservable differences between mothers (such as genetics) that might bias the results.

        In a fixed effect framework, identification derives from differences in stress

during the prenatal period between siblings. To better understand why cortisol levels

may differ across two pregnancies of the same mother, we look at corresponding changes

in underlying characteristics or conditions of the family for the sample of mothers with



                                              8
large changes in prenatal cortisol between births (results presented in Section V). In this

sample, “high cortisol” siblings are characterized by lower family income during the

prenatal period relative to their “low cortisol” siblings, but this difference largely

disappears by age 7.6 Thus identifying variation appears to come from temporary shocks

to the mother (particularly to her economic status) during the prenatal period that do not

persist through childhood and therefore are unlikely to be independently correlated with

offspring outcomes. We conduct a number of robustness checks to rule out alternative

explanations, including narrowing the sample to closely spaced births to rule out long

term changes in underlying conditions.



IV.     Data

Description

        The data are a subset of the National Collaborative Perinatal Project (NCPP). The

NCPP comprised a prospective survey of 55,908 pregnancies between 1959 and 1965

across 12 cities. Women were enrolled primarily though public clinics in the academic

medical centers where they sought prenatal care and their children were followed up

through age 7.7

        In this study we focus on a subset of 1093 children born to mothers enrolled in

NCPP through either the Providence or Boston sites for whom follow-up information as

adults is available. Children were selected for participation in the adult follow-up survey



6
 In the data, we only have measures of income and marital status during pregnancy and at age 7.
7
 Women who planned to put their children up for adoption and women who arrived at the hospital for
delivery without any prenatal care were excluded from the study. Limiting the sample in this way reduces
considerably the number of women with “unwanted pregnancies.” As such, we reduce any potential
upward bias that could arise from unwanted pregnancies if they are associated with greater stress and fewer
parental investments (Joyce, Kaestner and Korenman, 2000).

                                                     9
through a multi-stage sampling procedure which involved a core assessment interview

and three component studies. The sampling design included an emphasis on siblings.

         Trained interviewers collected information on adult education, employment and

income, disease and other characteristics between 2002 and 2004. In this work we focus

on educational attainment as our measure of adult economic status primarily because

educational attainment is arguably a better measure of permanent income than a single

measure of annual income, but also because the offspring adult income measures in these

data are heavily top-coded.8 Of the 1093 pregnancies with adult follow-up information,

386 are siblings.9



Measures of Cortisol

         Maternal blood/serum collected during the third trimester of pregnancy (between

31 and 36 weeks of pregnancy) was analyzed for cortisol.10 Cortisol naturally varies over

the period of gestation and over the course of the day. In our data, we do have

information on the week of gestation the blood was drawn, but not on the time of day.

Despite this we believe that this measure of cortisol is still a reasonable signal of true

baseline cortisol for two reasons. The first is that the variation in cortisol across

individuals is more than three times as large as the variation in cortisol over the course of

the day (Chiu et al, 2003). The second is that the distribution of total cortisol in our

8
  While the educational attainment data can be externally validated (eg: the distribution of years of
education is similar to that found in the CPS for a similar sample) the income data cannot likely due to
confusion regarding the income question in the survey.
9
  Of those with multiple births, we exclude the 15 mothers with 3 or 4 births within the period 1959-1965
as their characteristics are significantly different from the rest of the sample. For example, the mother with
4 births had 17 years of education when the average is 11-12 years in the full sample and the 1960 census.
10
   Blood was assayed for total and free cortisol. The latter refers to the amount of cortisol not bound to the
protein CBG (cortical binding globulin) and therefore free to bind to other receptors and affect the body.
Free cortisol is typically only 10 percent of total cortisol. In this analysis we focus on free cortisol,
consistent with existing medical literature.

                                                      10
sample is very similar to the distribution of total cortisol in other samples with more

carefully measured levels (Stroud et al, 2007).11 For example, a 2005 study by Solden et

al assayed 50 women in the morning of the 32nd week of pregnancy. The average level of

total cortisol for the sample was 287 (compared with 282 for ours) and the standard

deviation was 92 (compared with 84 for ours). Moreover, we find that the same patterns

observed between cortisol levels and maternal characteristics in studies based on fresh,

precise measures of cortisol are present in our sample as well. Together these facts

suggest that our measures of cortisol are valid measures of true baseline levels, though

they are measured with error.

         The nature or source of the measurement error, however, affects the interpretation

of our estimates. If the measurement error is random (eg there is no relationship between

time of day the blood was drawn and unobserved maternal characteristics), then this

would introduce classical measurement error and lead to attenuation bias of

approximately 0.59 which the inclusion of family fixed effects would likely exacerbate.12

If the measurement error is non-random and covaries with maternal characteristics (eg,

there is a relationship between time of day of blood draw and maternal characteristics),

then the inclusion of family fixed effects would reduce any attenuation bias from

measurement error. We discuss this when interpreting our results in the next section.




11
   We can only compare total cortisol levels across samples as the distribution of free cortisol levels is
rarely reported. However, free cortisol is typically between 9 and 10 percent of total cortisol depending on
the level of CBG.
12
   We calculate σ2c = 0.036 and σ2c + σ2v =0.0625 (where the former represents the distribution of cortisol
without noise and the latter, the variance with noise) based on the following: the mean and standard
deviation of 100 random draws of cortisol levels measured at 11 am are .28 and .19, respectively. If we
draw 100 random observations from the pool of all measures (taken between waking an 9 pm) the mean
and standard deviation are .30 and .25, respectively. Based on this we calculate σc= .19 and σv+ σc =.25 and
a reliability ratio of 1.7, which corresponds to an attenuation bias of 0.59.

                                                     11
Characteristics of the Sample

        Appendix Table 1 presents sample means for the full NCPP Boston/Providence

sample (column 2), the cortisol sample (column 3) and the sibling sub-sample (column

4). The cortisol sample appears to be a representative sub-sample of the full

Boston/Providence NCPP sample (comparing columns 2 and 3). Mothers are similar in

terms of education, income, race, age and marital status. As expected, birth outcomes

(gestation and weight at birth) are slightly better for the cortisol subsample due to the fact

that they were selected based on availability of third trimester maternal serum collected at

at least 4 weeks prior to delivery as well as offspring survival to adulthood. This positive

sample selection will likely result in estimates that represent a lower bound if one way

that prenatal cortisol negatively affects offspring outcomes is through increased

probability of prematurity and/or lower birthweight, as has been hypothesized in the

literature (IOM, 2006).

        If we compare women in the sibling sub-sample with those from the larger

cortisol sample we see that the sibling subsample is similar in terms of cortisol levels and

offspring outcomes but that the mothers in the sibling sample appear slightly less

disadvantaged in terms of income, education, marital status and race compared with the

full sample. In fact, the sibling sub-sample is slightly more representative of the

population of women with young children as measured in the 1960 decennial census,

which is more likely to be white and married, older, and less poor (column 1). 13 That the

NCPP sample is more disadvantaged than the general population of young mothers is not

surprising given that the recruitment for subjects in the NCPP was conducted through

13
 This comparison is based on women with children less than five years old residing in urban areas of
Massachusetts and Rhode Island drawn from the 1960 census. Because of limitations of the census data,
we were unable to calculate averages for Providence and Boston only.

                                                  12
hospital-based public clinics. To address the generalizability of findings based on a non-

random sample of mothers, in a robustness check, we apply weights to the sibling sub-

sample so that the sample better reflects the income, race and educational distribution of

the population of women with young children as measured by the 1960 census. The

weighted means are presented in column 4 and it is evident that the weighted sample

more closely resembles the 1960 census sample in terms of socio-economic status.14



Variation in Cortisol Across and Within Families

In Figure 1 we present the distribution of free cortisol levels for the whole sample and the

sibling subsample.15 They are similar, though there is less variation in the sibling

subsample, as expected (µ=22.5 ng/ml and 20.6 ng/ml; σ= 22.6 and 16.3 for the full and

sibling sub-samples, respectively).16 There is considerable correlation in the cortisol

measures within families (ρ=0.42) which cannot be completely explained by similarities

in observable characteristics. When we attempt to match unrelated children based on

observable maternal characteristics (maternal age, race, education, marital status, IQ and

family income), the correlation in cortisol between matched pairs only reaches 0.16,

underscoring a considerable correlation between cortisol levels and unobserved maternal

characteristics (such as genetics). Despite the strong correlation in sibling cortisol levels,

there is still significant within family variation for identification: the within-family

coefficient of variation for the sibling sample is 0.37.



14
   Sampling weights equal to one over the probability of being sampled were calculated for 2 racial
categories, 3 education categories and 4 income categories for a total of 24 cells.
15
   Free cortisol refers to the amount of circulating cortisol that is not bound to proteins and therefore “free”
to interact.
16
   There is one outlier in the sibling cortisol sub-sample which we remove in the regression analyses.

                                                       13
V.       Results

         We proceed in five stages. First, we document a negative relationship between

maternal economic status and our marker for stress (cortisol), consistent with existing

bio-medical literature. Second, we estimate the impact of prenatal stress on adult

educational attainment using OLS and family fixed effects. Third, we explore the

mechanisms by which stress affects adult educational attainment by estimating the impact

of stress on intermediate outcomes: birth outcomes, cognition and health at age 7.

Specifically, we estimate whether prenatal stress negatively affects weight and gestation

at birth, verbal IQ and the number of chronic conditions the child has at age 7. Fourth,

we conduct robustness checks and explore the relationship between cortisol levels and

prenatal and postnatal investments in children. Finally, we explore whether and how

maternal human capital interacts with cortisol to affect offspring outcomes.



SES and Maternal Cortisol Levels

         We document a socioeconomic gradient in maternal cortisol levels in this sample,

consistent with existing literature (Cohen et al, 2006; Cohen, Doyle and Baum, 2006;

Steptoe et al, 2003; Kunkz-Ebrecht, et al, 2003). We compare maternal/family

characteristics of those with “normal prenatal cortisol” (defined as the bottom 80% of the

distribution of cortisol) to those with “high prenatal cortisol” (defined as the top quintile

of the distribution) in Table 1, columns 1-3.17 In the cross-sectional comparisons, we


17
   This method of defining “high” and “normal” levels of cortisol is typical of the existing bio-medical
literature. It is reassuring, however, to note that the 80% cutoff is externally validated as it is very similar
to the same cutoff in a dataset based on 50 women in the 32nd week of pregnancy assayed for cortisol in the
morning as reported by Solden et al (2005).

                                                      14
find that mothers with “high prenatal cortisol” levels are more likely to be black and

single and have lower income, at both pregnancy and 7 years post pregnancy. For

example, women with high cortisol are characterized by $5500 less (annual) income at

pregnancy, or 21 percent less, than “normal prenatal cortisol” mothers and this difference

persists: these same women are characterized by 18 percent less income seven years post-

natal. Mothers with elevated cortisol also have fewer years of schooling. All differences

are significant except birth order and sibling number.18

        Not only are low SES mothers characterized by higher average cortisol levels, but

low SES mothers (defined as those with less than a high school degree) are also

characterized by greater variability in their cortisol levels across siblings. Thirty one

percent of high school drop-outs are characterized by at least a standard deviation

difference in cortisol levels across siblings (σ=14 ug/ml), compared with 21 percent of

mothers who are high school graduates.

        In columns 4-6 of Table 1 we explore how family characteristics vary across

births in a sample of families with large changes in free cortisol levels between siblings.

For these within family comparison, when we compare “high prenatal cortisol” children

with their “normal prenatal cortisol” siblings, the difference in real income at pregnancy

is 17 percent, similar to the cross sectional difference, but the difference in income at age

7 is smaller (6 percent) and insignificant. Note that the difference may have diminished

prior to age 7, but the only post-natal income measures that we have in these data were




18
  Differences in gender are not significant. Ultrasound technology was not available at the time of study
so it is not possible that the gender of the fetus was known before birth.

                                                    15
collected at age 7. In contrast, the large difference in the probability of being single

while pregnant persists until age 7, but is not statistically significant.19

        Importantly, within-family high cortisol is uncorrelated with birth order.

Endogenous fertility is potentially a concern here if particularly stressful pregnancies

reduce the probability of a future birth. However, there is no evidence of this in our data:

high prenatal cortisol levels are not at all predictive of future fertility.

        We conclude that in the cross section, elevated cortisol is associated with race

(being black), persistent poverty (at least until age 7), low levels of maternal human

capital and being single. Within family, there is some evidence that high prenatal cortisol

is associated with a temporary negative shock to income during pregnancy that appears to

recover by age 7. These differences underscore the need to include maternal fixed effects

to limit comparisons to differences across births to the same mothers.



Relationship Between Maternal Prenatal Cortisol and Offspring Outcomes: Preliminary
Evidence


        Before turning to regression analysis, we provide simple non-parametric

comparisons of the outcomes of offspring of the same mother. Specifically, we compare

years of schooling, gestation and weight at birth, and IQ and health at age 7, of siblings

exposed to different levels of prenatal cortisol. Comparing siblings, we find that those

exposed to higher prenatal cortisol levels (relative to their siblings) are characterized by

slightly lower adult educational attainment and verbal cognition and worse health at age 7

as well as slightly worse birth outcomes (Table 2, top panel).

19
  In Table 1, the probability of being single increases considerably between birth and age 7. This is
consistent with data from the 1960 and 1970 census which shows that the probability of being single more
than doubles over this period, increasing from .032 to 0.085.

                                                   16
       However, because existing medical research finds that negative effects of cortisol

on mental and motor development occur when cortisol levels either exceed (or, in some

rare cases, fall short of) normal circulating levels, we also present differences in

offspring outcomes when one sibling is exposed to extremely high levels of prenatal

cortisol (defined as in the top quintile). The results are presented in the second panel of

Table 2. The differences are large: siblings exposed to very high cortisol levels are

characterized by a year less schooling, a verbal IQ that is 5 points lower and a 48 percent

increase in the number of chronic conditions. The birth outcome differences, however,

are very small, most likely due to the positive selection on birth outcomes in these data,

as noted previously.

       We follow these non-parametric, unconditional comparisons with regression

analyses that include multiple controls for changing prenatal and post-natal circumstances

in the next section.



Impact of Maternal Cortisol on Offspring Educational Attainment

       In this sub-section we provide empirical evidence based on fixed effect

regressions that elevated maternal prenatal cortisol negatively affects offspring human

capital accumulation as measured by highest grade completed. Specifically, we create

three indicators to represent exposure to free cortisol in-utero: bottom quintile of

distribution, the middle 20-80 percent of the distribution (omitted category), and the top

quintile of the distribution of cortisol. While this is our preferred specification, we also

present results with a linear measure of cortisol.




                                              17
       We include the following controls: maternal race (indicator for black), maternal

education, marital status at birth, maternal age at birth, family income during pregnancy,

offspring gender, number of siblings at age 7, birth order, whether the husband lives at

home with the mother, and the number of times the family moved between birth and age

7 (a measure of instability), as well as the week of gestation that the cortisol was

measured. We also include an indicator for whether the mother worked during pregnancy

(a potential source of stress) and whether there was any pregnancy complication to

control for the possibility that the increase in maternal cortisol observed simply reflects

maternal anxiety over the health of the fetus. We run three regressions: OLS results

based on the full sample (column 1, Table 3), OLS results for the sub-sample of siblings

(column 2), and FE results for the subsample of siblings (column 3). The FE regressions

include the same controls as the OLS, with the exception of maternal race and education

which are fixed across births.

       Being exposed to highly elevated cortisol in-utero has a large negative and

significant impact on years of schooling in the OLS regressions. For the full sample,

exposure to high cortisol levels results in .47 fewer years of schooling, which represents

25 percent of a standard deviation (µ=13.4 and σ=1.9 years of schooling in this sample).

For the sibling subsample, the estimate is still large (though smaller, -0.34) but not

significantly different from the estimate based on the full sample (Table 3, column 2).

       When we include maternal fixed effects to control for all unobserved differences

between mothers that may be correlated with cortisol levels while pregnant and offspring

outcomes, we find that exposure to elevated levels of cortisol in-utero reduces years of

schooling by roughly 1.1 years of schooling, which represents 58 percent of a standard



                                             18
deviation. While these estimated effects may seem large relative to those of most

educational interventions (Hanushek, 2006), it is consistent with existing evidence on the

impact of prenatal conditions on offspring educational outcomes.20 For example,

Almond, Edlund and Palme (2008) find that in-utero exposure to low levels of radiation

reduce school test scores by six percentile points – a very large effect relative to most

educational interventions. Almond and Mazumder (2008) find that fasting during

pregnancy leads to a 20 percent increase in adult disability.

        In the second panel of Table 3 we estimate a linear specification. The estimates

based on the maternal fixed effect specification with a full set of controls suggest that a

standard deviation increase in prenatal cortisol leads to a reduction of 0.46 years of

schooling, or 25 percent of a standard deviation.



Interpretation of FE Estimates

        There are two potential interpretations of our finding that the estimated impact of

prenatal cortisol on adult educational attainment increases when we include family fixed

effects. The first relates to measurement error in the measure of cortisol used. As noted

previously, cortisol naturally varies over the course of the day and it is not known when

these measures were drawn. If the time of day that the blood was drawn was not random

but correlated with unobservable characteristics of the mother that might affect offspring

outcomes, the OLS estimates would be biased. If we assume that these unobservable

characteristics remain constant across pregnancies, the inclusion of maternal fixed effects

would reduce the bias from such non-random measurement error. This is possible, but

20
  The size of the effect is also comparable to educational interventions geared to the very youngest school
children. For example, Gormley and Gayer (2005) find that a year of pre-K increases cognitive/knowledge
scores among Kindergarten students by 39% of a standard deviation.

                                                    19
we think unlikely given that controlling for maternal work (the most likely characteristic

to affect time of day of blood draw) does not alter the results.

         A second interpretation or explanation is that the larger FE estimates might reflect

a potential misspecification of the OLS regression framework. An alternative model is

one in which an individual adjusts to a baseline or personal level of cortisol that may be a

function of underlying average levels of stress, genetics or some combination of factors.

It is only when mothers are exposed to a new or unexpected stressor that moves them

from their usual level that adverse effects are found. There is some support for this

model in the psychological and biological literatures. Mineka and Kihlstrom (1978)

review a large body of scientific experiments, performed mostly on animals, which finds

that unanticipated aversive events have a greater negative impact on observed behavior

and health than predictable aversive events which occur with the same frequency. A

classic example of this type of study is Rosenblum and Paully (1984) who subject

monkeys to three environments: low foraging demand (abundance of food), high foraging

demand (scarcity of food) and variable foraging demand (unpredictable periods of

abundance and scarcity). They find the greatest negative effects on mother-infant pairs

subjected to the variable foraging environments.21

         If the true model is one of variable stress, a fixed effect strategy would be the

correct specification. By including maternal fixed effects we implicitly identify the

impact of deviations from mean (or personal) cortisol levels on outcomes. Given existing




21
  The impact of unpredictable events on biomarkers for stress such as cortisol is unclear. There is only one
paper that attempts to measure biomarkers among adult monkeys reared as infants in VFD, HFD and LFD
environments and the findings are not straightforward, with increases in some baseline markers for stress
(CRF) but declines in others (including cortisol) among the VFD reared monkeys (see Coplan et al, 1998).

                                                    20
evidence that baseline cortisol varies considerably within a non-stressed pregnant

population, this alternative model seems plausible.

       With the data we have, there is no way to test empirically whether the true model

is one of “variable stress.” We do, however, provide some evidence that would be

consistent with a model of this type. Specifically, we limit the sample to one randomly

selected child in each family (from the sibling subsample) and define two measures for

each child. The first is his or her own absolute level of prenatal cortisol and the second is

a relative measure defined as the difference between his level and the level of his sibling

(who is excluded from the regression sample). We then regress the focal child’s

educational attainment on both these measures (own absolute level and relative

difference) and a full set of controls in an OLS framework.

       The results (Appendix Table 2) suggest that the relative measure of cortisol is

more highly correlated with offspring educational attainment than the absolute measure.

The coefficient on the relative measure of cortisol is large and significant (-0.023): a one

standard deviation increase in this relative measure (σ=17) is associated with -.39 fewer

years of school. In contrast, the coefficient on the absolute measure is positive and much

smaller than the coefficient on the relative measure (and significant at the 10 percent

level). Because these results are based on an OLS specification, we cannot necessarily

interpret them as causal. However, they are consistent with a model in which significant

variation in prenatal stress negatively affects offspring outcomes.

       In the following subsections we explore the mechanisms by which maternal

prenatal cortisol affects offspring educational attainment. Specifically, we focus on birth

outcomes, child cognition and health as three potential intermediate outcomes affected by



                                             21
prenatal cortisol. We focus on these three intermediate outcomes because they have been

shown in the medical literature to be adversely affected by elevated stress and cortisol in-

utero and in the economics literature, to affect educational attainment.



Prenatal Cortisol and Birth Outcomes

        There is evidence that stress in-utero reduces birth weight and increases the

probability of prematurity (IOM, 2006; Eskenazi, et al, 2007; Camacho, 2008).

Unfortunately, our sample was constructed in such a way as to preclude most premature

births since the sample was selected based on availability of third trimester serum drawn

at least 4 weeks before the date of delivery (and typically more than 8 weeks before date

of delivery) to prevent the cortisol measure from capturing the stress of delivery. This

will likely prevent us from estimating any significant effects on birth outcomes. Indeed,

we find that prenatal cortisol has no large or significant impact on birth weight or

gestation in either the OLS or FE models with a full set of controls (Table 4). One

implication of this is that our estimates of the impact of cortisol on other offspring

outcomes likely reflect a lower bound.



Prenatal Cortisol and Child IQ

        Next we estimate the impact of prenatal maternal cortisol on child cognition

measured at age 7.22 Specifically we estimate the impact of cortisol on verbal IQ because

of evidence that those with Cushings disease (a hormonal disorder caused by prolonged

exposure of the body's tissues to high levels of the hormone cortisol) are characterized by


22
  LeWinn, et al (2008) use a subset of the NCPP sibling sample to produce maternal FE estimates of the
impact of an index of free cortisol on child verbal IQ at age7 and the results are very similar.

                                                   22
deficits in verbal learning and other verbal functions but not non-verbal functions

(Starkman et al 2001).23

        The results suggest that exposure to elevated cortisol in-utero (Table 4, top panel)

appears to have a large negative and significant impact on verbal IQ. Specifically,

exposure to cortisol in the top quntile of the distribution is associated with a 6 point lower

verbal IQ (43 percent of a standard deviation) in the fixed effect regression with a full set

of controls. It is important to note that verbal IQ comprises only half the total IQ score.

As such, the impact of exposure to elevated prenatal cortisol on full IQ at age 7 is roughly

half the size of the verbal estimates (3.4 points).

        Given the high degree of correlation between child IQ and years of education in

these data (ρ=.45 for verbal IQ at age 7), we conclude that the adverse effect of exposure

to elevated cortisol in-utero on adult years of education is likely mediated in part by the

negative impact on verbal cognitive functioning.



Prenatal Cortisol and Child Health at Age 7

        We also estimate the impact of exposure to elevated stress in-utero on child health

as measured by the number of chronic condition at age 7 as determined by medical

examination of the child (Table 5).24 In these regressions, we include two additional

controls: gestation and birth weight. In our sample, 75 percent of the children have no

chronic conditions, 22 percent have 1, 2 percent have 2 conditions and less than one

percent has 3 conditions. The results differ somewhat from those for child IQ. In the


23
   The verbal IQ score is derived from the Wechsler intelligence tests.
24
   The evidence that physical health affects schooling is limited. In the US, Bleakley (2007) finds that
hookworm eradication among children increased school attendance, literacy and long term income. There
is more evidence that mental health affects schooling in developed countries (Currie and Stabile, 2007.)

                                                   23
non-linear regressions, we find that very high cortisol increases the number of chronic

conditions by .18 (relative to a mean of 0.26) in the fixed effect setting, but the estimate

is very imprecise. However, the results from the linear specification suggest that a linear

increase in cortisol positively and significantly raises the number of chronic condition. In

the fixed effect regressions, a standard deviation increase in cortisol is significantly

predictive of an increase in the number of chronic conditions of .16. We take this as

suggestive evidence that exposure to cortisol in-utero has a negative effect on offspring

health that may not necessarily be evident at birth and that this may represent a second

mechanism through which exposure to prenatal cortisol negatively affects completed

years of schooling among offspring.



Interpretation and Robustness

        How should we interpret these results? One interpretation is that of a causal

impact of prenatal cortisol on offspring outcomes, consistent with neurobiological

evidence. A second interpretation is that the underlying stressor is the cause of the

decline in offspring human capital and that maternal cortisol levels are merely a proxy for

unmeasured stressors, despite the inclusion of controls that are more comprehensive than

usual. Both interpretations generate the same policy implication: reducing the sources of

everyday stress faced by parents will improve offspring outcomes. The main difference

between the two interpretations has to do with the timing. The first interpretation implies

that the prenatal period is critical and that post-natal stress doesn’t matter while the latter

would be consistent with prenatal and/or postnatal stress mattering.




                                              24
           We conduct a number of robustness checks attempt to shed some light on the

issue of timing by trying to isolate short lived changes in stress levels around the prenatal

period in two ways. First, we include controls for two potential sources of postnatal

stress: income and marital status at age 7 (Table 6, Panel A) and there is no change in the

estimated effects of prenatal cortisol on educational attainment, child IQ or health.

           Second, we present estimates of the impact of prenatal cortisol on offspring

outcomes limiting the sample to siblings spaced at most two and a half years apart. In this

way we further limit variation in the estimation sample to short-lived shocks to stress.

The average spacing in this sample is 2.1 years and in limiting the sample this way we

reduce the sample size to fewer than 192 siblings (96 pairs). When we do, the point

estimates are very similar to those based on the full sample (in some cases larger and in

others smaller) though they are imprecisely estimated in the adult education regression

due, most likely, to the reduction in sample size.

           We conduct a number of additional robustness checks. Since previous work has

found season of birth to be correlated with offspring outcomes in humans and scientists

have found seasonal patterns in cortisol levels in both animals and adult males (Laurence

et al, 2008; Walker et al,1997)25, we attempt to rule out the possibility that seasonal

variation is driving our results. To do so, we control for season of birth in FE regressions

of the impact of cortisol on education, IQ and health and present the results in Panel C of

Table 6. The inclusion of three indicators for season of birth does not change the point

estimates but does reduce precision.

           We also rule out the possibility that our estimates of the impact of cortisol on

offspring outcomes are driven by other circulating hormones that are often correlated
25
     We found only small (3 ng/ml) and insignificant differences in cortisol across seasons.

                                                       25
with cortisol levels. Sex hormones, testosterone in particular, are correlated with cortisol

levels and have been hypothesized to affect offspring outcomes (Romano, Leoni and

Saino, 2006). To identify the impact of cortisol separate from testosterone, we control

for testosterone levels in the regressions presented in Panel D of Table 6. When we

control for testosterone levels, the estimated impact of cortisol on education, IQ and

health at age 7 is unchanged.

        As discussed previously, the sample was non-randomly selected. As a result, we

constructed weights based on the 1960 census for metropolitan Massachusetts (includes

Boston) and Rhode Island (includes Providence). The weights, once applied, should

generate results that are more generalizeable to the population of mothers at the time.

The weighted regression estimates, presented in panel E of Table 6 are slightly smaller

than the non-weighted regressions and in the case of chronic conditions, is no longer

significant.

        In the last panel of Table 6 we present estimates of the impact of prenatal cortisol

levels on height at age 7 measured in centimeters as a falsification exercise. The point

estimates are very small (-0.855 for elevated cortisol), given a mean height of 120 cm,

and imprecise.



Prenatal Stress and Parental Investments

        We examine whether prenatal maternal cortisol is correlated with either pre or

post natal investments in the child. The former includes: 1) weight gain during

pregnancy, 2) smoking during pregnancy, 3) the number of prenatal visits. The latter

include: 1) the mother’s “responsiveness” to her child’s needs, as assessed by a



                                             26
psychologist in the eighth month post-birth, 2) whether as part of the psychological

examination, the interviewer concludes that the child faces an “unfavorable emotional

environment” at one year of age and 3) whether the child attended preschool at age 4.

        We present OLS and FE regression estimates of the impact of prenatal cortisol on

the above measures of parental investments (Table 7). For the prenatal investments, the

point estimates suggest a negative relationship between elevated cortisol and each of the

prenatal investments, but none of the estimates is significant. We also try factor analysis

for the prenatal investments, but still find negative but insignificant effects. For the

postnatal investments, there is no consistent relationship with elevated cortisol.



VI. Maternal Human Capital, Stress and Offspring Human Capital

        Finally, we explore how maternal human capital interacts with stress to affect

offspring outcomes. To do so, we present fixed effect estimates of the impact of elevated

cortisol on offspring education stratified by maternal education (less than a HS degree,

only a HS degree, at least a HS degree). The results very clearly show that the negative

impact of elevated cortisol on offspring outcomes is greatest for mothers with the lowest

levels of human capital (Table 8). The results indicate that a child born to a mother

without a HS degree and exposed to elevated prenatal stress will received nearly 2 fewer

years of schooling, compared with his sibling. For mothers with a HS degree, the impact

is roughly half the size (the t statistic is only 1.6).

        What can explain this difference? It is not because the cortisol is higher among

those with less than a HS degree: among those with high cortisol, average cortisol is 48.9

for HS dropouts and 48.4 for HS grads. One likely possibility is that mothers with low



                                                27
levels of human capital when exposed to a stressful event, have fewer resources, mental

and otherwise, to draw upon. While only suggestive, we look at how the probability of

providing a poor emotional environment at age 1 changes when stressed by maternal

education. For HS drop-outs, this probability increases by 12.5 percentage points for

siblings exposed to high prenatal cortisol relative to their “non-stressed” siblings. For

those with at least a HS degree, the increase is less than half that, 4.8 percentage points.

       One implication of this finding is that exposure to stress may play a role in the

intergenerational transmission of human capital. In Table 9 we present intergenerational

elasticities in human capital (education). We regress ln(offspring years of schooling) on

ln(maternal years of schooling) and a full set of controls (but not fixed effects) in column

1, Table 9. The estimated elasticity suggests that a 1 percent increase in maternal

education leads to a .122 percent increase in offspring education. In column 2, we

include an indicator for elevated cortisol. While elevated cortisol is negatively related to

offspring human capital, controlling for exposure to stress does little to the main effect of

maternal education: the coefficient on ln(maternal education) is virtually unchanged

(estimates of 0.122 and 0.119). However, when we include an interaction between

maternal education and elevated cortisol in column (3), the interaction term is large and

significant. We find that among the non-stressed, there is a moderate amount of

transmission of human capital from mother to child, but when stressed, the degree of

transmission doubles. More specifically, when non-stressed, a ten percent increase in

maternal education translates to a one percent increase in offspring education; when

stressed, a ten percent increase in maternal education translates to a 2.2 percent increase

in offspring education.



                                             28
VII. Conclusions

       In this paper we explore the role of maternal stress in affecting offspring

outcomes. Specifically, we show that in-utero exposure to elevated levels of the stress

hormone cortisol negatively affects offspring human capital as measured by years of

schooling, cognition and health. While the effects may seem large compared with many

educational interventions (Hanushek, 2006), they are comparable to the considerably

larger estimates of the impact of prenatal conditions (Almond and Mazumder, 2008 and

Almond, Edlund and Palme, 2008) and early childhood interventions (Currie, 2001) on

offspring educational outcomes. The results are generally non linear – the negative

effects are concentrated among those with the highest cortisol levels. Cortisol levels in

the normal range appear to have less of an effect on long term outcomes. Moreover, not

only the levels but also the variation in stress appears to matter, suggesting that shocks to

stress levels have a particularly negative impact on offspring outcomes. These results are

consistent with the emerging neurobiology research showing that exogenous in-utero

exposure to stress or cortisol impairs the developing brain of the fetus. They also support

hypotheses put forth by others that maternal stress may play a part in the documented

relationship between exposure to stressful events, such as civil conflict or natural

disasters, and poor offspring outcomes.

       Our results have important implications. First, they suggest that reducing the

number of stressors faced by expectant mothers can positively affect offspring outcomes.

As for the timing of the stressors, though evidence from neurobiology posits that the

prenatal period is critical for offspring outcomes, and our results are consistent with this,



                                             29
we cannot, with our data, rule out the possibility that early postnatal stressors also matter.

Rather, our results are consistent with either prenatal or early postnatal stressors affecting

offspring outcomes.

       Second, they shed light on a potential mechanism behind large intergenerational

correlations in economic status. While we find that women with lower levels of human

capital face more stressors, this alone does not explain why their children have worse

outcomes. Rather, the consequences of elevated stress are greater for the offspring of

women with less human capital. This is consistent with women with less human capital

having fewer resources to combat the negative effects of stress. These results suggest

that reducing stressors faced by women with low levels of human capital may be

particularly effective in lowering the observed intergenerational correlations in human

capital and better enabling children born into poverty to escape it as adults.




                                             30
                                     References

Douglas Almond, Douglas, Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach (2011)
“Inside the War on Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes” Review of
Economics and Statistics XCIII (2): 387-403

Almond, Douglas (2006) “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-term Effects of
In-utero Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population” Journal of Political
Economy, 114: 672-712.

Almond, Douglas, Edlund, Lena and Marten Palme (2009) “Chernobyl’s Subclinical
Legacy: Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1729-1772.

Almond, Douglas, Edlund, Lena, Li, Hongbin and Jansen Zhang (2007) “Long-Term
Effects of the 1959-1961 China Famine: Mainland China and Hong Kong” NBER
Working Paper 13384

Almond, Douglas and Bashkar Mazumder (2008) “Health Capital and the Prenatal
Environment: The Effect of Maternal Fasting During Pregnancy” NBER WP # 14428.

Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie (2011) “Human Capital Development before Age
Five” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4(B): 1315-1486.

Black, Sandra, Devereux, Paul and Kjell Salvanes (2007) “From the Cradle to the Labor
Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122(1): 409-439.

Buka, Stephen, Shenassa Edmund and Raymond Niaura (2003) “Elevated risk of tobacco
dependence among offspring of mothers who smoked during pregnancy: a 30-year
prospective study.” American Journal of Psychiatry. 160(11): 1978-84.

Camacho, Adriana (2008). "Stress and Birth Weight: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks",
American Economic Review-papers and proceedings 98(2): 511-15.

Chiu, Simon, Collier, Christin, Clark, Albert and Katherin Wynn-Edwards (2003)
“Salivary Cortisol on ROCHE Elecsys immunoassay system: pilot biological variation
studies” Clinical Biochemistry 36:211-214.

Cohen, Sheldon, Schwartz, Joseph, Epel, Elissa, Kirschbaum, Clemens, Sidney, Steve
and Teresa Seeman (2006) “Socioeconomic Status, Race and Diurnal Cortisol Decline in
the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) Study”
Psychosomatic Medicine, 68: 41-50.

Coplan, JD, Trost, R, Owens, MJ, Cooper, T, Gorman, HM, Nemeroff, CB and LA
Rosenblum (1998) “Cerebrosponal Fluid Concentrations of Somastostatin and Biogenic

                                          31
Amines in Grown Primates Reared by Mothers Exposed to Manipulated Foraging
Conditions” Arch Gen Psychiatry, 55(1998): 473-447.

Corak, Miles (2004). “Do Poor Children Become Poor Adults? Lessons for Public Policy
from a Cross-Country Comparison of Earnings Mobility.” UNICEF Innocenti Research
Center, Florence, Italy.

Cunha, Flavio and James Heckman (2007) “The Technology of Skill Formation”
American Economic Review 97 (2): 31-47.

Currie, Janet and Maya Rossin-Slater (2012) “Weathering the Storm: Hurricanes and
Birth Outcomes” NBER Working Paper no. 18070.

Dohrenwend, Barbara S. (1973) “Social status and stressful life events” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology. 28(2): 225-235.

Eskenazi, B (2007) “Stress Caused By September 11 Disaster Linked To Low Birth
Weights.” European Society for Human Reproduction and Embryology.

Evans, Gary and Michelle Schamberg (20009) “Childhood Poverty, Chronic Stress and
Adult Working Memory” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 106 (16).

Gesquiere, Lawrence, Khan, Memuna, Shek, Lily, Wango, Tim, Wango, Emmanuel,
Alberts, Susan and Jeanne Altmann, “Coping with a challenging environment: Effects of
seasonal variability and reproductive status on glucocorticoid concentrations of female
baboons (Papio cynocephalus)” Hormones and Behavior, 54 (3): 410-416.

Glynn, Laura M., Pathik D. Wadhwa, Christine Dunkel-Schetter, Aleksandra Chicz-
DeMet, and Curt A. Sandman. 2001. “When Stress Happens Matters: Effects of
Earthquake Timing on Stress Responsivity in Pregnancy,” American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 184(4): 637-642.

Gormley, William T. and Ted Gayer (2005) “Promoting School Readiness in Oklahoma:
An Evaluation of Tulsa's Pre-K Program” J. Human Resources; XL: 533 - 558.

Gutteling, Barbara, deWeerth, Carolina, and Jan Buitelaar (2005) “Prenatal Stress and
Children’s Cortisol Reaction to the First Day of School” Psychoneuroendocrinology. 30:
541-549.

Hanushek, Eric (2006). “School Resources” in The Handbook of the Economics of
Education. Eric Hanushek and Finish Welch eds. Elseveier.

Heckman, James and Dimirty Masterov (2007) “The Productivity Argument for Investing
in Young Children” NBER Working Paper # 13106.




                                           32
Huizink, Anja, Robles de Medina, Pascale, Mulder, Eduard, Visser, Gerard and Jan
Buitelaar (2003) “Stress During Pregnancy is Associated with Developmental Outcome
in Infancy” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry. 44(6): 810-818.

Institute of Medicine Committee on Understanding Premature Birth and Assuring
Healthy Outcomes, Board on Health Sciences Policy, Behrman, R.E., and Butler, A.S.
(eds.) (2006). Preterm Birth: Causes, Consequences, and Prevention. Washington, DC,
The National Academies Press.

Joyce, Theodore, Kaestner, Robert and Sanders Korenman (2000). “The Effect of
Pregnancy Intention on Child Development.” Demography 37(1): 83-94.

Kunz-Ebrecht, Sabine, Kirschbaum, Clemens and Andrew Steptoe (2004) “Work Stress,
Socioeconomic Status and Neuroendocrine Activation Over the Working Day” Social
Science and Medicine 58: 1523-1530.

Lauderdale, Diane (2006). “Outcomes for Arabic-Named Women in California Before
and After September 11.” Demography, 43(1): pp.185-201.

LeWinn, Kaja, Stround. Laura, Molnar, Beth, Ware, James, Koenen, and Stephen Buka
“Elevated Maternal Cortisol Levels During Pregnancy are Associated with Reduced
Childhood IQ” Mimeo, University of California, SF, October 2008.

Mansour, Hani and Daniel Rees 2011. “Prenatal Stress on Birth Weight: Evidence from
the al- Aqsa Intifada.” Discussion Paper Series, IZA DP No. 5535.

Marmot, Michael and GS Smith (1991). “Health Inequality Among British Civil
Servants: the Whitehall II Study.” The Lancet. 337 (8754).

Mazunder, Bhashkar (2005) “The apple falls even closer to the tree than we thought: new
and revised estimates of the intergenerational inheritance of earnings” in Unequal
Chances: family background and economic success. Russell Sage (Eds Samuel Bowles,
herbert Gintis and Melissa Osboure Groves)

McEwen, Bruce (1998) “Protective and Damaging Effects of Stress Mediators” New
England Journal of Medicine 338: 171-179.

Mineka, Susan and John Kihlstrom (1978) “Unpredictable and Uncontrollable Events: A
New Perspective on Experimental Neurosis” Journal of Abnormal Psychology. 87(2):
256-271.

Qian, Nancy and Xin Meng (2009) “The Long Run Impact of Famine on Survivors:
Evidence From China’s Great Famine” unpublished manuscript.




                                          33
Rablen, Matthew and Andrew Oswald (forthcoming) “Mortality and Immortality : The
Novel Prize as an Experiment into the Effect of Status on Longevity” Journal of Health
Economics

Rosenblum, Leonard and Gayle Paully (1984) “The Effects of Varying Environmental
Demands on Maternal and Infant Behavior” Child Development. 55: 305-314.

Scarr, Sandra (1997) “Behavior-Genetic and Socialization Theories of Intelligence” in
Intelligence, Heredity, and Environment Robert Sternberg and Elena Grigorenko, eds.
Cambridge University Press.

Sapolsky, Robert, Uno, Hideo, Rebert, Charles and Caleb Finch (1990) “Hippocampal
Damage Associated with Prolonged Glucocorticoid Exposure in Primates” The Journal of
Neuroscience 10(9): 2897-2902

Schneider, M. L., Coe, C. L., & Lubach, G. R. (1992). Endocrine activation mimics the
adverse effects of prenatal stress on the neuromotor development of the infant primate.
Developmental Psychobiology, 25: 427-439.

Schneider, Mary (1992). “Prenatal Stress Exposure Alters Postnatal Behavioral
Expression Under Conditions of Novelty Change in Rhesus Monkey Infants”
Developmental Psychobiology, 25(7): 529-540.

Sekl, Jonathan (1998) “Physiologic Programming of the Fetus” Clinics in Perinatalogy
25: 939-964.

Simeonova, Emilia (2009). “Out of Sight, Out of Mind? The Impact of Natural Disasters
on Pregnancy Outcomes,” CESInfo Working Paper No. 2814

Solon, Gary (1999) “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market” Handbook of Labor
Economics, Vol 3, Eds Orley Ashenfelter and David Card.

Starkman, Monica, Giordani, Bruno, Berent, Stanley, Schork, Anthony and David
Schteingart (2001) “Elevated Cortisol Levels in Cushing’s Disease Are Associated With
Cognitive Decrements” Psychosomatic Medicine 63:985–993.

Steptoe, Andrew, Kunz-Ebrecht, Sabine, Owen, Natalie, Feldman, Pamela, Willemsen,
Gonneke, Kirschbaum, Clemens, and Michael Marmot (2003) “Socioeconomic Status
and Stress-Related Biological Responses Over the Working Day” Psychosomatic
Medicine 65: 461-470.

Steptoe, Andrew and Michael Marmot (2002) “The Role of Psychobiological Pathways
in Socio-Economic Inequalities in Cardiovascular Disease” European Heart Journal 23:
13-25.




                                           34
Stroud, Laura, Solomon, Catherine, Shenassa, Edmund, Papandonatos, George, Niaura,
Raymond, Lipsett, Lewis, LeWinn, Kaja and Stephen Buka (2007) “Long-term stability
of maternal prenatal steroid hormones from the National Collaborative Perinatal Project:
still valid after all these years.” Psychoneuroendocrinology 32(2): 140-50.

 Uno, H, Lohmiller, L, Thieme C, Kemnitz J, Engel, M, Roecker E and P Ferrell (1990)
“Brain Damage Induced by Prenatal Exposure to Dexamethasone in Fetal Rhesus
Macaques” Developmental Brain Research.

Yu, In Tag, Lee, Sang-Hun, Lee Yong-Sung, and Hyeon Son (2004) “Differential effects
of corticosterone and dexamethasone on hippocampal neurogenesis in vitro.”
Biochemical and biophysical research communications. 317(2): 484-90.

Van Eck, Marleen, Berkhof, Hans, Nicolson, Nancy and Jose Sulon (1996) “The Effect
of Perceived Stress, Traits, Mood States and Stressful Daily Events on Salivary Cortisol”
Psychosomatic Medicine 85(5): 447-458.

Van Goozen, SH, Mathys, W, Cohen-Kettenis, PT, Buitellar, JK and H van England
(2000). “Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Axis and Autonomic nervous System Activity
in Disruptive Children and Matched Controls” Journal of the American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 39: 1438-1445.

 Walker, Brian, Best, Ruth, Noon, Joseph, Watt, Graham C. M. and David J. Webb
(1997) “Seasonal Variation in Glucocorticoid Activity in Healthy Men” The Journal of
Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 82(12): 4015-4019

Welberg, LAM, Sekl, Jonathan and Meghan Homes (2001) “Prenatal Glucocorticoid
Programming of Brian Corticosteroid Receptors and Corticotrophin-Releasing Hormone:
Possible Implications for Behaviour” Neuroscience. 104: 71-79.

Wust, Stehan, Federenko, Ilona, Hellhammer, Dirk and C Kirschbaum (2000) “Genetic
Factors, Perceived Chronic Stress and the Free Cortisol Response to Awakening”
Psychoneuroendocrinology 25: 707-720.




                                           35
                          Table 2: Within Family Differences in Prenatal Cortisol Levels and Offspring Outcomes

                                               Lower Cortisol   Higher Cortisol          Difference   % Difference   Diff. as % Std. Dev.
Years of completed schooling                      13.57             13.44                   -0.13        -1%                  -7%

7 year IQ                                          101.1             99.52                  -1.58         -2%               -11%

Number of Chronic Health Conditions at age 7       0.309             0.293                  -0.02         -5%               -4%

Gestation                                          40.09             39.93                 -0.159          0%               -8%

Birth Weight                                       3,338             3309                   -29           -1%               -6%


                                          Low/Normal Cortisol    High Cortisol           Difference   % Difference   Diff. as % Std. Dev.
Years of completed schooling                    13.61               12.54                   -1.07        -8%                 -58%

7 year IQ                                          100.3             95.2                   -5.12         -5%               -37%

Number of Chronic Health Conditions at age 7       0.25              0.37                   0.12          48%               28%

Gestation                                          40.18             40.00                 -0.185          0%               -9%

Birth Weight                                       3,328             3262                   -66           -2%               -13%
       Table 3: Prenatal Cortisol and Offspring Educational Attainment

Panel A: Quintiles of Cortisol                (1)       (2)         (3)
Top quintile prenatal cortisol              -0.471    -0.342      -1.148
                                            [0.159]   [0.183]     [0.536]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol           -0.138    -0.248      -0.241
                                            [0.193]   [0.191]     [0.464]
Black                                        0.193     0.177
                                            [0.192]   [0.253]
Maternal education                           0.215     0.188
                                           [0.0396]  [0.0477]
Mother single at birth                     -0.0167    -0.899       -0.211
                                            [0.263]   [0.370]      [1.194]
Maternal age at birth                       0.0383    0.0313       -0.138
                                           [0.0192]  [0.0220]      [0.187]
Income at birth in $1000s                   0.0126  -0.00336     -0.00537
                                          [0.00664] [0.00733]     [0.0148]
Mother working while pregnant                0.106     0.130      -0.0287
                                            [0.232]   [0.221]      [0.372]
Male                                        -0.507    -0.108       -0.503
                                            [0.157]   [0.166]      [0.281]
Birth order                                -0.0531   -0.0729        0.240
                                           [0.0584]  [0.0779]      [0.327]
Number of siblings at age 7                 -0.102    -0.101        0.116
                                           [0.0540]  [0.0619]      [0.215]
Husband at home                              0.583     0.474       -0.327
                                            [0.195]   [0.249]      [0.705]
Number moves birth to age 7                -0.0310    -0.168      -0.0437
                                           [0.0570]  [0.0550]      [0.193]
Providence                                  0.0124   0.00634
                                            [0.198]   [0.196]
Pregnancy complication                      -0.100   -0.0382        0.264
                                            [0.177]   [0.171]      [0.336]
Gestation at draw date                    0.000178 -0.0258         0.0585
                                           [0.0499]  [0.0522]     [0.0902]
Constant                                     10.16     12.02        14.76
                                            [1.821]   [1.763]      [5.177]

Observations                                 980        376         386
R-squared                                   0.206      0.234       0.788


Panel B: Linear Cortisol                      (1)       (2)          (3)
Free cortisol                             -0.00303 -0.00396       -0.0290
                                          [0.00293] [0.00375]     [0.0110]
Constant                                     10.26     12.06        11.80
                                            [1.759]   [1.745]      [4.812]

Observations                                 980        376         381
R-squared                                   0.198      0.228       0.815

Sample                                       Full      Sibling    Sibling
Full controls                                 Y           Y          Y
Maternal FE included                          N          N           Y
Robust standard errors in brackets
                             Table 4: Prenatal Cortisol of Birth Outcomes

                                      (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
Panel A: Quintiles of Cortisol        BW       Gestation      BW       Gestation    BW       Gestation

Top quintile prenatal cortisol      -50.58      -0.128      -98.56      -0.235     -40.21     -0.297
                                    [39.44]     [0.177]     [62.39]     [0.283]    [85.56]    [0.398]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol    68.01      0.0368       41.72      -0.357      77.97     0.0354
                                    [45.98]     [0.183]     [64.72]     [0.279]    [83.57]    [0.541]

Observations                          981         980         376        376        386        386
R-squared                            0.064       0.055       0.088      0.045      0.872      0.822




                                      (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
Panel B: Linear Cortisol              BW       Gestation      BW       Gestation    BW       Gestation

Free cortisol                       -0.239    -0.000324     -0.641      0.00145     0.700    -0.00386
                                    [0.931]    [0.00449]    [1.519]    [0.00779]   [1.882]    [0.0109]
Constant                             2,983       37.90       3,618        38.30     4,476       42.48
                                    [342.8]     [1.377]     [489.5]      [2.094]   [1,075]     [5.733]

Observations                          981         980         376        376        386        386
R-squared                            0.059       0.055       0.080      0.039      0.871      0.822

Sample                                  Full        Full     Sibling    Sibling    Sibling    Sibling
Full controls                            Y           Y          Y         Y          Y          Y
Maternal FE included                     N           N          N         N          Y          Y
Robust standard errors in brackets
Full controls include all controls listed in Table 3, Top Panel
       Table 4: Prenatal Cortisol and Offspring 7 Year IQ

Panel A: Quintiles of Cortisol                  (1)         (2)

Top quintile prenatal cortisol                -3.586      -6.056
                                              [1.733]     [3.016]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol             -1.812       1.706
                                              [1.697]     [2.999]

Observations                                    363         372
R-squared                                      0.297       0.866


Panel B Linear Cortisol                         (1)         (2)

Free cortisol                                -0.0300      -0.0709
                                             [0.0441]     [0.0825]

Observations                                    363         372
R-squared                                      0.288       0.861

Sample                                          Sibling    Sibling
Full controls                                      Y          Y
Maternal FE included                               N          Y
Robust standard errors in brackets
Full controls include all controls listed in Table 3, Top Panel
                Table 5: Prenatal Cortisol and Offspring Health (Chronic Conditions) at Age 7

Dependent variable=number of chronic conditions, age 7
Panel A: Quintiles of Cortisol                                                      (1)               (2)

Top quintile prenatal cortisol                                                    0.0590             0.176
                                                                                 [0.0845]           [0.184]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol                                                  0.118            -0.117
                                                                                  [0.102]           [0.237]

Observations                                                                        363               372
R-squared                                                                          0.063             0.699


Panel B: Linear Cortisol                                                            (1)               (2)

Free cortisol                                                                     0.00257           0.00925
                                                                                 [0.00265]         [0.00547]

Observations                                                                        363               372
R-squared                                                                          0.062             0.706


Sample                                                                             Sibling           Sibling
Full controls                                                                         Y                Y
Maternal FE included                                                                  N                Y
Robust standard errors in brackets
Full controls include all controls listed in Table 3, Top Panel, as well as birth weight and gestation
                                        Table 6: Robustness Checks

                                                                        (1)        (2)        (3)
Panel A: Control for Income and Marital Status at Age 7              Education     IQ       Chronic

Top quintile prenatal cortisol                                        -1.058     -6.324
                                                                      [0.567]    [2.948]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol                                     -0.292      1.392
                                                                      [0.486]    [3.115]
Free cortisol                                                                                0.00882
                                                                                            [0.00499]
Constant                                                               12.52      47.71        1.968
                                                                      [6.166]    [42.20]      [1.618]

Observations                                                           363         361        361
R-squared                                                             0.784       0.878      0.732


                                                                        (1)        (2)        (3)
Panel B: Birthspacing<2.5 years                                      Education     IQ       Chronic

Top quintile prenatal cortisol                                        -0.665     -8.415
                                                                      [0.564]    [2.755]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol                                     -0.538     -2.885
                                                                      [0.536]    [2.931]
Free cortisol                                                                                0.00639
                                                                                            [0.00265]
Constant                                                               18.11      105.8        0.608
                                                                      [9.045]    [52.92]      [1.967]

Observations                                                           198         192        192
R-squared                                                             0.651       0.821      0.645


                                                                        (1)        (2)        (3)
Panel C: Control for Season of Birth                                 Education      IQ      Chronic
Top quintile prenatal cortisol                                        -1.172     -5.859
                                                                      [0.541]    [3.039]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol                                     -0.220      1.886
                                                                      [0.474]    [3.041]
Free cortisol                                                                                0.00864
                                                                                            [0.00513]
Constant                                                               14.40      74.91        1.424
                                                                      [5.166]    [42.16]      [1.555]

Observations                                                           386         372        372
R-squared                                                             0.788       0.868      0.737


                                                                        (1)        (2)        (3)
Panel D: Control for Testosterone                                    Education     IQ       Chronic

Top quintile prenatal cortisol                                        -1.149     -6.077
                                                                      [0.536]    [2.996]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol                                     -0.245      1.686
                                                                      [0.469]    [2.994]
Free cortisol                                                                                0.00868
                                                                                            [0.00488]
Constant                                                               14.95      74.70        1.526
                                                                      [5.132]    [42.49]      [1.576]

Observations                                                           386         372        372
R-squared                                                             0.788       0.867      0.727


                                                                        (1)        (2)        (3)
Panel E: Weighted Regressions                                        Education     IQ       Chronic

Top quintile prenatal cortisol                                        -0.967     -6.969
                                                                      [0.522]    [3.512]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol                                     -0.265     -0.567
                                                                      [0.404]    [4.579]
Free cortisol                                                                                0.00654
                                                                                            [0.00537]
Constant                                                               12.72      44.81        1.587
                                                                      [4.958]    [56.05]      [1.785]

Observations                                                           377         364        364
R-squared                                                             0.845       0.881      0.766


                                                                        (1)        (2)
Panel F: Child Height in cm. at Age 7 (Falsification)

Top quintile prenatal cortisol                                        -0.855
                                                                      [1.120]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol                                     -1.836
                                                                      [1.533]
Free cortisol                                                                    -0.0160
                                                                                 [0.0340]
Constant                                                               116.9       116.0
                                                                      [16.74]     [17.47]

Observations                                                           372         372
R-squared                                                             0.840       0.836

Sample                                                                Sibling    Sibling     Sibling
Full controls                                                           Y          Y           Y
Maternal FE included                                                    Y          Y           Y
Note: average child height at age 7 is 120 cm
Robust standard errors in brackets
                                                                            Table 7: Prenatal Cortisol and Prenatal and Postnatal Child Investments

                                                     (1)        (2)             (3)       (4)              (5)         (6)              (7)           (8)                 (9)           (10)                (11)      (12)
                                                      Weight Gain                  Smoker                  Prenatal Visits            Mother Unresponsive             Unfavorable Emotional Env             Nursery School
Panel A Quintiles of Cortisol                       OLS         FE             OLS        FE              OLS          FE              OLS            FE                 OLS             FE                 OLS        FE
Top quintile prenatal cortisol                     -1.102     -0.562          0.0648   0.0456            -0.105      -0.630          -0.00300      -0.0951             -0.0292        -0.0272              0.0241    0.0743
                                                   [0.975]    [2.440]        [0.0642] [0.0327]           [0.419]    [0.823]          [0.0265]     [0.0640]             [0.0324]       [0.0725]            [0.0430] [0.0740]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol                  -0.260      3.030          0.0263   0.0725             0.101     -0.0369          0.00492      -0.00853             -0.0143         0.0178             -0.0235    0.0254
                                                   [1.031]    [2.664]        [0.0682] [0.0669]           [0.445]    [0.796]          [0.0271]     [0.0700]             [0.0168]       [0.0689]            [0.0343] [0.0455]

Observations                                         358        368            376         386             375        385               376            386                376             386               346       355
R-squared                                           0.122      0.775          0.049       0.957           0.195      0.846             0.063          0.686              0.202           0.737             0.101     0.840



                                                     (1)        (2)             (3)       (4)              (5)        (6)               (7)          (8)                  (9)           (10)                 (11)      (12)
                                                      Weight Gain                 Smoker                   Prenatal Visits            Mother Unresponsive             Unfavorable Emotional Env              Nursery School
Panel B Linear Cortisol                             OLS         FE             OLS        FE              OLS         FE               OLS           FE                  OLS             FE                 OLS         FE
Free cortisol                                     0.000986 -0.0426           0.00143 0.000511           -0.00271 -0.00784            0.000570    -0.000163            -0.000560      -0.000644            0.00109 0.00130
                                                  [0.0279] [0.0548]         [0.00136] [0.000724]        [0.0119] [0.0181]           [0.000889]   [0.00238]            [0.000442]    [0.000792]           [0.000919] [0.00165]

Observations                                         358        368            376         386             375        385               376            386                376             386               346       355
R-squared                                           0.119      0.771          0.048       0.957           0.194      0.845             0.065          0.678              0.201           0.737             0.102     0.839




Sample                                                   Sibling Sibling       Sibling    Sibling            Sibling Sibling            Sibling      Sibling            Sibling         Sibling            Sibling   Sibling
Full controls                                              Y       Y             Y           Y                 Y       Y                   Y            Y                  Y               Y                  Y         Y
Maternal FE included                                       N       Y             N           Y                 N       Y                  N             Y                  N               Y                  N         Y
Robust standard errors in brackets
Full controls include all controls listed in Table 3, Top Panel.
Maternal Responsiveness is measured at 4 months of age and is an aggregate of maternal responsiveness to the child, maternal focus on the child, child's appearance (neat to unkempt) and attendtion paid to child
Unfavorable emotional environment is measured at age 1 and is the interviewers positive response to the question of whether there is an unfavorabl emotional environment at home
Nervous Condition is whether the mother reports a nervous condition any time from the birth of the child to age 7
Weight gain is maternal weight gain during pregnancy
Table 8: Does Maternal Human Capital Moderate the Impact of Prenatal Cortisol on Offspring Outcomes?

                                                                     (1)       (2)          (3)
                                                                   Mother     Mother       Mother
Dependent Variable= offspring education in years                    <HS        HS          >=HS

Top quintile prenatal cortisol                                     -1.905     -0.947       -0.786
                                                                   [0.743]    [0.594]      [0.550]
Bottom quintile prenatal cortisol                                  -0.130     -0.425       -0.429
                                                                   [0.934]    [0.424]      [0.425]
Constant                                                            24.39      8.770        9.068
                                                                   [8.336]    [5.656]      [5.635]

Observations                                                        143         177          233
R-squared                                                          0.844       0.821        0.802

Sample                                                           Sibling      Sibling      Sibling
                                                               Mother <HS    Mother HS   Mother >=HS
Full controls                                                      Y             Y            Y
Maternal FE included                                               Y             Y            Y
Robust standard errors in brackets
Full controls include all controls listed in Table 3, Top Panel.
                               Table 9: Stress and Intergenerational Correlations in Human Capital

                                                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
Dependent Variable= Ln(offspring education)

Ln(maternal education)                                       0.122      0.119       0.0958     0.122      0.121      0.0753
                                                            [0.0243]   [0.0240]    [0.0257]   [0.0243]   [0.0242]   [0.0374]
Ln(maternal education)*high cortisol                                                 0.131
                                                                                   [0.0559]
High (top quintile) prenatal cortisol                                  -0.0202      -0.326
                                                                       [0.0100]     [0.134]
Ln(maternaleducation)*cortisol                                                                                     0.00200
                                                                                                                  [0.00125]
Cortisol                                                                                               -0.000288 -0.00501
                                                                                                       [0.000187] [0.00301]
Constant                                                     2.279       2.272      2.346      2.279      2.270     2.387
                                                            [0.0654]    [0.103]    [0.108]    [0.0654]   [0.103]   [0.130]

Observations                                                  981        981         981        981        981        981
R-squared                                                    0.194      0.198       0.205      0.194      0.195      0.197

Sample                                                           Full    Full        Full       Full       Full       Full
Full controls                                                     Y       Y           Y          Y          Y          Y
Maternal FE included                                              N       N           N          N          N          N
Robust standard errors in brackets
Full controls include all controls listed in Table 3, Top Panel.
1% increase in maternal education leads to a .122% increase in offspring education
if highly stressed, 1% increase in maternal education leads to a .22% increase in offspring education
                      Figure 1: Distribution of Prenatal Cortisol
          .05




                                                  .05




                                                                                   .04
          .04




                                                  .04




                                                                                   .03
          .03




                                                  .03
Density




                                        Density




                                                                                Density
                                                                                 .02
          .02




                                                  .02




                                                                                   .01
          .01




                                                  .01
          0




                                                  0




                                                                                   0
                0    50     100   150                   0    20 40 60 80 100              −50        0        50
                    Full Sample                             Sibling Subsample               Sibling Difference

                                                                                                                   ®
                                                 Appendix Table 1: Sample Characteristics

                                   1960 Census          Providence & Boston         Cortisol Sample           Sibling Sample
                                    Unweighted              Unweighted               Unweighted       Unweighted           Weighted
Maternal Education                     11.5                     11.4                     11.07           11.4                11.6

Family Income                        $37,971                  $26,013                  $24,403         $26,233             $35,113

Mother Black                          0.03                      0.12                        0.13         0.08               0.03

Maternal Age                          30.6                      25.2                        24.9         24.6               25.4

Mother Single                         0.03                      0.11                        0.09        0.056               0.024

Birthweight (grams)                                            3185                         3307         3290               3303

Gestation (weeks)                                               36.8                        40.1         39.9                40

Free Cortisol (ng/ml)                                                                       24            22                20.5

Verbal IQ 7 year                                                99.9                        99.2        100.2               101.8

Adult Education                                                                             13.1         13.2               13.3

Severe Chronic Conditions 7 year                                                            0.25         0.25               0.25

Observations                                                   17921                        1058         320                 320
Income in 2000 dollars
            Appendix Table 2: OLS Estimates of the Impact of a Relative Change in Cortisol on Adult Eduction

                                                                      (1)                             (2)

Own Cortisol                                                        0.00802                         0.0142
                                                                   [0.00619]                      [0.00835]
Own Cortisol-Sibling Cortisol                                       -0.0189                        -0.0229
                                                                   [0.00695]                      [0.00875]
Constant                                                              11.43                          11.42
                                                                     [1.161]                        [1.567]

Observations                                                          266                            134
R-squared                                                            0.271                          0.299

Sample                                                              Sibling              Sibling- 1 Randomly Selected
Full controls                                                         Y                                Y
Maternal FE included                                                  N                                N
Robust standard errors in brackets
Full controls include all controls listed in Table 3, Top Panel.
