                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE DESIGN OF FISCAL ADJUSTMENTS

                                           Alberto F. Alesina
                                            Silvia Ardagna

                                         Working Paper 18423
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18423


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2012




We thank Jeff Brown, Carlo Favero, Francesco Giavazzi, Paulo Mauro and participants to the 2012
AER session on Fiscal Adjustments for useful comments and Giampaolo Lecce for excellent research
assistantship. Views and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not necessarily
represent those of Goldman Sachs or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The author alone
is responsible for any remaining errors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Alberto F. Alesina and Silvia Ardagna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The design of fiscal adjustments
Alberto F. Alesina and Silvia Ardagna
NBER Working Paper No. 18423
September 2012
JEL No. H2,H3,H5,H62

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper offers three results. First, in line with the previous literature, we confirm that fiscal adjustments
based mostly on the spending side are less likely to be reversed. Second, spending based fiscal adjustments
have caused smaller recessions than tax based fiscal adjustments. Finally, certain combinations of
policies have made it possible for spending based fiscal adjustments to be associated with growth in
the economy even on impact rather than with a recession. Thus, expansionary fiscal adjustments are
possible.


Alberto F. Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

Silvia Ardagna
Global Economics
Global Investment Research
130 Peterborough Court
133 Fleet Street
London EC4A 2BB
United Kingdom
ardagna@gmail.com
               The design of fiscal adjustments∗
                  Alberto Alesina and Silvia Ardagna†
                 Harvard and IGIER     Goldman Sachs
                         This version: September 2012


                                        Abstract
           This paper oﬀers three results. First, in line with the previous lit-
      erature we confirm that fiscal adjustment based mostly on the spending
      side are less likely to be reversed. Second, spending based fiscal adjust-
      ments have caused smaller recessions than tax based fiscal adjustment.
      Finally, certain combinations of polcies have made it possible for spend-
      ing based fiscal adjustments to be associated with growth in the economy
      even on impact rather than with a recession. Thus, expansionary fiscal
      adjustments are possible.


1     Introduction
Two are the critical questions regarding fiscal adjustments, defined as decisive
reductions of government deficits. First: what is the eﬀective mix between tax
increases and spending cuts in order to achieve a relatively permanent reduction
of the debt/GDP ratio? Second: how large are the output and employment
losses associated with fiscal adjustments? Is it possible to completely eliminate
them?
    This paper oﬀers new evidence on these questions. We find the following
results. First, in line with the previous literature we confirm that fiscal adjust-
ments based mostly on the spending side have been less likely to be reversed
and have lead to more long lasting reductions of debt over GDP ratios. Sec-
ond, expenditure based fiscal adjustments are correlated with smaller recessions
than tax based fiscal adjustments. In some cases, during and in the immediate
aftermath of spending based fiscal adjustments GDP growth is actually higher
than in the years before. These episodes of "expansionary"fiscal adjustments
are more likely to occur when they are accompanied by a growth oriented policy
   ∗ We thank Jeﬀ Brown, Carlo Favero, Francesco Giavazzi, Paolo Mauro and participants to

the 2012 AER session on Fiscal Adjustments for useful comments and Giampaolo Lecce for
excellent research assitantship.
   † Views and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not neces-

sarily represent those of Goldman Sachs. The author alone is responsible for any remaining
errors.



                                             1
mix such as labor market and goods market liberalization. A sense of "regime
change"in which expectations are turned around may also be important and
may aﬀect investors’ confidence.
    The present paper builds upon a rich and lively literature based on "episodes".
The first paper in this series was by Giavazzi and Pagano (1990), who studied
the experience of Denmark in the early eighties and Ireland at the end of the
same decade and argued that these episodes represent cases of “expansionary
fiscal adjustments”. The argument was that an increase in consumers and in-
vestors’ confidence, associated with the drastic fiscal change and reflected in a
sharp fall in long-term interest rates, compensated the Keynesian eﬀect of tax
hikes and spending cuts. A large literature has followed that paper making two
points: spending based adjustments are less contractionary and are more likely
to lead to a permanent stabilization or a reduction of the debt to GDP ratio;
second, in some cases spending based adjustments have been associated with
no recession at all, even in the short-run, thus producing an expansionary fiscal
adjustment. The first paper looking at the universe of large fiscal adjustments
was Alesina and Perotti (1995). Many other papers followed along similar lines
confirming those results.1
    One diﬃcult issue in this literature is how to identify episodes of large dis-
cretionary policy changes. Up until a paper by Alesina and Ardagna (2010)
the identification criteria was based upon observed outcomes: a large fiscal ad-
justment was one where the cyclically adjusted primary deficit over GDP ratio
fell by a certain amount (normally at least 1.5 per cent of GDP)2 . The idea
was that such a large adjustment in the cyclically adjusted primary deficit was
unlikely to be driven by the business cycle and was, instead, an indication of a
discretionary active fiscal adjustment package. A recent paper by economists at
the IMF (IMF 2010) suggested a diﬀerent way of identifying large, exogenous
fiscal adjustments. Following the narrative approach pioneered by Romer and
Romer (2010) they picked cases that according to their criteria were attempts by
governments to reduce deficits aggressively. Although the presentation of that
paper emphasized the diﬀerences with earlier work, the findings were essentially
in line with the results summarized by Alesina and Ardagna (2010) in the sense
that both agree that spending based adjustments lead to much smaller down-
turns in output. The IMF study finds that on average, in the episodes their
identification technique picks up, adjustments cause in the short-run (modest)
recessions. The IMF findings, however, have been revisited and a later IMF
paper (Devries et al. 2011), using the same methodology, revised the set of
fiscal stabilization episodes (see Favero, Giavazzi and Perego 2011 for a com-
parison of the results obtained using the two sets of data). About a third of
the episodes are reclassified from the 2010 to the 2011 version. We consider the
later revisions as the correct and final version of episodes. Alesina, Favero, and
Giavazzi (2012) show using the IMF definitions that the results regarding the
composition of spending versus tax changes is robust. Spending cuts have been
   1 An incompletre lsit includes Alesina, Perotti and Tavares (1998), Broadbent and Daly

(2010), IMF (1996), Mc Demott and Wescott (1996), Von Hagen and Strauch (2001).
   2 The results are not unduly sensitive to the choice of the threshold.




                                           2
associated with very small or no recessions while tax increases have been asso-
ciated with large recessions. Both the current paper and Alesina, Favero, and
Giavazzi (2012) find that contrary to the claim by IMF (2010) and Devries et
al. (2011) monetary policy is not the explanation of the systematic diﬀerences
between tax based and expenditure based adjustments.
    But there are other possible policies. In fact Alesina and Ardagna (1998)
and Perotti (2012) note that fiscal adjustments are multiyear rich policy pack-
ages and that one can learn a lot from detailed case studies. One lesson of
these case studies is that several accompanying policies (in addition to spending
cuts or tax increases) favor the success of a fiscal adjustment and can moderate
the contractionary eﬀects on the economy. For instance, income policies (wage
agreements) help, and such policies are helped by fiscal programs that slow-
down the dynamics of public sector wages. Wage moderation, and sometimes,
but schematically, exchange rate devaluation help competitiveness inducing an
export boom. The behavior of private investment is often central if entrepre-
neurs react positively to a change in the fiscal package (Alesina et al. (2002)
and Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi (2012)).
    As far as the channels through which fiscal adjustments can aﬀect the econ-
omy, the appropriate policy-mix has eﬀects on the economy both on the demand
side and on the supply side of the economy. The relatively small negative ef-
fects of spending cuts on growth via the demand side can be compensated by the
positive eﬀect that accommodative monetary policies have on the demand side
and/or by the positive eﬀect that cuts to current spending and liberalization
reforms have via the supply side of the economy. In some cases, expectations
about a change in the policy regime generated a positive wealth eﬀect and a
reduction in risk premia on long-term interest rates. This had positive eﬀects
on private consumption and investment. While we do not test for the chan-
nels through which fiscal adjustments aﬀect the economy in this paper, we have
done so in our previous research. In particular, Alesina et al. (2002) show
that spending cuts have a positive eﬀect on private investment while increases
to taxes, particular labour taxes, hurt investment through the labour market
and firms’ profitability. The size of fiscal policy shocks on firms’ profits and
private investment is large enough to explain the boom (fall) in private invest-
ment that accompanied expansionary and spending based (contractionary and
tax based) fiscal adjustments. Hence, we concluded that there might be nothing
special around large fiscal adjustments in terms of the reaction of expectations
but that the composition of the adjustment and its eﬀects on the labour mar-
kets can explain the diﬀerent outcomes. A similar conclusion is also reached
by Ardagna (2004) that running a horse race between the so-called expectation
channel and the labour market channel finds more evidence in favour of the
latter than the former. Finally, Alesina and Perotti (1995) find evidence that
spending cuts have a positive eﬀect on exports’ competitiveness, while increases
in taxes work in the opposite direction.3
   3 See also Ardagna (2007), Daveri et al. (2000) and Finn (1998) for models that formalize

the eﬀects of changes to the government wage bills, transfers and labour tax increases on the



                                             3
    The present paper takes on from this line of papers. It uses both the IMF
classification of fiscal adjustments and the earlier one based upon the size of
changes of the cyclically adjusted primary deficit over GDP ratio. We try to
clarify the diﬀerences between the two both methodologically and empirically.
In addition, we expand the analysis to include the eﬀects of a vast set of policies
which constitute the "package"accompanying the fiscal cuts. By considering
many alternative definitions of fiscal adjustments we can do much robustness
checks on our previous results and we confirm that they are robust. The main
results which we obtain is that the key message regarding the composition of fis-
cal adjustments is the same regardless of the definition used to identify episodes
of fiscal adjustments (i.e.: our definition using actual outcomes on the cyclically
adjusted deficit and the IMF definition based upon announced plans for cuts).
The same result is obtained by the VAR analysis of Alesina Favero and Giavazzi
(2012) who focus in particular on the confidence channel and by Biggs et. al.
(2010).
    Before proceeding it is worth mentioning two disclaimers. First, we do not
plan to review here the vast recent literature on empirical fiscal policy, the size
of spending multipliers, etc. We refer to several chapters in Alesina and Giavazzi
(2012) for this task. Second, we oﬀer no policy discussion on the size, timing
and opportunity of the current fiscal adjustments in Europe or the US. The
reader can draw his/her own conclusion based upon the historical evidence and
empirical analysis which we present.4
    This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we discuss data and
definitional issues. In particular, we consider alternative definitions of what
a fiscal adjustment is. In section 3, we use our outcome based definition to
investigate successful and expansionary adjustments versus unsuccessful and
contractionary ones. Section 4 discusses the policy mix which leads to success
versus failure. Section 5 uses the Weo definition of fiscal adjustments and repeats
the same analysis of success versus failure. Section 6 provides econometric
evidence on the eﬀect of diﬀerent types of fiscal adjustments on the economy
using the same methodology proposed by the IMF (2010). The last section
concludes.


2     Data and definitions
2.1     Data
We consider data on 21 OECD countries from 1970 to 2010. The countries
included in the sample are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
France, Finland, Germany, Greece, Italy, Ireland, Japan, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom,
and the United States. The variables’ definitions and the source of the variables
economy in the context of unionized or perfectly competitive labour markets.
   4 See Nielsen (2012) for an analysis of current fiscal consolidation programs undergoing in

Europe.



                                              4
are indicated in Table 1. These are the countries which were members of the
OECD group for the entire sample period.5

2.2        Definitions of fiscal adjustments
Defining an episodes of fiscal adjustment is challenging for two reasons. The
first diﬃculty lies in the endogeneity of fiscal variables, that is the reduction
of the deficit over GDP ratio may be due to an increase in the denominator
and may have nothing to do with a discretionary policy action. Obviously,
one can (and should) use cyclically adjusted fiscal variables but the cyclical
correction is notoriously imperfect and arbitrary to some extent. Thus, one has
to worry about the fact that in a boom not only spending may go down because
of automatic stabilizers, but the government may choose to cut discretionary
spending. If one does not take that into account one is lead to the wrong
conclusion. Second, it is often diﬃcult to identify the precise timing since fiscal
adjustments are often multi-year events. For instance, imagine a country in
which the deficit over GDP ratios falls by 2 per cent in year t, by 0.1 per cent in
year t+1, and 2 per cent in year t+2. Does one consider the three year period
one fiscal adjustment or does one consider year t and year t+2 as two separate
episodes? Depending on what choice one makes the results might be diﬀerent.6
    The literature on episodes adopted definitions that considered only single
years large adjustments or consecutive years in which the adjustment in each
year was smaller but always in the range of 1-2 per cent as this range seemed
a high enough one to isolate large episodes but not so large as to have too few
episodes.7 The rationale for these definitions is that a year with such a large
reduction of the primary deficit cannot be "business as usual", therefore it must
indicate a change in the policy stance.
    In the present paper, however, we consider only multi-year adjustments and
we allow for the possibility of small reductions in the primary deficit in a par-
ticular year, provided that this happens in a period of consecutive years when
we observe sizable improvements in the fiscal balance. In particular, we use the
following definition.

Definition 1 A fiscal adjustment is either: 1) a two year period in which the
cyclically adjusted primary balance/GDP improves in each year and the cumu-
lative improvement is at least two points of the balance/GDP ratio; 2) a three
or more year period in which the cyclically adjusted primary balance over GDP
   5 We  exclude the tiny Luxembourg.
   6 See Perotti (2012) for a detailed illustration of this problem.
   7 Alesina and Ardagna (2010) define a period of fiscal adjustment as a year in which the

cyclically adjusted primary balance improves by at least 1.5 per cent of GDP. Alesina and
Perotti () defined a period of fiscal adjustment as a year in which the cyclically adjusted
primary balance improves by at least 2 per cent of GDP per year or a period of consecutive
years in which the cyclically adjusted primary balance improves by at least 1 per cent of GDP
per year.
  The qualitative nature of the results did not change and conclusions were also robust to
changes in the threshold chosen.



                                             5
improves in each year and the cumulative improvement is at least three points
of the balance/GDP ratio.

    The list of our episodes of fiscal adjustments captured by this definition is
in Table 2. This definition allow us to avoid the problem highlighted above
of "stop and go"adjustments a problem which we had in Alesina and Ardagna
(2010). Also, it allow us to provide evidence on the robustness of the results of
the previous episodes literature and to focus on episodes that in terms of their
duration are closer to what OECD countries will experience this time around.
In fact, given the size of the budget deficit that many OECD countries have
accumulated, fiscal adjustments are likely to be multi-year processes. Finally,
note that we use the primary deficit, (i.e.: the diﬀerence between current and
capital spending, excluding interest rate expenses paid on government debt, and
total tax revenue), rather than the total deficit, to avoid that episodes selected
result from the eﬀect that changes in interest rates have on total government
expenditures. Figure 1 illustrates the ten largest fiscal adjustments based upon
this definition. Of the 52 episodes of fiscal adjustments, 24 last two years, 8 last
3 years and the longest (only one) lasts 9 years.
    We are interested in two measures of results of fiscal adjustments. One is
whether they managed to reduce substantially the debt over GDP ratio, the
second is a measure of costs in terms of downturn for the economy. With
regard to the first question we label "successful"an episode of fiscal adjustment
which has lead to a reduction of the debt/GDP ratio and "unsuccessful"those
with the opposite feature. We should emphasize that one should not give a
normative interpretation to this term but simply consider it as a label which
refers specifically to the eﬀect of the fiscal adjustment on the debt/GDP ratio.
We label "expansionary"those episodes which have not lead to a downturn and
recessionary those which did. More precisely, we use the following definitions.

Definition 2 A period of fiscal adjustment is successful if the debt to GDP ratio
two years after the end of a fiscal adjustment is lower than the debt to GDP ratio
in the last year of the adjustment.

   This definition selects 25 episodes of successful fiscal adjustments and 24
unsuccessful. Note that the total (49) is lower than the 52 observations of the
previous table since three cases of adjustments are too close to the end of the
sample to allow us a classification based upon this definition. In Table A1 in
the Appendix we list all the episodes.

Definition 3 A period of fiscal adjustment is expansionary if real GDP growth
during the adjustment period is higher than the average growth the country ex-
perienced in the two years before.

    This definitions selects 35 episodes of expansionary fiscal adjustments and
17 contractionary. Table 2 lists all the episodes.
    In order to avoid that the world business cycle may lead us to incorrectly
classify adjustments because external factors may be important for small open

                                         6
economies we also use a second definition to select expansionary and contrac-
tionary fiscal adjustments.

Definition 4 An expansionary fiscal adjustment is one in which the average
growth in diﬀerence for the G7 average growth during the adjustment was higher
than the average growth in the two year before the adjustment relative to the G7
average growth.

    This definition isolates 28 cases of expansionary fiscal adjustments and 24
unsuccessful. Table 2 lists the episodes.
    We should be very clear on the following point. This correlation between
fiscal adjustments and the economy which highlights the occurrence of "expan-
sionary"episodes, should not be considered "casual"at this point. We cannot
say that austerity is growth promoting per se. We can only note at this point a
correlation. In what follows we explore this correlation to investigate whether
certain types of fiscal adjustments rather than others are more likely to be con-
tractionary or expansionary.


3     Diﬀerent types of fiscal adjustments
In this section we explore based upon our two outcome definitions reported above
the characteristics of episodes, distinguishing those which have been successful
versus unsuccessful and expansionary versus contractionary.

3.1    The composition of fiscal adjustments
Table 3 presents some basic summary statistics on the successful versus unsuc-
cessful episodes. Interestingly they are almost exactly the same in number (24
versus 25). By definition the successful ones lead to a reduction of the debt over
GDP ratios and the others do not. Successful fiscal adjustments were slightly
longer in time. More interestingly, successful fiscal adjustments were associated
with higher growth during the adjustment. Needless to say the higher growth is
what might have helped in making the adjustment successful in the first place.
In terms of word business cycle proxied by G7 growth, successful and unsuc-
cessful adjustments are indistinguishable. This hints to the fact that success or
failure depend on domestic factors rather than the world business cycle. More
on this below.
    Table 4 shows some basis statistic regarding expansionary versus contrac-
tionary episodes using our two definitions; Table 4a using definition 1 and Table
4b using definition 2. As mentioned above according to definition 1 there were
more expansionary than contractionary episodes (35 versus 17). According to
the second they were about half and half (28 versus 24). Note how the G7
growth is virtually identical on average for all types of fiscal adjustments.
    Table 5a presents evidence on the composition of the episodes of fiscal ad-
justments using definition 1. The key observation here is that there is a signif-
icant diﬀerence between successful and unsuccessful and contractionary versus

                                        7
expansionary: the successful and expansionary ones were those based mostly
upon spending cuts rather than tax increases. This is the same results we had
obtained earlier in Alesina and Ardagna (2010). All the components of spending
except for public investment are reduced more during successful than unsuccess-
ful adjustment. Public employment grows less in successful adjustments. All
these diﬀerences are statistically significant at standard conventional levels. In-
terestingly the size of the reduction of the cyclically adjusted deficit is virtually
identical for expansionary and contractionary adjustments, while, perhaps not
surprisingly the size is much larger for successful one versus unsuccessful one.
A breakdown of diﬀerent types of taxes does not yield significant diﬀerences
(results are available from the authors). More detailed research on this point is
warranted.
     Note that comparing successful versus unsuccessful adjustments, it is ap-
parent that the reduction in total deficit is much larger than that of primary
deficit. This indicates a strong reaction in interest rates, which may be due
to investors’ confidence eﬀects. Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi (2102) investigate
more formally this confidence eﬀects finding that indeed confidence "moves"but
it is unclear whether it follows or precede movement of output. Note also that
the yearly reduction in the primary deficit is lower than 2%, on average,8 and
that although in successful and expansionary adjustments the cumulative re-
duction of the primary deficit is larger, its size is not statistically diﬀerent from
that in unsuccessful and contractionary episodes. Table 5b uses as a definition
of expansionary versus contractionary definition 2. The results are broadly quite
similar to those of Table 5a. From now on we use definition 1 for all the other
tables which we present. The results using the other definition are quite similar
and are available from the authors.
     Table 6 investigates diﬀerences in initial conditions. There do not seem
any statistically diﬀerent initial conditions when comparing successful versus
unsuccessful episodes. Growth was higher for successful ones, unemployment
though was also higher. The results are striking for the case of expansion-
ary versus contractionary. In this case, it is pretty clear that expansionary
episodes started with worse initial conditions, growth was lower and unemploy-
ment higher. There are two possible interpretations of this result. One is that
growth was picking up on its own and continued to pick up "despite"the fiscal
adjustment. This would imply that the measure of cyclical adjustment on the
deficits are imperfect. The other interpretation is that the fiscal adjustment was
part of a package that generated a "major change"in the policy stance which
favored at the same time austerity and growth.9 The results presented in the
next section point toward the second interpretation because the policy mix of
expansionary fiscal adjustments included pro growth supply side reforms. This
   8 SeeStehn et al. (2011) for evidence on the non-linear eﬀect on the speed of fiscal tightening
and the possibility that fiscal consolidations that are too large induce a large contraction in
economic activity and undermine the deficit reduction.
   9 An important point for future research relate to long run unfunded liabilities of govern-

ments. like social security funds. To what extent these major policy changes" include fixing
long term trend of certain programs, like medicare in the US?



                                                8
interpretation would be consistent with the case studies analyzed by Alesina
and Ardagna (1998) and Perotti (2012). In their view, episodes of large fiscal
adjustments are a complex combination of policy actions including both supply
side and demand side policy reforms, an issue to which now we turn to.

3.2        The policy mix
In this section, we illustrate which other policies have been associated with the
episodes of successes and expansions versus unsuccess and contractions.

3.2.1       Labor and goods market liberalizations
 The expansionary fiscal consolidation episodes were those which were accompa-
nied by goods and labor market liberalizations. Our interpretation is that these
supply side reforms more than compensated the (small) recessionary eﬀects of
spending cuts on the demand side. Table 7 summarizes the results. This table
highlights two points. The first one (Table 7a) is that the countries which expe-
rienced expansionary fiscal consolidations are those which were on average less
regulated both in the case of goods market that labor market. The definition
of the regulatory indices is in Table 1. In particular, union density and vari-
ous measures of product market regulation were lower (i.e. less regulation) in
countries (and times) which experience lower fiscal adjustments. When in Table
7b we look at changes we find a reduction in virtually all indices of regulation
suggesting that more deregulation has accompanied fiscal consolidations. Even
though diﬀerences are not always statistically significant, successful and expan-
sionary episodes were characterized by a larger decrease in the various indices.
This is encouraging since deregulation should aﬀect directly growth and through
growth favour the reduction of the debt/GDP ratio. These results are consistent
with the case studies of Alesina and Ardagna (1998) and Perotti (2012).

3.2.2       Macroeconomic Variables and Confidence Indicators
We now explore the eﬀects of the policy mix on various macro variables. Table
8 reports a few basic measures of monetary conditions and interest rates. The
interesting result here is that long-term interest rates (both nominal and real)
fall more during expansionary rather than contractionary fiscal adjustments and
for successful rather than unsuccessful. Credit conditions also appear to be eas-
ier during successful and expansionary episodes. The reduction in long-term
interest rates may be associated with an increase in confidence. In fact, Table 9
shows an increase in confidence during expansionary and successful adjustments.
Whether it is an improvement in economic conditions which improves confidence
or the other way around, remains to be seen.10 The reduction in nominal inter-
est rates may also be the result of monetary easing, which could be endogenous
to the fiscal adjustment. If the monetary authority perceives a credible policy
 1 0 See   Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi (2012)




                                                 9
package of fiscal consolidation, it might be more likely to "ease". The impor-
tance of interest rate movements is highlighted in Table 10 which reports a
breakdown of the various component of GDP. This table shows that all compo-
nents of GDP increased during successful and expansionary adjustments relative
to unsuccessful and contractionary ones. However, the eﬀect seems especially
strong on private investments, which are more likely to be sensitive to interest
rates. This result is in line with Alesina et al. (2002) and Alesina, Favero and
Giavazzi (2012). An additional interesting observation also in line with Alesina,
Perotti and Tavares (2004), Alesina and Ardagna (1998) and Perotti(2012)) is
that net export improves during expansionary and successful adjustments. We
then now turn to examine competitiveness and exchange rate movements.

3.2.3   Unit labor costs and competitiveness
Table 11 reports results on unit labors cost and competitiveness. The first row
shows that during successful and expansionary adjustments unit labor costs have
grown less than during unsuccessful and contractionary ones. Line 2 shows that
the same holds not only in absolute terms but relative to trading partners. Fi-
nally, line 3 shows results along the same line with respect to productivity. This
evidence is consistent with that of labor and goods’ market deregulation pre-
sented above. It shows that supply side reforms and possibly wage moderation
and agreements with the unions (see also Perotti (2012) on this point) have fa-
cilitated the fiscal adjustment. In other words the negative Keynesian eﬀect on
the demand side of spending cuts have been overturned with the help of supply
side reforms.

3.2.4   The exchange rate
A few authors (Lambertini and Tavares (2007) , Weo (2010) and Devries et
al. (2011)) have argued that devaluations have been an important factor in ex-
plaining the success of fiscal adjustments, namely those which were expansionary
were so because they were accompanied by large and permanent devaluations.
In our view, this point is overstated. As a first pass in Figure 2 we show the
(lack of ) correlation between the reduction in the debt over GDP ratio in all the
episodes of fiscal adjustments against the rate of growth of the nominal eﬀective
exchange rate, (a decrease in the exchange rate corresponds to a devaluation).
As the figure shows there is no correlation. The same lack of correlation appears
in Figure 3 when we plot the same variable against the total (over the entire
adjustment period) nominal exchange rate change. But, is there a diﬀerence
between successful, unsuccessful and expansionary and contractionary? Table
12 provides rather inconclusive answers. For the case of expansionary versus
contractionary in both case we have on average a devaluation before the ad-
justment. During the adjustment in both cases we have an appreciation but
smaller for expansionary episodes. The diﬀerence is, however, small and not
statistically significant. In the case of successful versus unsuccessful episodes,
the appreciation is actually larger than during unsuccessful ones, but, again,


                                       10
the diﬀerence is not statistically significant. Thus, at least based upon these
basic statistics the role of the nominal exchange rate does not appear to be so
predominant.


4     The IMF "Narrative"Method
In this section, we perform the same analysis, to the outcome based definition of
Devries (20100). We find results which are remarkably similar to those presented
above. Thus, the claim (Weo (2010) and Devires at al. (2011)) that the results
based on episodes identified via the "narrative" method were substantially dif-
ferent from those of the preexisting literature (and in particular of Alesina and
Perotti (1995) and Alesina and Ardagna (2010)) are largely unsubstantiated. In
particular, we show below that the claims that the composition does not mat-
ter, but it is the monetary stance that explains the diﬀerential eﬀect of spending
based versus tax based adjustment is not supported by a careful data analysis.

4.1    Definitions
The IMF Weo (2010) proposed a diﬀerent approach based upon the narrative
approach pioneered by Romer and Romer (1989) for monetary policy and ap-
plied by the same authors on fiscal policy (Romer and Romer (2010)). These
authors identified episodes of discretionary changes in tax policy in the US with
a careful study on Congressional debates and identified after much careful work
several episodes of "exogenous", i.e. not due by the business cycle, changes of
tax policy in the post war US. Weo (2010) adopts a similar methodology for 17
countries for a 30 year period. Then, it defines a fiscal adjustment episode a
multi-year period in which a government explicitly raised taxes or cut expen-
diture with the explicit and declared intention of reducing the deficit. Table
13 lists the original episodes. Based upon these episodes, Weo (2010) reported
essentially three results: 1) tax based fiscal adjustments were more recessionary
than spending based ones; 2) on average spending based fiscal adjustment were
(mildly) recessionary; 3) the fiscal package mattered. Subsequently Devries et
al. (2011) provided a diﬀerent classification of episodes, which is also reported
in Table 13. In what follows we use the episodes of Devries et al. (2011) rather
than Weo (2010) since the former are the corrected "final"list of episodes.

4.2    The composition of the adjustments
Table 14 shows that the key result regarding the composition of fiscal adjust-
ments holds using the Devries et al. (2011) dates as well. The successful and
expansionary fiscal adjustments are those which were primarily on the current
spending side. Alesina, Favero, and Giavazzi (2012) also using these episodes
show how diﬀerent the eﬀect of spending based and tax based adjustments were.
The former were associated with virtually no recessions, on average, while the
latter were accompanied by a prolonged downturn.


                                       11
    Table 15 to Table 21 reproduce the same analysis which we had performed
above on our definition of episodes using the IMF classification. The basic result
is that exactly the same picture emerges regarding the eﬀect of accompanying
policies which lead to expansionary versus contractionary episodes. In particu-
lar, Table 15 shows that there is not a clear pattern about the initial conditions
which diﬀerentiate the four types of fiscal adjustments. Table 16 shows that as
discussed above, expansionary fiscal adjustments are more likely to occur in less
regulated economies. Table 17 shows that expansionary fiscal adjustments are
more likely to occur when they are accompanied by liberalizations. Table 18
shows that there is no diﬀerence in measures of monetary conditions regarding
expansionary versus contractionary episodes while "easier"monetary conditions
seem to have helped adjustments to be successful by lowering interest rates. Ta-
ble 19 shows positive eﬀects on confidence of expansionary adjustments: once
again causality is an issue here. Is confidence driving the expansions or the
other way around? A much more sophisticated analysis, beyond the scope of
this paper, would be necessary to answer this question. Table 20 confirms the
important role of investment increases during successful fiscal adjustment, again
the same result we obtained above with our definition of adjustment. Table 21
confirms the role of unit labor costs which fell much more on average for expan-
sionary fiscal adjustments rather than contractionary ones.
    The bottom line then is that the basic results of the paper namely that:
1) spending based adjustment are less much less contractionary or even ex-
pansionary than tax based ones and 2) diﬀerences in supply side policies like
liberalization and wage moderation are key element of the policy mix, are robust
to alternative definitions of episodes. They hold both for our definitions based
upon deficit reduction outcomes and the Deviers et al. definition based upon
announced plans.


5     Econometric Evidence
5.1    Methodology
We now turn to empirical estimates of the eﬀect of fiscal policy and its main
components on real GDP. Our baseline specification is identical to that esti-
mated by IMF (2010)
                    2
                    X                   2
                                        X
                                                        
           ∆ =          ∆− +           ∆ − +  +  +  
                    =1                 =0



     is the logarithm of real GDP, ∆    is equal to the change in the
cyclically adjusted primary balance (or the IMF series measuring the size of
fiscal consolidations in percent of GDP) in periods of fiscal adjustments and
zero otherwise,  is a vector of country fixed eﬀects and  a vector of year
fixed eﬀects.


                                              12
   We estimate equation (1) over the entire sample period by OLS and we
cumulate the estimated responses for ∆  at t, t+1, t+2 to measure the
eﬀect of a 1 percentage point change in the fiscal variable on the level of real
GDP. We compute the standard errors of the impulse responses via the delta
method.
   For robustness check, we also augment equation (1) with two additional
terms,

         2
         X                    2
                              X                         2
                                                        X
                                                                       
∆ =          ∆− ++           ∆ − ++           ∆ − + + + 
         =1                  =0                       =0


    where: ∆     is equal to the change in the cyclically adjusted primary
balance in "normal" times (i.e. when no fiscal adjustment is taking place) and
zero in periods of fiscal consolidations.
    Equation (1) assumes that changes in the cyclically adjusted primary balance
in periods of fiscal consolidations are exogenous and uncorrelated with changes
in fiscal policy in all other periods. Including the additional terms allows us
to verify the robustness of these assumptions. In fact, if the assumption holds,
the estimated coeﬃcients of ∆    should not change when we include the
additional term.
    To investigate the role of the composition of a fiscal consolidation, we split
the change in ∆  into the change in the cyclically adjusted primary spending
and the change in the cyclically adjusted taxes. In this respect, we diﬀer from
the IMF specification. Devries et al. (2011) measure the eﬀect of a diﬀerent
composition of a fiscal adjustment by introducing a dummy variable equal to
one for the episodes in which the improvement in the fiscal balance is due to
public spending cuts for more than 50% and zero otherwise. Given that the
IMF provides time series for changes in spending and tax shocks, by using the
continuos changes in spending and taxes one uses all the information and does
not risk that the results are driven by a particular threshold chosen to identify
spending based versus taxed based adjustments.
    Finally, we estimate the various specifications also controlling for other policy
changes (i.e. structural reforms in product and labour markets and monetary
policy) to check that our main results on the composition are sound and we
investigate the eﬀect of the policy changes on GDP components.

5.2    The eﬀect of fiscal shocks on GDP
Table 22 shows the cumulated eﬀect on real GDP of (i) a 1% improvement in
the primary balance (col.1 and 4), (ii) a 1% decrease in primary spending (col.2
and 5), or (iii) a 1% increase in taxes (col.3 and 6). The specifications are
estimated following the baseline model (1). In columns 1-3, fiscal consolidations
are defined according to Definition 1 above, while in columns 4-6, we consider
the episodes identified by Devries et al. (2011).



                                             13
    Estimates based on our series suggest that fiscal consolidations do not have a
statistical significant eﬀect on GDP at any time horizon (column 1), and that the
result is due to the oﬀsetting eﬀects of spending cuts and tax increases. While
a decrease in primary spending has an expansionary and statistically significant
eﬀect on GDP with a peak eﬀect of 0.46 percent within three years (t-statistic =
2.57), an increase in taxes has a contractionary but not statistically significant
eﬀect on GDP with a peak eﬀect of -0.34 percent within three years. This result
is in line with the statistical evidence discussed so far.
    The estimates based on the IMF series suggest a diﬀerent picture at a first
reading: fiscal consolidations have a statistical significant contractionary eﬀect
on GDP with a peak eﬀect of -0.63 percent within two years (t-statistic = 3.89)
(see column 4). However, the negative eﬀect on GDP is driven by taxation
in the IMF sample. Column 4 shows that cuts to primary spending are not
statistically significant at any time horizon. Instead, an increase in taxes has a
contractionary and statistically significant eﬀect on GDP with a peak eﬀect of -
1.60 percent within three years (t-statistic = -3.69). The eﬀect of a 1 percentage
point increase in taxes is almost three times as large than the average eﬀect of
the primary deficit and much larger than the eﬀect we find using our definition
of fiscal adjustments.
    Estimates for the augmented model are in Table 23. The key message does
not change, although the magnitude of the coeﬃcients varies, suggesting that
the assumption that changes in the fiscal stance in years of fiscal consolidations
are uncorrelated with changes in "normal times" is not supported by the data.
Consistently with results in Table 22, real GDP declines in response of a 1%
positive shock to taxes in periods of fiscal consolidation, regardless of the criteria
used to select these episodes. Primary spending shocks do not have a statistically
significant eﬀect on GDP if episodes are selected using the IMF methodology,
but real GDP increases in response to spending cuts in our sample of fiscal
consolidations.
    Finally, note that the IMF data do not provide a distinction between pri-
mary current spending and spending on capital goods. The descriptive statistics
discussed above shows that current primary spending is the critical item of the
budget that distinguishes expansionary and successful fiscal adjustments from
contractionary and unsuccessful ones. We run again the baseline and augmented
specifications for our sample of fiscal adjustments and separate primary spend-
ing between changes in primary current spending and spending on capital goods.
Results are in Table 24. We find that shocks to the former have a statistical
significant eﬀect on GDP but not the latter. Moreover, the eﬀect on GDP of a
decrease in current primary spending is even larger than the eﬀect of a decrease
in total primary spending. A reduction of 1 percentage point of GDP in current
primary spending has a peak eﬀect of 0.73 percent (t-statistic = 3.07) within
three years, compared with a 0.46 percent eﬀect due to a reduction in total
primary spending by the same magnitude.




                                         14
5.3    Monetary policy
We now investigate whether the results on the eﬀect of spending cuts and tax
increases hold when we control for changes in monetary or exchange rate policies.
First, we study the eﬀect of spending and tax changes on the monetary policy
variables. Second,we add among the right hand side of equations (1) and (2)
the short-term nominal interest rates or the change in the nominal eﬀective
exchange rate. Results are in Tables 25-26.
    When we identify episodes of fiscal adjustments using Definition 1, we find
that the short-term interest rate increases in response to tax increases, but falls
when spending is cut. However, these eﬀects are not statistically significant.
Instead, when we consider the IMF episodes, we find evidence that monetary
policy reacts diﬀerently to the spending and tax changes as the short-term in-
terest rate increases in response to tax hikes and falls in response to spending
cuts and coeﬃcients are statistically significant. This suggests that monetary
policy might endogenously respond to the type of the adjustments and cen-
tral banks might decide to accommodate only more credible and potentially
successful adjustments, (i.e. the spending based ones but not tax based ones).
    In all specifications, however, our results discussed in the section above on the
eﬀect that a diﬀerent composition of the fiscal adjustment has on GDP growth
hold when we include monetary variables among the regressors. The coeﬃcient
of the primary spending remains positive (i.e.: a decrease in spending leads to
higher growth) and statistically significant and the one on taxes negative and
insignificant when episodes are selected using Definition 1. When episodes are
selected using the IMF data, spending cuts do not have a statistical significant
eﬀect on GDP but a positive shock to taxes leads to a fall in output. The
coeﬃcient on the monetary policy variable has the expected sign and a shock
to the short term interest rate has a statistically significant eﬀect on GDP
after two and three years in all specifications. Hence, while a reduction in the
short-term interest rate does have a positive eﬀect on economic activity, the
expansionary eﬀect due to monetary policy does not eliminate the one from
the compositional eﬀect of a fiscal adjustment. Devries et al. (2011) claim
that spending based adjustments are less contractionary only because monetary
policy is more accommodative. They never test the model including the interest
rate among the regressors but they reach this conclusion by only comparing the
response to fiscal policy shocks in the baseline specification and the response
of the interest rate to diﬀerent types of adjustments. Results similar to our
but based also on country by country evidence by Alesina, Favero and Giavazzi
(2012) confirm the irrelevance of monetary policy as an explanation for the
diﬀerent eﬀects of tax based and expenditure based adjustments on output.
    Turning to the exchange rate, we do not find any statistically significant
eﬀect of fiscal shocks on the nominal eﬀective exchange rate and results discussed
so far are not aﬀected when we include the exchange rate variable among the
regressors of equation (1) or (2). Results on these specifications are not shown
but are available upon request.



                                         15
5.4    Labor markets and competitiveness
Finally, we investigate the eﬀect of spending and tax shocks when we control for
the eﬀect of goods and labour market liberalizations and changes in unit labor
costs. We included one by one the same indices we discussed in Table 7 among
the regressors of equation (1) and (2). As for the case on monetary policy, dereg-
ulation policies do not alter our conclusions on the eﬀect of spending cuts and
tax increases on GDP either when we select episodes of fiscal adjustments using
our methodology nor when we use the IMF sample (results are not shown but
available upon request). However, when we look at the eﬀect of the regulatory
indicators on GDP, coeﬃcients are in general not statistically significant within
a 3-year horizon.
    Finally, improvements in cost competitiveness have statistical and economic
significant eﬀect on GDP. A reduction in the growth rate of unit labour costs
by 1% increases GDP with a peak eﬀect of 0.27 percent within three years
(t-statistic = 5.98) when episodes are identified with Definition 1 and of 0.31
percent within three years (t-statistic = 5.63) when episodes are identified ac-
cording to the IMF criteria (see Table 27). Interestingly, regardless of the way in
which episodes are identified, we find that unit labour costs decrease in response
to cuts in primary spending and that the eﬀect is statistically significant. This
is consistent with the evidence in Perotti (2012) and can help explaining the
positive response of exports to spending based fiscal adjustments. Finally, once
again, the qualitative eﬀect of spending and tax shocks does not change when
we control for competitiveness indicators in the regressions estimated in Tables
22-23.

5.5    Components of GDP
Devries et al. (2011) show that in spending based fiscal adjustments, exports
increase and that the decrease in domestic demand is larger than the total eﬀect
on GDP. They attribute the positive response of exports to a diﬀerent behavior
of the exchange rate. Also, they do not estimate the eﬀect on private consump-
tion and investment but on total domestic demand, including public spending
and inventories. We investigated the eﬀect of a reduction in primary spend-
ing (increases in taxes) on private consumption, business investment and export
separately. Our results, available upon request, are very much in line with those
in Tables 22 and 23. When episodes are selected using definition 1, spending
cuts (tax increases) have a positive (negative) on private consumption, business
and private investment and exports. When episodes are selected using the IMF
definition, reductions in public spending have a negative and significant eﬀect
only on private consumption after one year. The eﬀect on private consumption
is not statistically significant two and three years after the adjustment. Instead,
spending cuts have a positive and statistically significant eﬀect both on export
(after one and three years) and on business investment (three years after the
consolidation). Tax increases are always recessionary.



                                        16
6    Conclusions
In the last two years there has been a very lively debate about what are the
consequences of diﬀerent types of fiscal adjustments. In this paper we have taken
a detailed look at recent controversies, performed a host of sensitivity tests,
changing definitions and exploring alternative approaches. We also have brought
into the picture other variables like goods and labor market liberalizations,
which sometimes accompany fiscal adjustments.
    Our results can be summarized as follows: expenditure based adjustments
are those which are more likely to lead to a permanent reduction in the debt
over GDP ratio. In addition, they are associated with smaller recessions than
tax based ones or no recessions at all. The component of private demand which
seem to react more positively to an expenditure based adjustment is private
investment. Cuts in current spending have smaller or no eﬀect on output than
cuts in public investments. The small downturns caused by expenditure based
adjustments can be eliminated making the adjustment expansionary even on
impact, if the policy package include pro growth polices like labor and goods
market liberalization. Monetary policy has the standard eﬀect on output, but
it does not seem to play a role in diﬀerentiating the eﬀects of tax based versus
expenditure based adjustments.




References
 [1] Alesina A. and S. Ardagna (2010) “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes
     versus Spending”, Tax Policy and the Economy.
 [2] Alesina A., S. Ardagna, R. Perotti and F. Schiantarelli (2002) "Fiscal Policy
     Profits and Investment", American Economic Review, vol. 92(3), pages
     571-589, June.
 [3] Alesina A., D. Carloni and G. Lecce (2010) "The Electoral Consequences
     of Large Fiscal Adjustments", forthcoming in A. Alesina and F. Giavazzi
     (eds.) Fiscal Policy After the Great Recession University of Chicago Press
     and NBER.
 [4] Alesina A. and A. Drazen (1990) “Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?”,
     American Economic Review,vol. 81(5), pages 1170-88, December.
 [5] Alesina A., C. Favero and F. Giavazzi (2012) "The output eﬀects of fiscal
     adjustments", NBER Working Paper, no 18336.
 [6] Alesina A. and F. Giavazzi (2012) (eds) “Fiscal Policy after the Great Re-
     cession”, University of Chicago Press and NBER forthcoming.
 [7] Alesina A., and R. Perotti (1995) “Fiscal Expansions and Adjustments in
     OECD Countries”, Economic Policy, n.21, 207-247.

                                       17
 [8] Alesina A., R. Perotti, and J. Tavares (1998) “The Political Economy of
     Fiscal Adjustments”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 1998.
 [9] Ardagna S. (2007) “Fiscal policy in Unionized Labor Markets", Journal of
     Economic Dynamics & Control 31 (2007) 1498—1534.
[10] Ardagna S. (2004) “Fiscal Stabilizations: When Do They Work and Why”,
     European Economic Review, vol. 48, No. 5, October 2004, pp. 1047- 1074.
[11] Biggs A., K. Hasset, M. Jensen (2010), "A Guide for Deficit Reduction in
     the United States Based on Historical Consolidations That Worked", AEI
     Economic Policy Working Paper 2010-04, December 27, 2010.
[12] Brender A and A. Drazen (2008) "How do Budget Deficits and Economic
     Growth Aﬀect Reelection Prospects: Evidence form a Large Panel of Coun-
     tries", American Economic Review, 98(5): 2203—20.
[13] Broadbent B and K. Daly, (2010) “Limiting the Fall-out From Fiscal Ad-
     justment”, Goldman Sachs, Global Economics Paper 195, April 2010.
[14] Daveri F. and G. Tabellini, (2000) "Unemployment Growth and Taxation
     in Industrial Countries", Economic Policy, 15: 47—104.
[15] Devries, P., J. Guajardo, D. Leigh, and A. Pescatori (2011),
     “A New Action-Based Dataset of Fiscal Consolidation,”, IMF
     Working Paper No. 11/128. The data set is available at
     www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=24892.0.
[16] Favero, C., F. Giavazzi and J. Perego (2011) “Country Heterogeneity and
     the International Evidence on the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy”, IMF Economic
     Review 59: 652-682.
[17] Finn M.(1998) "Cyclical Eﬀects of Government’s Employment and Good
     Purchases", International Economic Review, 39, issue 3, p. 635-57.
[18] Giavazzi, F and M. Pagano (1990) ”Can Severe Fiscal Contractions Be Ex-
     pansionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries", NBER Macroeco-
     nomics Annual 1990, Volume 5, pages 75-122 National Bureau of Economic
     Research, Inc.
[19] Giavazzi F., and M. Pagano (1996) “Non-Keynesian Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy
     Changes: International Evidence and the Swedish Experience”, Swedish
     Economic Policy Review, vol. 3, n.1, Spring, 67-112.
[20] IMF (1996) “World Economic Outlook Ch. III”.
[21] IMF (2010) “Will it Hurt? Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Fiscal Consolidation”,
     World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, October.




                                     18
[22] Lambertini L. and J. Tavares (2007) "Exchange Rates and Fiscal Adjust-
     ments: Evidence from OECD and Implications for the EMU", Contribu-
     tions in Macroeconomics 5.1.
[23] McDermott J., and R. Wescott (1996) “An Empirical Analysis of Fiscal
     Adjustments”, IMF Staﬀ Papers, vol. 43, n.4, 723-753.
[24] Mauro P. (2011) ed. “Chipping Away at Public Debts”, John Wiley.
[25] Nielsen L. (2012) "Who is Delivering on the Fiscal Front so Far?" Goldman
     Sachs, European Economics Analyst, August 2012.
[26] Perotti R. (2012) "The Austerity Myth: "Growth without Pain?", forth-
     coming in A. Alesina and F. Giavazzi (eds.) Fiscal Policy After the Great
     Recession University of Chicago Press and NBER.
[27] Romer C. and D. Romer (1989) "Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New
     Test in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz", NBER Macroeconomics An-
     nual 1989, MIT Press.
[28] Romer, C. and D.Romer (2010) “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Tax
     Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks”, Amer-
     ican Economic Review, 100, 763-801.
[29] Stehn J., J. Hatzius, D. Wilson, S. Carlson (2011) "The Speed Limit of
     Fiscal Consolidations", Goldman Sachs, Global Economics Paper 207.
[30] von Hagen J., R. Strauch (2001) “Fiscal Consolidations: Quality, Economic
     Conditions, and Success”, Public Choice, vol. 109, no.3-4, pp 327-346.




                                     19
Table 2a: Episodes of fiscal adjustment selected using Definition 1 and Definition 2

 Episodes of fiscal adjustments

 Successfull                             Unsuccessfull

 Belgium                 1993-2001       Austria         1996-1997
 Canada                  1993-1997       Belgium         1973-1974
 Denmark                 1983-1986       Belgium         1984-1990
 Denmark                 2004-2005       Canada          1986-1989
 Finland                 1996-1998       Finland         1988-1989
 Ireland                 1986-1989       Finland         1993-1994
 Ireland                 1996-1998       France          1994-2001
 Italy                   1995-1997       Germany         1996-2000
 Japan                   1979-1987       Germany         2003-2007
 Netherlands             1971-1973       Ireland         1983-1984
 Netherlands             1996-2000       Italy           1976-1977
 Netherlands             2004-2005       Italy           1982-1983
 New Zealand             1991-1994       Italy           1988-1993
 Norway                  1978-1980       Italy           2006-2007
 Norway                  1993-1996       Netherlands     1982-1983
 Portugal                1994-1995       Netherlands     1985-1988
 Spain                   1986-1987       Norway          1982-1983
 Spain                   1994-1997       Norway          1988-1990
 Sweden                  1983-1984       Norway          1999-2000
 Sweden                  1986-1987       Norway          2004-2005
 Sweden                  1993-1998       Portugal        2002-2003
 Sweden                  2004-2005       Portugal        2006-2007
 Switzerland             2003-2008       Spain           1983-1984
 United Kingdom          1984-1988       Sweden          1975-1976
 United Kingdom          1994-2000
Table 2b: Episodes of fiscal adjustment selected using Definition 1 and Definition 3

Expansionary (Def. 3)                       Contractionary (Def. 3)

Austria             1996-1997               Canada        1986-1989
Belgium             1973-1974               Germany       1996-2000
Belgium             1984-1990               Ireland       1976-1977
Belgium             1993-2001               Ireland       1983-1984
Canada              1993-1997               Italy         1982-1983
Denmark             1976-1978               Italy         1988-1993
Denmark             1983-1986               Japan         1979-1987
Denmark             2004-2005               Netherlands   1971-1973
Finland             1988-1989               Netherlands   1982-1983
Finland             1993-1994               Norway        1978-1980
Finland             1996-1998               Norway        1982-1983
France              1994-2001               Norway        1988-1990
Germany             2003-2007               Norway        1999-2000
Ireland             1986-1989               Portugal      1982-1984
Ireland             1996-1998               Portugal      2002-2003
Italy               1976-1977               Sweden        1975-1976
Italy               1995-1997               Sweden        1986-1987
Italy               2006-2007
Netherlands         1985-1988
Netherlands         1996-2000
Netherlands         2004-2005
New Zealand         1991-1994
Norway              1993-1996
Norway              2004-2005
Portugal            1994-1995
Portugal            2006-2007
Spain               1983-1984
Spain               1986-1987
Spain               1994-1997
Sweden              1983-1984
Sweden              1993-1998
Sweden              2004-2005
Switzerland         2003-2008
United Kingdom      1984-1988
United Kingdom      1994-2000
Table 2c: Episodes of fiscal adjustment selected using Definition 1 and Definition 4

Expansionary (Def. 4)                       Contractionary (Def. 4)

Belgium            1973-1974                Austria         1996-1997
Belgium            1984-1990                Belgium         1993-2001
Canada             1993-1997                Canada          1986-1989
Denmark            1976-1978                Denmark         1983-1986
Denmark            2004-2005                Germany         1996-2000
Finland            1988-1989                Germany         2003-2007
Finland            1993-1994                Ireland         1976-1977
Finland            1996-1998                Ireland         1983-1984
France             1994-2001                Italy           1976-1977
Ireland            1986-1989                Italy           1982-1983
Ireland            1996-1998                Italy           1988-1993
Italy              1995-1997                Netherlands     1971-1973
Italy              2006-2007                Netherlands     1982-1983
Japan              1979-1987                Norway          1982-1983
Netherlands        1985-1988                Norway          1988-1990
Netherlands        1996-2000                Norway          1993-1996
Netherlands        2004-2005                Norway          1999-2000
New Zealand        1991-1994                Portugal        1982-1984
Norway             1978-1980                Portugal        2002-2003
Norway             2004-2005                Spain           1983-1984
Portugal           1994-1995                Sweden          1975-1976
Portugal           2006-2007                Sweden          1983-1984
Spain              1986-1987                Sweden          2004-2005
                                            United
Spain              1994-1997                                1984-1988
                                            Kingdom
Sweden             1986-1987
Sweden             1993-1998
Switzerland        2003-2008
United Kingdom     1994-2000
Table 3 :Successful vs. unsuccessfull fiscal stabilizations

                                                          Successful          Unsuccessful          St. err. of difference
 Change in the debt/GDP                                     -0.19                 1.49                      0.65**
 Debt/GDP (T+2) - Debt/GDP (T)                               -7.4                6.89                      1.18***
 GDP growth                                                  3.47                 2.3                      0.27***
 G7 GDP growth                                              2.89                 2.89                         0.17
 GDP growth in deviation from G7 growth                      0.58                -0.59                     0.25***
 Avg. growth (T0-Tn) - avg growth (T0-2-T0-1)                1.43                0.32                       0.49**
 Average duration                                           3.03                 2.55                        0.28*
 Number of episodes                                           25                   24

Note: Changes are in percentage points of GDP unless indicated. Average duration is in terms of years. See also Table 1 for the
exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level. ***10% significance level.
Table 4a: Expansionary vs. contractionary fiscal stabilizations
Definition 3*

                                                        Expansionary       Contractionary       St. err. of difference
    Change in the debt/GDP                                  0.34                 1.1                      0.73
    Debt/GDP (T+2) - Debt/GDP (T)                          -1.88                2.94                     2.5*
    GDP growth                                              3.15                2.49                    0.31**
    G7 GDP growth                                           2.95                2.84                      0.18
    GDP growth in deviation from G7 growth                   0.2               -0.35                     0.30*
    Avg. growth (T0-Tn) - avg growth (T0-2-T0-1)            1.88               -1.25                   0.35***
    Average duration                                        2.85                2.63                       0.3
    Number of episodes                                       35                  17

Note: Changes are in percentage points of GDP unless indicated. Average duration is in terms of years. See also Table 1 for the
exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level. ***10% significance level.




*
 A period of fiscal adjustment is expansionary if real GDP growth during the adjustment period is higher than the average
growth the country experienced in the two years before.
Table 4b: Expansionary vs. contractionary fiscal stabilizations
Definition 4†

                                                     Expansionary       Contractionary       St. err. of difference
    Change in the debt/GDP                               0.54                0.57                     0.66
    Debt/GDP (T+2) - Debt/GDP (T)                       -2.51                2.19                    2.30**
    GDP growth                                           3.31                2.46                   0.28***
    G7 GDP growth                                        2.86                2.99                     0.16
    GDP growth in deviation from G7 growth               0.45               -0.53                   0.27***
    Avg. growth in dev. G7 (T0-Tn) - avg
                                                          1.42                -1.39                0.32***
    growth in dev. G7 (T0-2-T0-1)
    Average duration                                      2.94                2.57                    0.27
    Number of episodes                                     28                  24

Note: Changes are in percentage points of GDP unless indicated. Average duration is in terms of years. See also Table 1 for the
exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level. ***10% significance level.




†
 An expansionary fiscal adjustment is one in which the average growth in difference for the G7 average growth during the
adjustment was higher than the average growth in the two year before the adjustment relative to the G7 average growth.
 Table 5a: The composition of fiscal adjustments
 Definition 3‡


                                                                   St. err. of                                             St. err. of
                                       Success      Unsuccess                     Expansionary       Contractionary
                                                                   difference                                              difference
 Δ Total deficit                         -6.27         -3.91         0.80***           -5.43               -4.16              0.86
 Δ Primary deficit                       -5.82         -4.59            0.83           -5.34                -4.8              0.86
 Δ Primary expenditures                  -4.18         -2.53           0.91*           -3.98               -2.05            0.92**
 Δ Current primary spending              -2.48         -1.31            0.73           -2.62               -0.38            0.68***
 Δ Gov. consumption                      -1.35         -0.61          0.37**           -1.32               -0.25            0.36***
 Δ Government wage
                                         -1.1          -0.59          0.27*            -1.12               -0.28            0.26***
 expenditures
 Δ Government non wage
                                         -0.24         -0.05           0.2             -0.24               0.03               0.2
 expenditures
 Δ Transfers                             -0.74         -0.55           0.4             -0.97              0.04               0.39**
 Δ Subsidies                             -0.39         -0.15          0.14*            -0.33              -0.17               0.14
 Δ Government investment                  -1.7         -1.21           0.5             -1.36              -1.67                0.5
 Δ Total revenue                         1.64          2.06            0.6              1.36              2.75               0.58**
 Composition - spending                  71.81         44.96          14.4*            71.14              33.98             14.18**
 Composition - current
                                         45.36         20.75          14.8*            48.7                1.29            14.00***
 spending
 Composition - capital spending          26.45          24.2            5.9            22.43              32.69               5.79*
 Composition - taxes                     28.19         55.04          14.4*            28.86              66.02             14.18**
 Public employment growth                 1.64          3.08           1.62             1.51              6.37               1.84**

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points of GDP unless indicated. Composition – spending, Composition – current spending, Composition – capital
spending and Composition –taxes are changes in the respective variables in percentage points of the change of Primary Deficit.
Public employment growth is in percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance
level. ** 5% significance level. ***10% significance level.




 ‡
   A period of fiscal adjustment is expansionary if real GDP growth during the adjustment period is higher than the average
 growth the country experienced in the two years before.
 Table 5b: The composition of fiscal adjustments
 Definition 4§

                                                     Expansionary Contractionary             St. err. of difference
 Δ Total deficit                                        -5.62         -4.31                            0.81
 Δ Primary deficit                                      -5.49         -4.78                             0.8
 Δ Primary expenditures                                 -3.89         -2.72                            0.88
 Δ Current primary spending                             -2.39         -1.29                            0.69
 Δ Gov. Consumption                                     -1.26         -0.63                           0.36*
 Δ Government wage expenditures                         -1.18         -0.46                         0.25***
 Δ Government non wage expenditures                     -0.13         -0.17                            0.19
 Δ Transfers                                            -0.77         -0.49                            0.39
 Δ Subsidies                                            -0.37         -0.17                            0.13
 Δ Government investment                                -1.49         -1.42                            0.47
 Δ Total revenue                                         1.6           2.07                            0.57
 Composition – spending                                 66.56         50.16                           14.04
 Composition - current spending                         42.33         22.56                            14.3
 Composition - capital spending                         24.24         27.59                             5.6
 Composition – taxes                                    33.44         49.84                           14.04
 Public employment growth                                1.84           4.8                            1.83

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points of GDP unless indicated. Composition – spending, Composition – current spending, Composition – capital
spending and Composition –taxes are changes in the respective variables in percentage points of the change of Primary Deficit.
Public employment growth is in percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance
level. ** 5% significance level. ***10% significance level.




 §
  An expansionary fiscal adjustment is one in which the average growth in difference for the G7 average growth during the
 adjustment was higher than the average growth in the two year before the adjustment relative to the G7 average growth.
Table 6: Initial conditions

                                                        St. err. of                                      St. err. of
                            Success       Unsuccess                   Expansionary     Contractionary
                                                        difference                                       difference

 Growth                       2.4             1.5         0.65            1.5               2.8            0.67**
 Growth G7                    0.1            -0.7          0.6            -0.6              0.5            0.64*
 Inflation                    4.2            6.4          1.29*           4.2               9.5           1.42***
 Unemployment rate            8.2            6.9           1.3            8.6               5.1           1.21***
 Total deficit/GDP            -5.5           -4.7          1.4            -5.6              -4.6            1.42
 Primary
                              -2.0           -2.4           1.0           -2.5              -2.1            1.03
 deficit/GDP
 Debt/GDP                     69.9           63.2           7.5           69.1              60.3            8.07

Note: The table reports the variables of interest the year before the beginning of the episode of fiscal adjustment. Variables are
in percentage points of GDP unless indicated. Inflation and Unemployment rate are in percentage points. See also Table 1 for
the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level. ***10% significance level.
Table 7a: Fiscal adjustment and regulation of goods markets: levels

                                                                  St. err. of                                            St. err. of
                                    Success       Unsuccess                       Expansionary       Contractionary
                                                                  difference                                             difference
 Initial level
 Product market regulation             4.0            4.4            0.40               4.0                 5.2           0.39***
 Product market regulation
                                       3.9            4.3            0.46               3.8                 5.2           0.45***
 excluding public ownership
 Barriers to entry                     3.9            4.4            0.48               3.8                 5.3           0.47***
 Public ownership                      4.3            4.6            0.32               4.4                 4.9              0.3
 Employment protection                 2.3            2.6            0.37               2.3                 2.9             0.44
 Employment protection
                                       2.3            2.6            0.33               2.4                 2.5              0.4
 regular contracts
 Employment protection
                                       2.3            2.6            0.54               2.2                 3.3             0.63*
 temporary contracts
 Union density                        48.6           42.6            5.98              45.7                47.9             6.15

Note: The table reports the variables of interest the year before the beginning of the episode of fiscal adjustment. Variables are
in levels. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level. ***10%
significance level.
Table 7b: Fiscal adjustments and regulation of goods markets: changes

                                                                 St. err. of                                           St. err. of
                                  Success       Unsuccess                       Expansionary       Contractionary
                                                                 difference                                            difference
 Cumulative change
 Product market regulation         -16.69          -7.98            4.8*            -14.44              -4.92             5.13*
 Product market regulation
 excluding public                  -20.56          -10.2           6.14*            -18.48               -4.7            6.47**
 ownership
 Barriers to entry                 -23.62          -15.6           8.04             -21.44              -11.6             8.49
 Public ownership                  -13.93           -5.6           5.15*            -10.36              -6.98             5.42
 Employment protection              -6.36           -1.8            3.79             -4.51              -4.15             4.69
 Employment protection
                                    -1.14           1.25            2.59             -0.16                 0              3.12
 regular contracts
 Employment protection
                                   -10.55           -4.8            6.18             -8.35               -7.3              7.6
 temporary contracts
 Union density                      -7.43          -3.19            2.69             -5.96              -2.95             2.86

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level.
***10% significance level.
Table 8: Fiscal adjustments and monetary conditions

                                                                  St. err. of                                            St. err. of
                                       Success     Unsuccess                     Expansionary       Contractionary
                                                                  difference                                             difference
 Cumulative change
 Inflation                              -1.07        -1.19          0.82             -0.72               -1.56              0.96
 Nom. short-term interest rate          -2.53        -0.49         0.94**            -1.62               -0.65              1.17
 Nom. long-term interest rate           -2.42        -0.38        0.67***            -1.55               -0.07             0.87*
 "Real" short-term interest
                                        -1.97        -0.76          1.23             -1.61               -0.65             1.35
 rate
 "Real" long-term interest rate         -2.08        -0.37          1.01*            -1.42                0.41             1.16
 Loans - % growth rate                   39.8         28.5          9.24              34.4                34.9             11.7
 Deposits - % growth rate                32.7        28.9           7.99             31.95                27.8              9.9

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. Data for loans and deposits are available for a
sub-sample of episodes.* 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level. ***10% significance level.
 Table 9: Fiscal adjustments and confidence

                                                            St. err. of                                                St. err. of
                                Success     Unsuccess                         Expansionary        Contractionary
                                                            difference                                                 difference
 Consumer confidence             -2.69        -12.48         2.50***              -5.48               -15.69            3.82***
 Economic sentiment
                                103.64        100.44         1.57**              102.51               99.69               2.33
 index
 Consumer confidence -
                                  670          -11.2           707                 483                -7.85               989
 cum % change
 Economic sentiment
                                  13.8         5.05             6.3               13.4                -12.91            7.32***
 index - cum % change

Note: The table reports the levels and the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Data
are available for a sub-sample of episodes (i.e. European countries starting in 1985). Changes are in percentage points when
indicated. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level. ***10%
significance level.
Table 10: Macro variables during fiscal adjustments

                                                             St. err. of                                           St. err. of
                                Success      Unsuccess                     Expansionary Contractionary
                                                             difference                                            difference
 Cumulative change
 GDP dev. from G7
                                  2.36          -1.82         1.16***            0.73               -1.1              1.33
 - % growth rate
 GDP - % growth rate             14.02           7.08         1.94***           11.61               7.91             2.18*
 Private consumption
                                 12.35            6.2         2.06***           10.11               7.22              2.27
 - % growth rate
 Investment private sect.
                                 25.06          13.17           6.42*           26.17               6.77            6.00***
 - % growth rate
 Investment business
                                 29.72          14.22          7.53**           29.74               9.25            7.31***
 sect. - % growth rate
 Total investment (incl.
 housing)- % growth              19.75           6.98         4.47***           18.49               1.57            4.49***
 rate
 Exports - % growth rate         30.67           19.76         4.69**            27.62              19.69            4.89
 Imports - % growth rate         -4.66          -38.91          32.6            -21.04             -43.06            34.03
 Unemployment rate-
                                 -0.84           0.51          0.65**           -0.61               1.09            0.66**
 ppt change

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level.
***10% significance level.
 Table 11: Fiscal adjustments and competitiveness

                                                                  St. err. of                                     St. err. of
                                          Success    Unsuccess                  Expansionary    Contractionary
                                                                  difference                                      difference

 Cumulative change
 Unit labour costs - % growth rate         10.06       13.07         3.12           9.41             18.78         3.23***
 Relative unit labor costs in
                                             -1         0.35         3.64           -2.64             3.8           3.58*
 manuf. - % growth rate
 Relative consumer price index-
                                            -1.2       -0.21         2.55           -1.85             1.58           2.54
 % growth rate
 Export performance - % growth
                                           4.25         5.3          2.93           2.85              6.14           3.09
 rate
 Labor productivity - % growth
                                           9.33         5.22       1.43***          7.55              6.3            1.62
 rate

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level.
***10% significance level.
 Table 12: Fiscal adjustments and exchange rates

                                                           St. err. of                                                 St. err. of
                             Success       Unsuccess                        Expansionary         Contractionary
                                                           difference                                                  difference
 Nom. Eff. Exch Rate
                               1.41           -1.08            1.76              -0.05                 0.41                1.82
 (%) at t-1
 Nom. Eff. Exch Rate
 (%) during the 1st
                               -1.91          -1.55            1.56              -1.92                  -2                 1.63
 year of the
 adjustment
 Cum Eff. Exch Rate
                               3.52           1.04             3.98              0.96                  1.43                4.51
 (%)

Note: The table reports the variables of interest the year before the beginning of the episode (t-1) of fiscal adjustment, the first
year of the fiscal adjustment and the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes
are in percentage points. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level. ***10% significance level.
Table 13a: Episodes of fiscal adjustments Weo (Oct. 2010. ch.3)

     Episodes of fiscal adjustments
         Weo (Oct. 2010. ch.3)

Australia                  1980       1985   1986   1987   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999
Belgium                    1982       1983   1984   1987   1990   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996
                           1997       1998
Canada                     1980       1981   1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989
                           1990       1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999
Denmark                    1983       1984   1985   1986   1995
Finland                    1984       1988   1992   1993   1994   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000
                           2006       2007
France                     1984       1986   1987   1988   1989   1991   1995   1996   1997   1998
                           2000       2006   2007
Germany                    1982       1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1992   1993
                           1994       1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2003   2004   2005
                           2006       2007
Ireland                    1982       1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   2009
Italy                      1992       1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   2004   2005   2006
                           2007
Japan                      1981       1982   1983   1986   1997   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007
Portugal                   1983       2000   2002   2003   2005   2006   2007
Spain                      1983       1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1992   1993   1994
                           1995       1996   1997   1998
Sweden                     1983       1984   1986   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998
                           2007
United Kingdom             1981       1982   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999
United States              1980       1981   1985   1986   1988   1990   1991   1993   1994   2000
Table 13b: Episodes of fiscal adjustments Devries et al. (IMF WP 11/128)

        Episodes of fiscal adjustments
        Devries et al. (IMF WP 11/128)

Australia                     1985       1986   1987   1988   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999
Austria                       1980       1981   1984   1996   1997   2001   2002
Belgium                       1982       1983   1984   1985   1987   1990   1992   1993   1994   1996
                              1997
Canada                        1984       1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993
                              1994       1995   1996   1997
Denmark                       1983       1984   1985   1986   1995
Finland                       1992       1993   1994   1995   1996   1997
France                        1979       1987   1989   1991   1992   1995   1996   1997   1999   2000
Germany                       1982       1983   1984   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1997   1998
                              1999       2000   2003   2004   2006   2007
Ireland                       1982       1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   2009
Italy                         1991       1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   2004   2005
                              2006       2007
Japan                         1979       1980   1981   1982   1983   1997   1998   2003   2004   2005
                              2006       2007
Netherlands                   1981       1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1991   1992
                              1993       2004   2005
Portugal                      1983       2000   2002   2003   2005   2006   2007
Spain                         1983       1984   1989   1990   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997
Sweden                        1984       1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998
United Kingdom                1979       1980   1981   1982   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999
United States                 1978       1980   1981   1985   1986   1988   1990   1991   1992   1993
                              1994       1995   1996   1997   1998
 Table 14 a: The composition of fiscal adjustments using Devries et al. (2011) data
 Definition 3**

                                                                   St. err. of                                             St. err. of
                                      Success      Unsuccess                       Expansionary Contractionary
                                                                   difference                                              difference
 Δ Total deficit                       -3.54          -1.64           .88**             -3.16             -1.51               .97*
 Δ Primary deficit                     -3.82          -2.01           1.02*             -3.51             -1.84               1.07
 Δ Primary expenditures                -2.69          -0.68          .93*0*             -2.31              -0.7               .95*
 Δ Current primary spending             -1.6          -0.21            .6*               -1.4             -0.13              .63**
 Δ Gov. consumption                    -1.05          -0.05          .32***             -0.84             -0.14              .34**
 Δ Government wage
                                       -0.95          -0.44            .32*             -0.9              -0.37               .32*
 expenditures
 Δ Government non wage
                                       -0.11          0.39            .20**             0.06               0.23                .21
 expenditures
 Δ Transfers                            -0.2          -0.10             .44            -0.23              0.08                 .45
 Δ Subsidies                           -0.35          -0.06           .14**            -0.34              -0.06              .13**
 Δ Government investment                -1.1          -0.46             .49            -0.91              -0.57                .47
 Δ Total revenue                       1.13           1.33             .56              1.2               1.15                 .55
 Public employment growth                0.6           1.25            1.64            -0.65              3.56              1.91**
 Size-IMF                              4.76            2.67           1.21*            3.27               3.87                0.50
 Spending-IMF                          2.93           1.67             0.92            2.15               2.31                0.90
 Tax revenue-IMF                       1.83           1.00            0.49*            1.11               1.56                0.48
 Δ Pr. Expendit./ Δ Pr. deficit        70.4           44.8                             65.8               38.1
 Spending-IMF/ Size-IMF                61.5             62                             65.7               59.6

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points of GDP unless indicated. Composition – spending, Composition – current spending, Composition – capital
spending and Composition –taxes are in percentage points of the change of Primary Deficit. Public employment growth is in
percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level.
***10% significance level.




 **
   A period of fiscal adjustment is expansionary if real GDP growth during the adjustment period is higher than the average
 growth the country experienced in the two years before.
 Table 14 b: The composition of fiscal adjustments using Devries et al. (2011) data
 Definition 4††

                                                                             St. err. of
                                     Expansionary Contractionary
                                                                             difference
 Δ Total deficit                          -3.00              -1.59               .98
 Δ Primary deficit                        -3.45              -1.83              1.07
 Δ Primary expenditures                   -1.80              -1.11               .98
 Δ Current primary spending               -0.93              -0.52               .66
 Δ Gov. consumption                       -0.64              -0.30               .35
 Δ Government wage
                                          -0.75              -0.47               .32
 expenditures
 Δ Government non wage
                                           0.11               0.19               .21
 expenditures
 Δ Transfers                              0.03               -0.16               .45
 Δ Subsidies                              -0.33              -0.05             .13 **
 Δ Government investment                  -0.87              -0.59               .47
 Δ Total revenue                          1.64               0.72              .53 *
 Public employment growth                 -0.51               3.91            1.89 **
 Size-IMF                                 3.16                4.01              1.19
 Spending-IMF                             2.08                2.39              0.89
 Tax revenue-IMF                          1.08               1.61               0.48
 Δ Pr. Expendit./ Δ Pr. deficit            52.0               60.0
 Spending-IMF/ Size-IMF                   65.8               59.6

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points of GDP unless indicated. Composition – spending, Composition – current spending, Composition – capital
spending and Composition –taxes are in percentage points of the change of Primary Deficit. Public employment growth is in
percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level.
***10% significance level.




 ††
   An expansionary fiscal adjustment is one in which the average growth in difference for the G7 average growth during the
 adjustment was higher than the average growth in the two year before the adjustment relative to the G7 average growth.
Table 15: Initial conditions using Devries et al. (2011) data

                                                        St. err. of                                      St. err. of
                            Success       Unsuccess                   Expansionary     Contractionary
                                                        difference                                       difference

 Growth                        2.28          2.44          0.69            1.79              2.8             0.70
 Growth G7                    -0.09         -0.25          0.54           -0.62             0.28            0.52*
 Inflation                     4.92          3.49          1.22            2.84             6.11           1.39**
 Unemployment rate            7.66           6.58          0.87            8.19             6.07          0.77***
 Total deficit/GDP            -5.41         -5.18          0.99           -5.07             -5.60            0.94
 Primary
                              -1.78         -1.99          0.89           -2.45             -1.59           0.86
 deficit/GDP
 Debt/GDP                    68.33          69.48           9.7           66.00            70.50            9.56

Note: The table reports the variables of interest the year before the beginning of the episode of fiscal adjustment. Variables are
in percentage points of GDP unless indicated. Inflation and Unemployment rate are in percentage points. See also Table 1 for
the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level. ***10% significance level.
Table 16: Fiscal adjustment and regulation of goods markets using Devries et al. (2011) data: levels

                                                                  St. err. of                                             St. err. of
                                    Success       Unsuccess                       Expansionary       Contractionary
                                                                  difference                                              difference
 Initial level
 Product market regulation            4.14            3.9             .43              3.68                4.46              .41*
 Product market regulation
                                      4.12            3.96            .45              3.65                4.53              .43**
 excluding public ownership
 Barriers to entry                    4.19           3.85             .47              3.60                4.56              .44**
 Public ownership                     4.17           3.74             .44              3.70                4.2                .43
 Employment protection                 2.3           2.42             .39              2.18                2.54                .39
 Employment protection
                                      2.11           2.41             .39              2.18                2.27               .40
 regular contracts
 Employment protection
                                      2.68           2.43             .58              2.17                 2.8               .59
 temporary contracts
 Union density                        41.74          31.70            5.9             37.23               36.49               5.9

Note: The table reports the variables of interest the year before the beginning of the episode of fiscal adjustment. Variables are
in levels. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level. ***10%
significance level.
Table 17: Fiscal adjustments and regulation of goods markets using Devries et al. (2011) data:
changes

                                                                 St. err. of                                           St. err. of
                                  Success       Unsuccess                       Expansionary       Contractionary
                                                                 difference                                            difference
 Cumulative change
 Product market regulation         -21.29          -6.74           5.13**           -17.64              -8.48             5.28*
 Product market regulation
 excluding public                  -27.95          -8.72           7.04**           -24.43              -9.62            7.06**
 ownership
 Barriers to entry                 -33.04         -14.23           8.99**           -32.04              -11.56           8.80**
 Public ownership                  -11.69          -4.20            4.44*            -9.75               -4.76            4.43
 Employment protection              -9.58          -1.81             5.30            -4.81               -7.28            5.80
 Employment protection
                                     0.4            1.13            4.61              2.5               -2.04             4.77
 regular contracts
 Employment protection
                                    -15.6          -4.73            7.35            -10.59              -9.86             8.07
 temporary contracts
 Union density                      -5.99          -5.16            2.88             -6.58              -4.64             2.80

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level.
***10% significance level.
Table 18: Fiscal adjustments and monetary conditions using Devries et al. (2011) data

                                                                 St. err. of                                           St. err. of
                                      Success     Unsuccess                      Expansionary      Contractionary
                                                                 difference                                            difference
 Cumulative change
 Inflation                             -2.03         -0.35          1.02             -0.22              -1.82              1.1
 Nom. short-term interest rate         -2.77          0.35        1.04***            -0.86              -0.86              1.1
 Nom. long-term interest rate          -2.57         -0.06        .70***             -1.04              -1.14              .79
 "Real" short-term interest
                                       -1.61         1.17         .84***             -0.26               0.17              .96
 rate
 "Real" long-term interest rate        -0.73         0.76            .9*            -0.45               0.46              .84
 Loans - % growth rate                 17.77          18.0          7.98            11.32               19.63             7.67
 Deposits - % growth rate              17.02         21.76          7.56             14.7               20.84             7.55

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level.
***10% significance level.
 Table 19: Fiscal adjustments and confidence using Devries et al. (2011) data

                                                            St. err. of                                                St. err. of
                                Success     Unsuccess                        Expansionary        Contractionary
                                                            difference                                                 difference
 Consumer confidence             -9.33        -12.55          2.69               -7.72               - 12.61             2.82*
 Economic sentiment
                                 98.66        99.92           1.80              101.39                96.51            1.80***
 index
 Consumer confidence -
                                -50.75        -12.85          85.8               59.54               -82.41            62.18**
 cum % change
 Economic sentiment
                                 7.63          3.96           5.10                9.32                2.43               5.09
 index - cum % change

Note: The table reports the levels and the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment.
Changes are in percentage points when indicated. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance
level. ** 5% significance level. ***10% significance level.
Table 20: Macro variables during fiscal adjustments using Devries et al. (2011) data

                                                             St. err. of                                           St. err. of
                                Success      Unsuccess                     Expansionary Contractionary
                                                             difference                                            difference
 Cumulative change
 GDP dev. from G7
                                 -0.36          -1.99           1.19            -0.52              -1.90              1.14
 - % growth rate
 GDP - % growth rate             11.80           5.09         2.44***            9.84               6.04              2.57
 Private consumption
                                  9.91           3.98          2.47**            7.91               5.04              2.55
 - % growth rate
 Investment private sect.
                                 14.76           6.61           5.17            17.16               2.65            5.26***
 - % growth rate
 Investment business
                                 19.55          10.51           6.93            23.37               5.48            6.69**
 sect. - % growth rate
 Total investment (incl.
 housing)- % growth              11.81           3.33          4.26**           12.46               0.94            4.26**
 rate
 Exports - % growth rate          35.33         16.71         6.78***           28.96               20.42            6.90
 Imports - % growth rate         -37.21         14.12         26.92*            -3.68              -18.39            26.17
 Unemployment rate-
                                  0.79           0.48            .81            -0.41               1.48             .71**
 ppt change

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. * 1% significance level. ** 5% significance level.
***10% significance level.
 Table 21: Fiscal adjustments and competitiveness using Devries et al. (2011) data

                                                                  St. err. of                                     St. err. of
                                          Success   Unsuccess                   Expansionary    Contractionary
                                                                  difference                                      difference

 Cumulative change
 Unit labour costs - % growth rate         11.86       7.89          4.18           5.72            13.99          3.83**
 Relative unit labor costs in
                                           -3.06       -1.88         4.9           -6.57             -1.31           4.65
 manuf. - % growth rate
 Relative consumer price index-
                                           -3.06       -1.44         3.45          -5.44             -0.68           3.24
 % growth rate
 Export performance - % growth
                                           6.48        2.18          3.35           2.70             6.80            3.24
 rate
 Labor productivity - % growth
                                           8.89        3.72        1.69***          6.69             4.66            1.83
 rate

Note: The table reports the cumulative change in variables of interest over the episode of fiscal adjustment. Changes are in
percentage points. See also Table 1 for the exact definitions of the variables. *1% significance level. **5% significance level.
***10% significance level.
 Table 22: Effects of Fiscal Shocks on Real GDP, baseline specification

                                  Fiscal Adjustments - Definition 1              Fiscal Adjustments – IMF (2011)
  Dependent variable: Real
                                ΔCAPB<0          ΔG<0           ΔT>0         ΔCAPB<0             ΔG<0             ΔT>0
  GDP growth
  T                                0.07          0.15*           -0.12         -0.33**           -0.096          -0.64**

                                  (0.86)         (1.71)         (-1.00)        (-3.15)           (-0.56)          (-3.49)

  T+1                             0.19*          0.37**          -0.24         -0.63**           -0.177          -1.35**

                                  (1.64)         (2.74)         (-1.19)        (-3.89)           (-0.69)          (-4.11)

  T+2                              0.23          0.46**          -0.34         -0.51**           0.069            -1.6**

                                  (1.48)         (2.57)         (-1.28)        (-2.73)           (0.24)           (-3.69)

                                   682            682            682             482              482              482
Note: the Table shows the cumulative estimated response of a shock of 1 percentage point to a fiscal variable at t, t+1, t+2 on the
level of real GDP. Estimated regressions include country and time fixed effects. Standard errors are computed via the delta method.
T-statistics in parenthesis. **5% significance level. *10% significance level See also the text of the paper for a more extensive
explanation and the appendix for variables’ definitions and sources.



 Table 23: Effects of Fiscal Shocks on Real GDP, augmented specification

                                  Fiscal Adjustments - Definition 1              Fiscal Adjustments – IMF (2011)
  Dependent variable: Real
                                ΔCAPB<0          ΔG<0           ΔT>0         ΔCAPB<0             ΔG<0             ΔT>0
  GDP growth
  T                                0.06          0.15*           -0.17         -0.36**           -0.08           -0.72**

                                  (0.79)         (1.74)         (-1.43)        (-3.51)           (-0.49)          (-4.08)
  T+1                              0.18          0.32**         -0.33*         -0.68**           -0.19           -1.51**

                                  (1.49)         (2.44)         (-1.70)        (-4.25)           (-0.77)          (-4.82)
  T+2                              0.19          0.38**          -0.41         -0.55**            0.01           -1.81**

                                  (1.28)         (2.23)         (-1.60)        (-2.96)           `(0.06)          (-4.35)

                                     682             682           682             482                482              482
Note: the Table shows the cumulative estimated response of a shock of 1 percentage point to a fiscal variable at t, t+1, t+2 on the
level of real GDP. Estimated regressions include country and time fixed effects. Standard errors are computed via the delta method.
T-statistics in parenthesis. **5% significance level. *10% significance level See also the text of the paper for a more extensive
explanation and the appendix for variables’ definitions and sources.
 Table 24: Effects of Primary Spending Components on Real GDP

                                      Fiscal Adjustments - Definition 1                 Fiscal Adjustments - Definition 1
                                           baseline specifications                          Augmented specifications
 Dependent variable:             Δ Primary current          Δ Government           Δ Primary current          Δ Government
 Real GDP growth                    spending<0               investment<0             spending<0              investment<0
 T
                                      0.29**                   -0.06                      0.3**                      -0.09

                                      (2.38)                   (-0.42)                   (2.55)                      (-0.68)
 T+1
                                      0.63**                   -0.08                     0.53**                      -0.17

                                      (3.52)                   (-0.32)                   (3.09)                      (-0.67)
 T+2
                                      0.73**                   -0.07                     0.62**                      -0.19

                                      (3.07)                   (-0.22)                   (2.74)                      (-0.55)

                                       682                       682                        682                       682
Note: the Table shows the cumulative estimated response of a shock of 1 percentage point to a fiscal variable at t, t+1, t+2 on the
level of real GDP. Estimated regressions include country and time fixed effects. Standard errors are computed via the delta method.
T-statistics in parenthesis. **5% significance level. *10% significance level See also the text of the paper for a more extensive
explanation and the appendix for variables’ definitions and sources.




 Table 25: Effects of Fiscal Shocks on Short-Term Interest Rates

                                     Baseline specification                               Augmented specification
  Dependent
  variable:            Fiscal Adjustments -        Fiscal Adjustments –        Fiscal Adjustments -       Fiscal Adjustments –
  Short-term               Definition 1                IMF (2011)                  Definition 1               IMF (2011)
  interest rates
                        ΔG<0           ΔT>0         ΔG<0          ΔT>0          ΔG<0          ΔT>0          ΔG<0             ΔT>0

  T                      -0.1           0.15         -0.18       0.53**         -0.11          0.15         -0.26            0.55**

                       (-1.23)         (1.31)       (-1.11)       (2.71)       (-1.43)        (1.25)       (-1.58)           (2.88)
  T+1                   -0.11           0.29        -0.51*         0.8*         -0.11          0.31        -0.58**           0.88**

                       (-0.72)         (1.22)       (-1.74)       (1.88)       (-0.74)        (1.30)        (-2.0)           (2.14)
  T+2                   -0.13           0.37       -0.86**         0.81         -0.14          0.39         -0.9**             0.95

                       (-0.60)         (1.04)       (-2.29)       (1.27)       (-0.63)        (1.13)       (-2.44)           (1.53)


Note: the Table shows the cumulative estimated response of a shock of 1 percentage point to a fiscal variable at t, t+1, t+2 on short-
term interest rates. Estimated regressions include country and time fixed effects. Standard errors are computed via the delta method.
T-statistics in parenthesis. **5% significance level. *10% significance level See also the text of the paper for a more extensive
explanation and the appendix for variables’ definitions and sources.
 Table 26: Effects of Fiscal Shocks on Real GDP, controlling for monetary policy

                                 Baseline specification                                 Augmented specification
  Dependent
  variable:         Fiscal Adjustments -      Fiscal Adjustments –           Fiscal Adjustments -        Fiscal Adjustments –
  Real GDP              Definition 1              IMF (2011)                     Definition 1                IMF (2011)
  growth
                    ΔG<0         ΔT>0           ΔG<0          ΔT>0           ΔG<0           ΔT>0          ΔG<0           ΔT>0

  T                 0.14*        -0.04          -0.06        -0.47**         0.15*          -0.05          -0.04        -0.55**

                    (1.69)      (-0.30)        (-0.34)        (-2.41)        (1.79)        (-0.44)        (-0.25)        (-2.93)
  T+1              0.27**        -0.07          -0.21        -0.92**         0.24*          -0.17          -0.23         -1.1**

                    (2.00)      (-0.31)        (-0.85)        (-2.51)        (1.86)        (-0.84)        (-0.93)        (-3.16)
  T+2               0.4**        -0.16          -0.09         -1.1**         0.37**         -0.29          -0.11        -1.34**

                    (2.22)      (-0.53)        (-0.30)        (-2.18)        (2.13)        (-1.08)        (-0.40)        (-2.82)


Note: the Table shows the cumulative estimated response of a shock of 1 percentage point to a fiscal variable at t, t+1, t+2 on the
level of real GDP. Estimated regressions include country and time fixed effects. Standard errors are computed via the delta method.
T-statistics in parenthesis. **5% significance level. *10% significance level See also the text of the paper for a more extensive
explanation and the appendix for variables’ definitions and sources.



 Table 27: Effects of Fiscal Shocks on Unit Labour Costs

                                Baseline specification                                  Augmented specification
  Dependent
                   Fiscal Adjustments -       Fiscal Adjustments –           Fiscal Adjustments -        Fiscal Adjustments –
  variable %
                       Definition 1               IMF (2011)                     Definition 1                IMF (2011)
  Δ ULC
                   ΔG<0          ΔT>0           ΔG<0          ΔT>0           ΔG<0           ΔT>0          ΔG<0           ΔT>0

  T               -0.27**       0.39**         -0.64**         0.33         -0.33**         0.4**         -0.64**         0.35

                   (-2.02)       (2.04)        (-2.59)        (1.20)         (-2.50)        (2.22)        (-2.76)        (1.37)
  T+1             -0.43**        0.57*         -1.07**         0.57         -0.48**         0.56*         -0.99**         0.59

                   (-1.92)       (1.68)        (-2.79)        (1.12)         (-2.23)        (1.77)        (-2.74)        (1.23)
  T+2               -0.37         0.75         -1.47**         0.52          -0.47           0.68         -1.28**         0.45

                   (-1.22)       (1.63)        (-3.35)        (0.76)         (-1.61)        (1.55)        (-3.10)        (0.70)


Note: the Table shows the cumulative estimated response of a shock of 1 percentage point to a fiscal variable at t, t+1, t+2 on Unit
Labour Costs. Estimated regressions include country and time fixed effects. Standard errors are computed via the delta method. T-
statistics in parenthesis. **5% significance level. *10% significance level See also the text of the paper for a more extensive
explanation and the appendix for variables’ definitions and sources.
                                Figure 2: Exchange rate and government debt
            20.00




                                                                                   IRL
                                                                                           PRT
                                                                               NOR
               10.00




                                                                                                         NLD
                                                                         ITA             BEL
                                                                                         ITA
                                   ITA                   FIN                          AUTITAPRT
                                                                                              FINFRA      DEU
Change in debt




                                     ESP                                                     NOR   SWE
                                                                        CAN             NOR
                                                                                          NOR
                                                                                            NLD
    0.00




                                                                                     DEU BEL
                                                    SWE                                PRT
                                                                                     ESP
                                                                             CAN
                                                                             ESP          NLD
                                                                ITA                         CHEUK
                                                                                     NLD                        IRL
                                                                       JPN                    NLD
            -10.00




                                                                                  FIN NOR DNK
                                                                      NOR
                                                                               UK            BEL
                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                           DNK
                                                                                 NZL SWE

                                 SWE
                                                                                                 IRL
            -20.00




                       -20.00                    -10.00                                  0.00                    10.00
                                                               % Exch. rate gr.




              Figure 3: Cum. Exchange rate change and government debt
         20.00




                                                  IRL
                                                         PRT
                                                         NOR
               10.00




                                                             NLD
                                                  ITA
                                                   ITA                BEL
                                       ITA         AUT  FIN
                                                       ITA   DEU
                                                            FIN
Change in debt




                                             ESP     NOR FRA
                                                         PRT
                                                           SWE
                                                    NOR        CAN
                                                        NOR      NLD
    0.00




                                                  DEU BEL
                                                 SWE    PRT
                                                    ESP
                                                 CAN
                                                 ESP      NLD
                                                        ITA
                                                        CHE          UK
                                                 NLD      IRL
                                                       NLD                                             JPN
         -10.00




                                                     FINNORDNK
                                                  NOR
                                                   UKSWE   BEL
                                                      DNK
                                                    SWE NZL

                                                SWE
                                                        IRL
         -20.00




                 -50.00                           0.00                   50.00                                  100.00
                                                      % Cum Exch. rate gr.
