NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF RECONSTRUCTION FINANCE CORPORATION ASSISTANCE
ON MICHIGAN’S BANKS’ SURVIVAL IN THE 1930S
Charles W. Calomiris
Joseph R. Mason
Marc Weidenmier
Katherine Bobroff
Working Paper 18427
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18427

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2012

This paper was prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference, “The Microeconomics
of New Deal Policy,” July 26-27, 2012. For helpful comments, we thank Price Fishback, Eugene White,
Kris Mitchener, Larry Neal, Gary Richardson, Eric Hilt, Shawn Kantor, and other participants in the
February 2012 “pre-conference,” and July 2012 conference for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
Adonis Antoniades and Guojun Chen provided superb research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Charles W. Calomiris, Joseph R. Mason, Marc Weidenmier, and Katherine Bobroff. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance on Michigan’s Banks’ Survival
in the 1930s
Charles W. Calomiris, Joseph R. Mason, Marc Weidenmier, and Katherine Bobroff
NBER Working Paper No. 18427
September 2012
JEL No. G01,G18,G21,G28,N12,N22
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the effects of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation’s (RFC) loan and preferred
stock programs on bank failure rates in Michigan during the period 1932-1934, which includes the
important Michigan banking crisis of early 1933 and its aftermath. Using a new database on Michigan
banks, we employ probit and survival duration analysis to examine the effectiveness of the RFC’s
loan program (the policy tool employed before March 1933) and the RFC’s preferred stock purchases
(the policy tool employed after March 1933) on bank failure rates.
Our estimates treat the receipt of RFC assistance as an endogenous variable. We are able to identify
apparently valid and powerful instruments (predictors of RFC assistance that are not directly related
to failure risk) for analyzing the effects of RFC assistance on bank survival. We find that the loan program
had no statistically significant effect on the failure rates of banks during the crisis; point estimates
are sometimes positive, sometimes negative, and never estimated precisely. This finding is consistent
with the view that the effectiveness of debt assistance was undermined by some combination of increasing
the indebtedness of financial institutions and subordinating bank depositors. We find that RFC’s purchases
of preferred stock – which did not increase indebtedness or subordinate depositors – increased the
chances that a bank would survive the financial crisis.
We also perform a parallel analysis of the effects of RFC preferred stock assistance on the loan supply
of surviving banks. We find that RFC assistance not only contributed to loan supply by reducing failure
risk; conditional on bank survival, RFC assistance is associated with significantly higher lending by
recipient banks from 1931 to 1935.

Charles W. Calomiris
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

Marc Weidenmier
Robert Day School of Economics and Finance
Claremont McKenna College
500 East Ninth Street
Claremont, CA 91711
and NBER
marc_weidenmier@claremontmckenna.edu

Joseph R. Mason
Patrick F. Taylor 2164-A
E. J. Ourso College of Business
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
joseph.r.mason@gmail.com

Katherine Bobroff
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, Massachusetts 02163
klbobroff@gmail.com

3
I. Introduction: RFC Assistance to Banks During the Depression
This paper examines the effects of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation’s
(RFC) loan and preferred stock programs on bank failure rates of Michigan banks during
the period 1932-1934, which includes the important Michigan banking crisis of early
1933. Using a new database collected from primary sources, we employ probit and
survival duration models to examine the effectiveness of the government’s loan program
and preferred stock purchases on bank survival and failure rates, and on loan growth of
surviving banks. We study Michigan banks because the failure to stem Michigan’s
statewide banking crisis has been viewed by some historians of the Depression as a
critical precipitator of the national financial crisis of 1933 (Kennedy 1973).

The

prevalence of bank failures in Michigan during the period 1932-1934 provides a rich data
set to examine the determinants of failure, and the potential salutary effects of
government assistance.
The Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC) was a government-sponsored
enterprise founded to stem bank failures and reduce the economic costs of financial
disintermediation. The RFC was originally established to lend funds to troubled firms.
However, beginning in March 1933, the Corporation shifted from lending to banks to
directly recapitalized banks by purchasing their preferred stock. The program disbursed
approximately $200 billion in current U.S. dollars (Lohr 2008). When the RFC ceased
operations in the early 1950s, the government-sponsored entity sold its preferred stock
and recovered the funds provided by taxpayers.

4
Herbert Hoover established the RFC on February 2, 1932.1

The RFC was

originally established to stimulate the economy by increasing liquidity in the financial
system by loaning funds to troubled financial institutions. The RFC was an agency of the
executive branch of the federal government that had the ability to increase its lending
capacity and oversight powers by executive order. Its operations did not depend on
Congressional approval (Mason 2003).
During the Great Depression, the RFC conducted four major aid programs: a loan
program for financial institutions, a preferred stock program for financial institutions, a
railroad loan program, and a commercial and industrial loan program.2 The loan program
for financial institutions was the first program initiated by the RFC, and it was largely
replaced by a preferred stock program; there were few RFC loans made to banks after
March 1933, with the exception of loans made to assist the liquidation of failed banks.
While the RFC’s charter permitted the Corporation to make loans with maturities
of up to three years, most loans had maturities of less than six months. The threat of nonrenewal was perceived as giving the RFC necessary influence over bank management
practices. The RFC also demanded high-quality and liquid collateral for its loans, charged
an interest rate higher than the rates charged on Federal Reserve loans, and required
recipient banks to limit the salary of employees for the life of the loan.
1

This history of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation is based on Mason (2001b).
The RFC’s railroad loan program, like its bank loan program, was part of the original RFC Act.
However, unlike its loans to banks, the RFC’s railroad loans did not need to be fully secured. The RFC
also lent to railroads at below market rates. As a result of these lax lending polices, the RFC’s railroad loan
program was abused, and funds were used for the benefit of railroad company insiders (Mason 2001b).
The commercial and industrial loan program was the final economic stimulation program
undertaken by the RFC during the Great Depression. Because the banks had ceased lending, the RFC made
loans directly to businesses. The RFC encouraged banks to purchase the right to participate in commercial
and industrial loans instead of originating the loans themselves in order to stimulate private sector lending.
However, during the Great Depression, consumers were not increasing their demand for goods or
services. As a result, no businesses needed to invest in additional capacity. The commercial and industrial
loan program therefore had little impact on the economy.
2

5
The short duration, strict collateralization rules, and high interest of RFC loans
may have protected the RFC from loss, but it also may have limited the effectiveness of
RFC lending. Banks that received such assistance became more indebted as a
consequence of it, and were not given much additional time to restore market confidence
in their solvency. Because the RFC demanded high-quality collateral, the RFC’s loans
also effectively stripped banks of their best assets, thereby effectively subordinating
depositors – who retained general claims on the remaining assets of the bank, an asset
pool of lower quality than RFC collateral. Increased leverage, short maturity, and the
subordination of depositors increased the riskiness of recipient banks’ deposits, and may
have encouraged depositor runs, as many critics of the RFC lending program contended
(Olson 1977, Mason 2001a). The strict terms of RFC lending and the control the RFC
exercised over bank management also allegedly discouraged financial institutions from
using the RFC’s loan program. According to Olson (1972), the RFC’s loan conditions
were generally perceived as bringing “more problems than solutions.” In Olson’s (1972,
p. 177) view, RFC loans “helped only those basically sound enterprises that needed
temporary liquidity.”

James (1938) corroborates this view: “High collateral

requirements forced [banks] to isolate their most liquid assets as security for RFC loans.
In April 1932, for example, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation loaned the Reno
National Bank over $1,100,000, but in the process took as collateral over $3,000,000 of
the bank’s best securities.

This in itself left the bank unable to meet any future

emergency demands for funds by depositors.” The only econometric analysis of the loan
program’s effectiveness, based on the failure experience of banks in the Chicago Federal

6
Reserve District, suggests that the decision to borrow from the RFC did not prevent bank
failures, and may have contributed to the risk of failure (Mason 2001a).
To correct the perceived flaws of the loan program, the RFC moved from a policy
designed primarily to increase short-term liquidity to one that reduced the default risk of
deposits by increasing the capital of assisted banks. On March 9, 1933, Congress passed
the Emergency Banking Relief Act, altering the original mandate of the RFC to permit
the government-sponsored entity to purchase preferred stock in financial institutions.3
RFC assistance was not available to all banks; only to those that were deemed sufficiently
likely to survive as the result of receiving the assistance. Statistical analysis by Mason
(2001a) of Chicago Fed District recipients indicates that the banks that issued preferred
stock to the RFC were of middling risk compared to other banks at the time they received
assistance.
RFC preferred stock was junior to deposits and other debts, but senior to common
stock upon liquidation of a bank. After the issuance of the RFC’s preferred stock,
common stock dividends were strictly limited, and the RFC undertook additional
measures to ensure that banks accumulated additional capital and did not abuse
government protection (Upham and Lamke 1934, Cho 1953).

RFC preferred stock

carried voting rights that gave it the power to institute changes that would increase the
solvency and profitability of a bank. The bank’s earnings were placed in a retirement
fund that would be used to buy back the RFC’s preferred stock.
The RFC’s rules and control rights over financial institutions that participated in
the preferred stock program seem to have discouraged some banks from participating.
Furthermore, banks also expressed concern that participating in the aid program would
3

Emergency Banking Relief Act, Section 304. 73rd Congress, 1933.

7
make them seem weak, causing depositors and shareholders to lose confidence and
withdraw their funds from banks. As a result, widespread participation in the preferred
stock program occurred only when the FDIC began backing some of the deposits in
solvent banks in 1934. For large banks, FDIC insurance limits meant that only a small
proportion of their deposits were insured, but for small banks in rural areas, FDIC
coverage insured a much larger proportion of deposits.
Insurance coverage was offered only after many insolvent banks were closed in
1933, leaving the remaining banks to be insured by the FDIC and assisted by the RFC.4
Deeply insolvent banks were closed; marginal banks were assisted and insured, and
clearly solvent banks were insured without assistance.
Managers of relatively strong and weak banks alike sold preferred stock to the
RFC, purportedly to protect the identities of the institutions that were too weak to join the
FDIC without additional investment. As a result, the RFC eventually owned more than
one-third of the capital of American banks (Mason 2001b). Econometric analysis of
Chicago Fed District banks suggests that recapitalizing the banks with preferred stock
helped to stabilize the banking sector, although the program did not increase lending by
those banks (Mason 2001a).
The ambitious programs and immense resources of the RFC subjected the agency
to political pressure and public scrutiny. State and federal politicians, recognizing the
benefits of RFC aid, often pressured the government-sponsored enterprise to grant
4

According to Jesse Jones, the chairman of the RFC, more than 5,000 banks which had previously claimed
to be solvent “required considerable added capital to make them [sufficiently] sound” to join the FDIC
(Jones and Pforzheimer, 1951, p. 27). Jones personally appealed to the managers of all banks to join the
RFC’s stock program “so that depositors would not be induced to switch out of …banks when their names
were published” (p. 26-27). Thanks to the preferred stock program, the weaker banks were adequately
recapitalized and all but 141 of approximately 14,500 American banks joined the FDIC in 1934 (Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation).

8
assistance to their constituents.

Concerns about RFC accountability ultimately led

Congress to require the publication of the names of its aid beneficiaries.
Econometric analysis of the identities and characteristics of the recipients of aid
distributed by the RFC have not been able to identify evidence that the Corporation was
not swayed by political influence in its lending policies, where political influence is
defined as systematic biases related to political partisanship, Congressional committees
and the like (Mason 2003).5 The potential for the manipulation of the RFC by Congress
or the Administration was mitigated by three main factors. First, the loans made by the
RFC to financial institutions had to be fully and adequately secured.6 This restriction was
also incorporated into the RFC’s credit and capital programs, which ensured that aid
recipients were good candidates for recovery.

Second, the RFC was funded as a

government-owned corporation with an initial appropriation from Congress and capital
subsidies from the Treasury. The managers of the RFC relied upon this capital base rather
than regular Congressional appropriations, which freed the RFC’s managers from having
to concern themselves about ongoing political pressure from Congress. Finally, RFC aid
decisions were made at the regional level; each region’s field office was largely
independent from the others and appears to have been largely immune to political
influences from Washington. Field offices were given a large degree of autonomy over
assistance decisions, but also were held accountable to the central office if their decisions
adversely affected RFC earnings (Delaney 1954).
5

This study does not test for the personal influence of particular bankers on the allocation of RFC funding.
Not surprisingly, given the extent of RFC lending, some of the banks that received RFC assistance were
associated with politically influential individuals, who were also connected to the RFC, including Jesse
Jones and Charles Dawes. Whether the likelihood of assistance was affected by such personal connections
remains unexplored empirically. Doing so would require the mapping of the personal and business
connections of bank officers and board members, which is beyond the scope of this paper.
6
The RFC did not specify the level of collateral that was necessary and only its staff could evaluate
whether a bank had sufficient assets to secure a loan (Mason 2001b).

9
Mason (2001a) and Calomiris and Mason (2004) conduct in-depth analyses of the
operations of the RFC in the Chicago Federal Reserve District, distinguishing between
the effects of RFC loans and preferred stock purchases on Chicago Federal Reserve
member banks. The analysis suggests that as the RFC assumed greater default risk, its
aid programs more successfully limited bank failures. RFC loans did not lower bank
failure rates. RFC loans, like Fed discounting, was designed to deal with illiquidity
problems, not shocks that threatened bank solvency. In contrast, the preferred stock
program helped prevent banks from failing because they channeled resources to banks
(subsidized injections of capital) that reduced insolvency risk. Mason suggests that
marginally solvent banks receiving preferred stock assistance could operate more
efficiently and regain strength as a result of government infusions of capital stock.
While these findings are important and suggestive, it is not clear whether they
apply to other regions of the country, which suffered different histories of bank distress
during the Great Depression. Chicago’s deepest moment of crisis was its panic of June
1932, long before the nationwide panic that gripped the banking system in March of 1933
(Calomiris and Mason 1997, 2003a). In this study, we examine whether similar
consequences of RFC assistance can be discerned for Michigan banks. The timing and
extent of Michigan banking distress perhaps most closely tracked the sudden and
widespread panic that gripped the U.S. in early 1933, and therefore, provides an
important further test of the effectiveness of RFC preferred stock assistance in reducing
the costs of banking distress in 1933 and its aftermath.

10
II. Michigan Banks and the Nationwide Panic of 1933
The Great Depression saw the worst waves of banking distress that had gripped
the country since the late 1830s. Calomiris and Mason (2003a) review the history, and
causal influences, relating to the waves of failures that occurred from 1930 to 1933. From
November 1932 to February 1933, banking distress accelerated, and systemwide banking
crises gripped Nevada, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, Minnesota, Tennessee, Ohio, Arkansas,
Alabama, Missouri, Maryland, Louisiana, and Michigan. Calomiris and Mason (2003a)
show that the nationwide panic of early 1933 differed from prior waves of bank failure;7
unlike prior episodes of distress, the probability of failure rose dramatically in early 1933,
not only for banks with weak fundamentals, but for all banks.
The banking crisis in Michigan in February 1933 was of particular importance;
indeed, Kennedy (1973) describes the Michigan banking crisis as a “prelude to the
national banking disaster three weeks thereafter.” The turmoil experienced in Michigan,
the home of the American automobile industry, also highlights the devastating effects of
banking crises on the national economy.
In Detroit, significant amounts of money began to flow out of the largest banks
with the onset of the Great Depression (Awalt 1969). The Detroit Bankers Company
Group and the Union Guardian Group, the two major local bank holding companies, were
under additional pressure because of their banks’ heavy investment in local real estate
(New York Times 1933a).8
7

Between 1930 and February 1933, approximately $250

See Calomiris (2010) on the size of depositor losses during the 1930s. On the policy reaction to the
banking distress of the Depression and its aftermath, see Calomiris and White (1994), White (1998) and
Calomiris (2010). See Calomiris and Mason (2003b) on the credit supply consequences of banking distress
during the Depression.
8
The Detroit Banks Company Group held the First National Bank of Detroit, Peoples’ Wayne County
Bank, Detroit Trust Company, eight suburban banks, and a local investment company, the First Detroit
Company. The Union Guardian Group, also called the Ford Group, held the National Bank of Commerce,

11
million was withdrawn from the First National Bank of Detroit; its local competitors, the
Union Guardian Trust Company and the Guardian National Bank of Detroit, also
sustained massive withdrawals. By January 1933, these banks were losing between $2.5
million and $3 million in deposits each week (Awalt 1969).
These banks not only were large Detroit banks, they were at the center of the
largest two banking groups in Michigan. In Michigan, two holding companies – the
Guardian Detroit Union Group, and First National People's Wayne Group – controlled 56
banks (35 and 21, respectively), including the First National Bank of Detroit, Union
Guardian Trust Company, and Guardian National Bank of Detroit. As of December 1929,
the two banking groups accounted for $1.1 billion of the $1.2 billion in loans and
investments that were housed within group and chain banks in Michigan.9 In 1929,
Michigan banks affiliated with groups or chains represented 15.9 percent of all Michigan
banks, and 54.4 percent of the loans and investments of Michigan banks.10 The problems
of the Detroit banks, therefore, had broader potential ramifications elsewhere in
Michigan.11

Guardian Union Trust Company, and other local banks (Awalt 1969, 350). First National Bank had book
assets of $485,846,627 and 146 branch offices outside of its main office in Detroit at the time of the crisis;
the Guardian Union Group held book assets of $432,797,434, nine bank components in Detroit and 11 bank
branches in other Michigan cities (New York Times 1933b).
9
Group and chain banks were banks controlled by a centralized governance system, either related to a bank
holding company, a main bank, or individual stock holders. US House of Representatives (1930) identifies
the number and size of groups and chains in the United States as of December 1929, but it does not list the
banks that belonged to chains or groups.
10
Federal Reserve Board (1943), p. 312.
11
In our empirical work we considered trying to take account of a bank’s position in a group or chain,
either as a leader of a group or chain, or as a member of one, to see whether leadership of a chain or
membership in one might have affected the probability of receiving RFC assistance, or the probability of
failure. The only important group or chain leaders, however, were the banks in Detroit that were
reorganized in early 1933, and therefore, are not part of our sample. Furthermore, we could not locate a
reliable source for identifying members of groups or chains. Bank encyclopedias (like Polks) do sometimes
refer to group and chain connections, but it is not clear whether this is done consistently.

12
To meet the demands of its depositors, the Guardian Trust Company requested
additional funds from the RFC. Henry Ford had already attempted to bolster the bank’s
liquidity with a $7 million deposit. With deposits of approximately $32.5 million in the
Guardian Banks and an additional $18 million in the Detroit Bankers’ group, Ford had a
strong personal incentive to assist the local financial institutions (Awalt 1969). However,
Ford’s infusion of cash was not enough to sustain the Guardian Trust Company, and the
bank requested an additional $60 million from the RFC, which was already lending to a
number of local banks (New York Times 1933a; New York Times 1933c).
As the RFC considered the application of the Guardian Trust Company, Michigan
Senator James Couzens realized that the bank lacked sufficient collateral to justify a
standard loan (New York Times 1933a).12 Couzens asked Henry Ford to grant the
government a lien on his $7 million deposit, subordinating his claim to that of the RFC.
Ford rejected this plan and an alternative plan that would have required him to sign a
personal note for the difference between the bank’s collateral and the amount to be
loaned by the RFC. Contemporary sources indicate that the Ford family and company
had already advanced local banks $12 million and considered further efforts to save the
banks futile (Awalt 1969). Angered by the increasing pressure from government officials
to personally recapitalize the struggling banks, Ford threatened to withdraw $25 million
from the system at the first opportunity. Because it was feared that such a withdrawal
would cause a panic and threaten the survival of the local banks, Francis Awalt, acting

12

Couzens and Ford were former business partners in the Ford Motor Company. Couzens was also the
chairman of the Senate committee responsible for investigating the RFC’s loans, so his concerns about the
need for proper collateralization were sufficient cause to block the Union Guardian Trust Company’s aid
package (New York Times 1933a).

13
Comptroller of the Currency at the US Treasury, felt compelled to prevent the national
banks of Detroit from opening (Awalt 1969).
While Awalt recognized the need to keep all Michigan banks closed, his authority
was limited to national banks. Thus, federal officials conferred with Michigan Governor
William A. Comstock, who declared a statewide bank holiday on February 14, 1933. The
holiday was originally intended to last eight days (Awalt 1969). However, the complex
problems plaguing the financial system prompted officials to extend the holiday until
March 6 (Awalt 1969).
On February 18, soon after the Michigan bank holiday was declared, news
circulated of a potential merger of the Guardian Trust Company and the Central Hanover
Bank and Trust Company of New York. Supposedly, “local pride” motivated Detroit
bankers to reject the assistance of the New York banks, and local rivalries supposedly
prevented the mergers of Detroit banks (New York Times 1933d).
On February 24, Henry Ford and his son Edsel, a Chairman of the Union
Guardian Trust Company, offered to provide capital for two new banks to help liquidate
the assets of the distressed banks. The aid of the Ford family was offered on the
condition that they could select the new bank directors and officers (Awalt 1969).
Initially, it seemed that the Ford offer, accompanied by an additional $20 million from
New York bankers and an RFC pledge of $54 million, would allow depositors to access
at least 35 percent of their deposits immediately (Los Angeles Times 1933). However, the
New York bankers withdrew their offer of assistance because of concerns that they might
not have clear legal claim to the failing banks’ assets. The Ford family then withdrew its
contribution, and the bailout plan failed (New York Times 1933e). The failure of the

14
bailout plan helped to precipitate a panic across Michigan, which contributed to the panic
gripping the rest of the country (Mason 2003, Butkiewicz 1995).
The effects of the financial crisis were felt acutely in the real economy during the
weeks between the initial crisis in Detroit and President Roosevelt’s inauguration.
Detroit was threatened with a milk shortage and grocers were unable to sell food since
they could not cash checks (New York Times 1933f; New York Times 1933g). Twentyeight thousand local families supported by the Detroit Public Welfare Department were
unable to use their aid checks from the city’s accounts with the Guardian Group and First
National; Wayne County, Michigan was unable to support 10,000 ill and insane patients
because its deposits in the bank groups were unavailable (New York Times 1933g). In
late February, the Detroit Clearing House Association considered issuing scrip 13 to
provide a medium of exchange during the banking emergency (New York Times 1933g).
The situation in Michigan and the concurrent exposure of allegedly disreputable
business practices among New York bankers exacerbated financial instability across the
country. The instability of the Detroit banking system worried officials in Washington,
as the public withdrew deposits from banks nationwide. Over 5,500 banks with deposits
totaling $3.4 billion had temporarily closed by March 3. New York banks lost $200
million in gold and $150 million in currency; Chicago also lost $100 million in gold the
same day (Awalt 1969). The Federal Reserve banks admitted “they could not support
member banks indefinitely, especially those drained by the troubles in Michigan,
Maryland, and Ohio” (Kennedy 1973).

However, outgoing President Hoover was

unwilling to declare a national bank holiday, so comptroller Awalt and other government
officials pressured the governors of several states to declare state banking holidays and
13

Scrip is a certificate of indebtedness issued as currency or in lieu of money (Oxford English Dictionary).

15
institute banking restrictions. On March 6, the first business day following President
Roosevelt’s inauguration, he declared a national bank holiday to try to stem the panic.
On March 9, Congress passed the Emergency Banking Relief Act drafted by
Roosevelt and his advisors. The Act granted the federal government power over the
banking system.14 Under this act, the RFC would directly capitalize banks by purchasing
preferred stock.
The Emergency Banking Act of 1933 is widely regarded as having helped to
resolve the banking crisis. During the national holiday, government officials confirmed
the solvency of national banks, which were gradually reopened to their depositors
beginning March 13 (although many banks would remain suspended for a much longer
time, and some banks never were able to reopen their doors).15 Roosevelt’s innovative
banking plan and first “fireside chat” soothed depositors to such an extent that when
banks reopened, deposits actually exceeded withdrawals. Five thousand three hundred
eighty-seven of the Federal Reserve’s 6,694 member banks reopened by the end of
March; 7,654 of 11,455 state institutions also reopened during that time. By June, 91
percent of deposits in Federal Reserve member banks were available to the public.
Confidence in the banking system encouraged stock market values to increase; the values
of government bonds, corporate bonds and commodities also increased (Kennedy 1973).
After successfully reopening the first set of banks, Roosevelt’s administration
addressed the long-term capital needs of the banking system. Through investments made

14

The Act also contained provisions for reorganizing national banks and issuing preferred stock for banks.
It formalized lending by the Federal Reserve to banks, and created a Presidential discretionary fund of
$2,000,000 to help carry out the Act.
15
The 1933 Act created the concept of bank “conservatorship,” which was a way station between a normal
state of affairs and receivership. Many banks that received assistance from the RFC in 1933 were in
conservatorship.

16
by local businessmen and the RFC, the government engineered the direct recapitalization
of certain weak banks.

The RFC invested more than $1.2 billion in over 6,000

institutions during its 18 years of operations.16 Ultimately, the agency lost only $13.7
million and only 206 of the banks that received RFC preferred stock investments were
later forced to close (Kennedy 1973).17 The subsidies received by banks (and the implicit
taxpayer costs of RFC assistance) should be measured using ex ante costs (the cost
savings enjoyed by banks by virtue of their access to government assistance), not the ex
post losses.18 Nonetheless, the limited losses are indicative of the care with which RFC
funds were allocated.
In Detroit, the RFC orchestrated a “Spokane sale” of the assets of the banks.19
General Motors and the RFC announced the creation of a new bank on March 21. Half
the capital for this new corporation was provided by the RFC, which received preferred
stock. The other half of the necessary capital was provided by local interests, including
General Motors and Chrysler, which were granted common stock in the company (New
York Times 1933c). The RFC supervised the management of this new bank, the National
Bank of Detroit.
The National Bank of Detroit immediately took control of the assets and liabilities
of the Guardian group and the National group. On April 24, the National Bank of Detroit
16

Equivalent to approximately $19.5 billion in the year 2008 (Officer and Williamson, 2009).
Equivalent to approximately $227 million in the year 2008 (Officer and Williamson, 2009).
18
This approach to measuring cost is now widely recognized. For example, the Emergency Economic
Stabilization Act of 2008, which was the empowering legislation for the Troubled Asset Relief Program
(TARP), requires the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
to measure subsidies by including the cost of market risk when estimating the budgetary cost of TARP.
19
“Spokane sales” were used to dissolve banks that provided valuable services to the community but whose
assets covered less than half of their debt. Conservators arranged the sale of “desirable assets in bulk…to
an existing bank or a bank newly organized for that purpose,” and creditors were immediately paid from
the revenue generated by the sale (Kennedy 1973). After the sale and allocation of the proceeds, the old
banks could be dissolved.
17

17
distributed 30 percent of its holdings to the old depositors and began liquidating the
assets of the Guardian and National groups in May. The efficiency of the RFC’s “Detroit
plan” spurred numerous applications for reorganization in other communities. In total,
the RFC and Treasury Department authorized 257 similar relief operations.

These

rehabilitations were significant aspects of the repair begun with the passage of the
Emergency Banking Act, which allowed the banking system to be rebuilt on stronger
foundations following the banking crisis of 1933.

III. Data Construction and Summary Statistics
The purpose of this analysis is to measure the effect of the RFC’s loan and
preferred stock programs on bank failure rates, after controlling for other factors. The
models use a cross-sectional set of bank-level data describing RFC loans and preferred
stock investments in each bank, local economic conditions, individual bank financial
characteristics, and the incidence and timing of bank failure.
Individual bank financial data come from the Federal Reserve member bank
Reports of Condition and Income. For our period, regulators of state nonmember banks
did not publish comparable and detailed data on individual banks’ balance sheets, or
earnings and expenses. Bank-level data for Fed member banks are available in the
Reports of Condition and Income of the Federal Reserve, which were preserved only in
part for our period (Mason 2001a, 1996). This means that our sample of banks is
restricted to Federal Reserve member banks, and that the dates at which we observe
financial information about all Fed member banks is restricted (we will rely on annual
data observed in the December 1931 call report). Federal Reserve banks include all

18
national banks and some (typically, the largest) state-chartered banks, which provides
some institutional diversity in the sample. Our sample is roughly equally divided between
national banks and state-chartered Fed member banks.
We collected detailed data on the individual characteristics of Michigan banks, as
well as the characteristics of Michigan counties in which the banks operated. The
database includes county-specific data on various aspects of the economic environment,
as well as bank-specific data on bank balance sheet and income statement characteristics,
dates of bank failure, the number of bank correspondent relationships of various kinds
(which link the subject bank to banks operating elsewhere in the country), and the history
of loans and preferred stock assistance each bank received from the RFC. Previous
studies have identified bank and county characteristics that have been shown to be
important either in forecasting failure risk or in determining access to RFC assistance,
and those earlier studies informed our selection of variables for this study. We also
include additional variables that have not been identified in earlier studies. The list of
variables we employ are defined in Table 1, and the summary statistics for these variables
are reported in Table 2.
Many Michigan banks relied on RFC loans prior to March 1933, and Michigan
banks also made substantial and early use of the RFC’s preferred stock program. As a
result, Michigan banks provide a rich data set to examine the impact of RFC assistance.
As shown in Table 3, of the 209 Michigan Fed member banks in our sample as of
December 1931 (not all of which are included in our regression specifications due to
some missing observations), 92 received RFC loans from March 1932 through February
1933. Of the 195 banks in the sample as of March 1933, 11 received preferred stock

19
assistance in 1933 and another 43 received preferred stock assistance in 1934. (Three
banks in the sample also received RFC loans after March 1933, but these are not included
in Table 3 or in our regression analysis for the later period, as discussed further below.)
Figure 1 provides a more detailed picture of the timing of the receipt of RFC loans and
preferred stock assistance by Michigan banks in our sample.
As we have seen, the RFC played a central role in the reorganization of Detroit
banking, through its assistance to the newly formed National Bank of Detroit. That
observation, however, is not included in our database, because RFC assistance was
provided in a special form as part of asset liquidation and the creation of a new bank. The
predecessor and successor banks were separate entities. Our sample, in contrast, analyzes
the effects of RFC loans and preferred stock assistance to open banks. Of course, given
the potentially important stabilizing consequences of RFC assistance for the National
Bank of Detroit, it is important to recognize that its omission from our sample
unavoidably understates the systemic contribution of the RFC to Michigan banking.
The bank failure data for the national banks are taken from the Comptroller of the
Currency’s Annual Report. The Rand-McNally Bankers’ Directory provides the failure
data for state banks, supplemented in one case by an observation reported by the RFC.
For the purposes of the analysis, receiverships and voluntary liquidations are treated as
bank failures. Suspension and “conservatorship” are not treated as failure events. (Recall
that all Michigan banks suspended in February of 1933, as required by law, and many
banks received RFC assistance as part of their “conservatorship” to enable them to

20
reopen.) Fifty seven of the banks in our sample failed, 7 of which received RFC loans and
4 of which received RFC preferred stock assistance.20
County-level data for most characteristics are taken from the Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR 2001) database. Additionally, we
rely on Fishback and Kantor (2003) for county data on New Deal disbursements and
loans.

We collected data on each bank’s correspondent relationships (number of

correspondents in New York, Chicago, and elsewhere) from the Polk’s Bankers’
Encyclopedia.21
RFC loans and preferred stock purchases were hand-coded from the monthly
Reports of Activities of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation.22 The Reports include
the amount of each loan and preferred stock purchase. Many banks received multiple
loans or infusions of capital in the form of preferred stock. According to Mason (2001a),
32 percent of banks in the United States received more than one loan from the RFC and
12 percent borrowed from the government-sponsored entity more than twice. Previous
studies have examined the average amount of each loan or preferred stock purchase by
dividing the amount of each by the number of loans or preferred stock purchases
(Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Butkiewicz, 1995; Keehn and Smiley 1988, 1993).
However, because so many banks received several loans or preferred stock purchases, the
averages of RFC outlays may be biased downward.

20

In Table 3, only 3 RFC recipients are shown as failures, owing to the nature of the timing described in
the table, but one of the RFC preferred stock assistance recipients in 1933 failed in 1934.
21
Almost all of the correspondent information was taken from the September 1931 issue of Polk’s. In two
cases, the subject bank was not listed in the September 1931 issue, and in those two cases we obtained
correspondent information from the March 1932 issue.
22
These reports were published when Congress was in session after fall 1932. The reports were reproduced
in the Congressional Serial Set and, until 1933, in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle. The Archive
of the Clerk of the House of Representatives preserved the reports submitted while Congress was in recess
and remains the only source for these reports.

21
Typically, a bank receiving one RFC loan received subsequent loans, as the loans
were rolled over. This was not the case for preferred stock, which was typically received
only once (all of our Michigan recipients received preferred stock assistance only once
during the period March 1933-December 1934). In our study, we identify the date at
which the bank received its first loan or its first preferred stock injection.
In measuring the effects of RFC preferred stock assistance we only include
assistance received prior to the end of December 1934. We are aware that three banks in
our sample received RFC preferred stock assistance in 1935, but failure risk was virtually
nil in 1935 and 1936, so we do not consider assistance received during these years.
Our analysis treats the period January 1932-February 1933 separately from the
period March 1933-December 1934. February 1933 is a natural dividing line for a
separate two-period analysis of RFC assistance policies’ effects in Michigan for two
reasons. First, RFC policy changed from lending to preferred stock purchases in March
1933. Second, Michigan banks suspended in February 1933, and reopened from March
1933 through early February as part of the RFC/FDIC process of sorting institutions into
the healthy (which could reopen without assistance, the curably sick (which received
preferred stock assistance), and the dead (which were closed). In our regression analysis,
therefore, the effects of RFC loans are estimated for the early failure period, while the
effects of RFC stock purchases are estimated for the later period. As Table 3 shows,
failure rates were higher for the later period; from January 1932 through February 1933,

22
17 Michigan banks out of the 209 present as of December 1931 failed, while for the later
period 40 out of 195 banks present as of March 1933 failed.23
Table 4 presents simple characteristic comparisons – analogous to those discussed
in Calomiris and Mason (1997) for Chicago banks in the 1930s – across bank failure
cohorts. Here we compare four groups of banks: those that failed in the early period
(January 1932-February 1933), those that failed in the first part of the later period (March
1933-December 1933) during which many suspended banks were either closed or
reopened, those that failed in the second part of the later period (January 1934-December
1934), and those that survived beyond December 1934.
The first characteristic we compare across these four groups is their exogenous ex
ante failure risk. To capture exogenous ex ante failure risk we estimate a simple probit
model of failure risk for the early period. The column labeled “Predicted failure” in Table
4 reports the estimated probability of failure from a probit model that is identical to the
one reported in the first column of Table 5, except that RFC assistance is not included as
an explanatory variable in the regression specification used to construct the predicted
failure probabilities reported in Table 4. Clearly, and not surprisingly given the way
predicted failure probabilities are constructed, the banks that failed in the period January
1932-February 1933 display the highest mean probability of failure (30.9%). Predicted
failure risk is lower for the other three sub-groups, and declines over time (from a mean
of 7.3% for the banks that failed March-December 1933 to 6.2% for those that failed in
1934). Survivors had an average predicted failure risk of 3.9%.

23

Again, only 3 RFC recipients are shown as failures during Period 3 in Table 3, owing to the nature of the
timing described in the table, but one of the RFC preferred stock assistance recipients in 1933 also failed in
1934.

23
Table 4 also examines differences across the four cohorts in the structure of bank
liabilities as of December 1931 and related differences in bank funding costs for 1931. As
in Calomiris and Mason (1997), the differences are striking, and confirm that banks at
greater risk of failure tended to experience a contraction in their demand deposits held by
the public and in the deposits owed to other banks, and an expansion in their “Borrowed
money” (a shorthand for bills payable and rediscounts as a proportion of total bank debt).
In other words, as the market perceived banks to be at greater risk of default, demand
deposits contracted and were replaced in part by higher-cost risky funding. That higher
cost is reflected in the column labeled “Cost of funds” (defined as the total interest
expense for 1931 divided by total debt). The cost of funds so defined averaged 4% for
Michigan banks that ended up failing in the period January 1932-February 1933. For
other banks, their average cost of funds in 1931 was roughly half as high.
The data reported in Tables 3 and 4 show that the connections between the receipt
of RFC assistance and failure risk are potentially complex and must be analyzed
carefully. As Table 3 indicates, roughly equal numbers of Michigan banks received or did
not receive RFC loans in the early period, and the failure rate for the two groups was
similar (9/94 and 8/118). This does not necessarily imply anything about the
effectiveness of RFC loans in reducing failure risk, since the ex ante risk characteristics
of recipients were not necessarily the same as those of non-recipients. Indeed, as Table 4
indicates, failed banks (which had higher ex ante failure risk) were more likely to receive
RFC loans than banks that failed later or that survived. Similarly, only 4 out of 54
preferred stock issuing banks failed in the period March 1933-December 1934, compared
to 23 out of 184 failures for non-recipients during 1933 and 13 out of 118 failures for

24
banks that received no preferred stock assistance at any time in 1933 or 1934. Before
reaching conclusions about the effectiveness of RFC preferred stock assistance, however,
one must control for differences in the riskiness of banks targeted for assistance, and
model the relationship between exogenous variation in RFC assistance and the
consequences of that assistance for bank failure risk.

IV. Regression Methods and Empirical Results
To analyze the relationship between RFC assistance of both types and bank
failure risk we construct various regression models. We begin with simple probit and
survival duration modeling of the consequences of RFC assistance. Loans are the form of
RFC assistance in the early period and preferred stock purchases are the form of
assistance in the later period. In these simple models, we consider the probability of
failure over the specified period (in the probits) or the continuous survival duration
hazard during the period as a function of the receipt of RFC assistance and various
controls that capture the failure risk of the banks (based on 1931 bank characteristics and
county characteristics). In the simple probit and survival models, reported in Tables 5 and
6, RFC assistance takes a value of 1 if the bank receives assistance during the period and
zero otherwise. In the case of the simple survival duration models, reported in Table 6,
the receipt of assistance is related to the timing of subsequent failure (if any) within the
period. In Table 5, we only examine failures within the relevant periods (ending in
December 1934), while in Table 6 we utilize information about failure risk – which
influences the shape of the survival duration function – through December 1936.

25
When constructing a model of survival hazard, one has to choose the functional
form of the survival function. We found that the choice between a log-logistic and a log
normal functional forms did not affect our estimation results. For the sake of consistency,
we report results for log normal specifications in Table 6 because using that approach
permits us to perform subsequent estimation – which takes account of the endogeneity of
RFC assistance – using bivariate tobit, joint maximum likelihood estimation (MLE)
modeling, as we discuss further below.
The simple probit and survival models control for bank risk characteristics, but
these estimates may still be biased due to the endogeneity of assistance to bank
characteristics. In order to control for potential endogeneity bias, in subsequent
regressions reported in Tables 7-10 we model the effects of RFC assistance using various
regression procedures in which the first step forecasts the receipt of assistance and the
second step estimates the effect of exogenous variation in assistance. The various twostage regression procedures we employ require the identification of “instruments” as well
as “controls.” Controls are variables that potentially affect both the probability of
receiving RFC assistance and the probability of failure. Instruments are variables that are
assumed to affect the probability of failure only (or at least primarily) through their effect
on the probability of receiving assistance.
Probit models, which address the censoring and structural problems that arise in
OLS estimation, do not address “the differences in time in which each person is at risk of
experiencing the event” (Jenkins 2005).

The statistical techniques used in survival

analysis were developed to address “the sequential nature of the data, and are able to
handle censoring and incorporate time-varying covariates” (Jenkins 2005). As a result,

26
survival analysis allows us to incorporate the most information in our study of the
relationship between RFC aid policies and bank failure rates. In the case of the bank
survival times in this data set, duration is measured in days. Coefficients in the probit and
survival models in Tables 5 and 6 should have opposite sign, as one measures the effect
on failure risk, and the other measures the effect on the number of days of survival. We
use a log-normal survival model.

This differs slightly from the log-logistic

parameterization taken by Calomiris and Mason (2003a), but coefficient estimates are
nearly identical under either version, and the log normal structure facilitates MLE
estimation (when addressing the endogeneity of assistance) using a bivariate tobit on the
logarithm of survival days.
The bank characteristics selected as determinants of failure (controls) have been
widely analyzed in the literature (Alston et al. 1994; Calomiris and Mason 1997, 2003a;
Cole and Gunter 1995). Each bank characteristic is included at its value as of December
31, 1931.24 Net worth/total assets should be associated with lower failure risk. The
riskier or less liquid a bank’s assets, the greater its risk of failure.

Bonds, stocks,

securities owned, and loans and discounts are defined as risky and relatively “illiquid
assets,” and loans and discounts are distinguished from other illiquid assets, since they
are likely to be particularly illiquid and risky. Paper eligible for rediscount at the Federal
Reserve indicates lower credit risk assets which can produce greater liquidity (from Fed
lending) and thus should be associated with a decreased risk of bank failure. “Real estate
owned” indicates the level of foreclosed and nonperforming assets on the balance sheet
of the bank, and should be associated with higher failure risk. Because interest and

24

This analysis uses time-fixed covariates. Modeling these bank characteristics as time-varying covariates
might better describe their effect on the likelihood of failure and bank failure rates.

27
discount rates should be higher for riskier borrowers, the proportion of interest and
discount income relative to earnings has sometimes proven to be a useful predictor of
failure risk. Higher interest rate risk on liabilities compensate bank depositors and other
debtholders for bearing higher expected default risk and thus should be associated with
higher predicted failure rates. Recoveries, which may capture a sudden recovery in bank
asset values following a macroeconomic downturn, may also be positively associated
with failure risk.25 Larger bank size has been found to be associated with lower failure
risk, reflecting potential gains from loan diversification or lower risks associated with
locations in which banks are larger (bigger cities). National banks faced stricter limits on
real estate lending than state-chartered bank and a different supervisory regime. We also
include a county characteristic that Calomiris and Mason (2003a) identified as an
important predictor of bank failure risk: the “Crop income share” in the county in 1930.
This variable is meant to capture the extent to which banks are exposed to agricultural
loan risk, which for the nation as a whole, was associated with greater risk of bank
failure.
Given that these various controls are correlated, we do not expect all of them to
prove significant in our regression specifications; nevertheless, because our main interest
in including these variables is to control for differences in bank characteristics, we
include them in our “Full” specifications reported in the various tables. We also report
“Parsimonious” specifications that include a smaller list of variables that tend to prove
significant in some of the reported specifications.

25

Mason (2001a) notes, “recoveries may be positively associated with failure risk, if they capture a
rebound in bank asset values following a trough.”

28
Our list of potential instruments – variables that are employed as exogenous
determinants of RFC assistance that are not directly related to bank failure risk – includes
attributes of the bank and the county that could have affected the supply or demand for
RFC assistance for reasons unrelated to bank failure risk. The correspondent relationships
of banks indicate the extent to which the bank was important within the national network
of banking. It is possible that the RFC was more likely to approve assistance for banks
that were regionally or nationally important. To capture this, we collected data on the
number of correspondent relationships of each bank, and separately counted the number
of correspondents in New York, Chicago, and elsewhere.
We regard correspondent relationships of Michigan banks as obvious candidates
for valid instruments because they capture the extent to which problems suffered by
Michigan banks might have threatened to spread elsewhere through the cashing in of
Michigan banks’ deposits held in other banks. Furthermore, Michigan banks’
correspondent relationships should be orthogonal to the default risk of Michigan banks;
they capture a one-directional liquidity risk that Michigan banks posed for other banks,
not the liquidity risks of Michigan banks themselves (which we capture with other
control variables in our default risk regressions).
For purposes of estimation, we divided relationships according to whether they
involved money center banks in New York and Chicago, or other banks. For the same
reason, we included the “Net due to banks over total assets” of each subject bank; it is
possible that banks that were large creditors or debtors to other banks may have been
regarded as more important by the RFC. Although we report results below only for “Net
due to banks” we also experimented with including “Due to banks” and “Due from

29
banks” separately, but these never proved significant. Similarly, we included an indicator
variable for whether the bank was labeled an “Other reserve city bank” by the Fed.
As additional possible instruments, we also included county characteristics that
might have affected RFC lending propensity: the size of the population in the county
(larger counties may be more politically or economically important), the unemployment
rate in the county in 1930, the proportion of suspended deposits in 1931 (deposits of
failed banks), two measures of the extent to which the county received other forms of
potentially relevant federal government assistance (the proportion of relief expenditures
received by the county, and the proportion of government lending to the county that was
related to the mortgage market), and the manufacturing employment share of the county.
This latter variable – in the presence of the aforementioned control variable for crop
income share – should not be directly relevant as a measure of bank default risk; rather,
we included manufacturing employment as an indicator of the potential political or
economic importance of the county.

Simple Probits and Survival Duration Models
In the simple probit models reported in Table 5, the illiquid asset ratio and the
proportion of funding from bills payable and rediscounts proved to be the most robust
and significant predictors of failure risk for both periods. In the later period, real estate
owned and net worth also prove significant in the probits. Somewhat surprisingly, the
national bank indicator variable has a positive sign in the probits, although it is
challenging to interpret any partial correlation of a control variable given the correlations
among control variables. Differences over time in the relevance of various covariates

30
should be interpreted with caution. The fact that a characteristic was relevant for
predicting failure in the early period may make it less relevant in the later period, because
failed banks drop out of the sample used for estimation in the later period.
In the probit models reported in Table 5, RFC loans in the early period are
negatively but insignificantly related to bank failure. Preferred stock purchases in the
later period, in contrast, are negatively and significantly related to bank failure. These
findings are consistent with the results of Mason (2001a), and with the hypothesized
difference between the ineffectiveness of RFC loans (which increased bank indebtedness
and subordinated depositors) and the effectiveness of RFC preferred stock assistance
(which did not increase debt and did not subordinate depositors).
As in the probit analysis, illiquid assets tends to hasten failure (especially in the
early period), real estate owned also hastens failure (in the later period), the proportion of
funding in bills payable and rediscounts is associated with faster predicted failure, higher
net worth prolongs failure (significantly so in the later period), and national banks (ceteris
paribus) tend to fail faster than state member banks, ceteris paribus (in the later period).
Also, as in the probit models, loan assistance in the early period has an insignificant
positive effect in prolonging failure, while preferred stock assistance has a positive and
statistically significant effect on prolonging failure.

Controlling for the Endogeneity of RFC Assistance
Because the likelihood of receiving RFC assistance is likely endogenous to the
condition and circumstances of banks, there is a potential problem of endogeneity bias in

31
the estimates reported in Tables 5 and 6. To deal with this, we employ additional
regression methods, using the instruments defined above.
In the context of the probit models, our approach to dealing with endogeneity
follows Wooldridge (2002). This entails a three-stage process. First, we run a probit on
the RFC indicator variable using controls and instruments to predict the probability of
receiving RFC assistance. Next, we run a two-stage least squares model using the
predicted values from the probit regression as the sole instrument.
The first-stage probit model is reported in Table 7. In addition to the significance
of the some of the controls, we find that some of our instruments prove significant in
predicting RFC assistance. The number of correspondent relationships robustly predicts
RFC preferred stock assistance in the later period, and interestingly, correspondent
connections to New York and Chicago enter positively in predicting assistance while
total correspondent connections (including other locations) enter negatively; the
implication is that only connections to money center banks had net positive effects on the
probability of receiving RFC assistance. Corroborating that finding is the fact that a
reserve city bank designation is also associated with a greater (marginally significant)
likelihood of receiving assistance in the later period. County characteristics also prove
useful as instruments. The proportion of employment in manufacturing is positively
associated with RFC preferred stock assistance in the later period. Not all the county
characteristics are easy to explain. Population size of the county has opposite, and
significant, effects in the two sub-periods. A higher 1930 unemployment rate tends to
decrease the probability of RFC assistance in both periods, but only in the full
specifications. While this last finding may seem strange, one possible interpretation

32
revolves around the importance of agricultural distress for unemployment in the early
years of the Depression. This may simply be an indication that the RFC avoided assisting
banks that were hit by severe agriculture-related problems in 1921-1930.
Table 8 reports the effects of instrumented RFC assistance on failure risk. Both
versions of the model find that instrumented RFC assistance reduces failure risk in the
later period. Although the Wooldridge (2002) approach for modeling the effect of
instrumented RFC assistance on failure is inefficient compared to a bivariate probit, there
are two reasons to use this approach rather than a bivariate probit. First, because of our
small sample, the distribution of the error term in the first-stage probit is two-peaked (see
Figure 2 (a)), and this makes it difficult for the bivariate probit model to converge.
Second, the Wooldridge method permits us to compute various diagnostic statistics for
our instruments; in contrast, we are unaware of any established statistical tests for the
validity of instruments in the context of a bivariate probit model.
With respect to the power of our instruments, as we have noted, several of the
instruments prove significant in the first-stage regressions. In the context of the
Wooldridge (2002) approach, however, one can develop other tests of the validity and
power of instruments, which are reported at the bottom of Table 8. These tests indicate
that the power of the instruments is greater in the full version of the model.
To deal with potential endogeneity problems in our survival modeling, we
employed a bivariate tobit model, which exploits the fact that tobit is the appropriate
functional form for estimating a log normal survival model. Thus, the dependent
variables in Tables 9 and 10 should be interpreted, respectively, as the natural logarithm
of days until receipt of RFC assistance and the days until failure. When comparing first-

33
stage regression coefficients in Tables 7 and 9, coefficients on regressors should be of
opposite sign. First-stage results in Table 9 are quite similar to those reported in Table 7.
Some of the instruments gain significance in Table 9; in particular, mortgage loan
assistance, which was not significant in Table 7, enters positively and somewhat
significantly in Table 9.
Second-stage survival duration regressions are reported in Table 10. Coefficients
on regressors should have opposite signs as those in Table 8, with the exception of the
coefficient on the “Log of days to RFC assistance.” That coefficient should, and does,
have a negative sign for the later period in Table 10. This coefficient measures the effect
on survival of the delay in receiving RFC assistance (the dependent variable in Table 9).
The Log of days to RFC assistance is statistically significant, and confirms the result of
Table 6. We only report results for three specifications in Table 10 because the results for
the parsimonious survival model for the late period did not converge. This lack of
convergence reflected a similar problem to the lack of convergence of the bivariate
probit. In the early period survival models and in the full late-period model, convergence
was not a problem, apparently because the error term had a less pronounced two-peaked
shape (as shown in Figure 2 (b)).

RFC Preferred Stock Effects on Lending By Survivors
Finally, we investigate whether, conditional on survival, the receipt of RFC
preferred stock over the period March 1933 through December 1934 increased the supply
of loans and discounts for the period December 1931 through December 1935. We
emphasize that our analysis understates the overall effect of RFC assistance on loan

34
supply. Presumably, an important part of the effect of RFC assistance on loan supply
resulted from mitigating the risk of bank failure, thereby increasing the supply of loans.
Here we necessarily abstract from that important effect because we constrain the sample
to banks that survived through December 1935 (the only ones for which lending is
observed).
Furthermore, we emphasize that the effect of RFC preferred stock assistance on
the loan supply of surviving banks, in theory, could be either positive or negative. On the
one hand, the receipt of preferred stock assistance, per se, reduced insolvency risk and
should have encouraged banks to lend more. On the other hand, the RFC required
recipient banks to retain earnings and increase their capital ratios. The strings attached to
RFC assistance could have caused recipients to reduce loan supply relative to surviving
banks that did not receive assistance.
We report two alternative approaches to estimating the effect of RFC assistance
on the lending by surviving banks. First, in Tables 11 and 12, we report results from the
three-stage procedure suggested by Wooldridge (2002), described above. That is, we run
a probit model for this sample (analogous to the regressions reported in Table 7),
estimating the probability of receiving RFC preferred stock assistance for this sample.
Those first-stage results are reported in Table 11, for both a full and parsimonious
specification. Table 12 reports the two-stage least squares results for the loan growth
regression, which uses the predicted values from Table 11 as the sole instrument. The
dependent variable in Table 12 is bank loan growth from December 1931 to December
1935.

35
It is important to emphasize that this exercise is performed on a constrained
sample of bank survivors. Results in Table 11 consequently are quite different from those
in Table 7. FERA assistance now comes in significant in the first-stage regression, as
does the manufacturing employment share, but not the numbers of correspondents or the
reserve city bank indicator.
It is also important to emphasize that we would expect that FERA assistance and
the manufacturing employment share may be correlated with loan demand, and thus, it is
not obvious on an a priori basis that these are valid instruments for a second-stage
regression of loan growth. We report various tests of instrument power at the bottom of
Table 12. They confirm that the instruments are powerful for the full model, but not as
much for the parsimonious model (for example, the Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic is
4.30, which is far below the Stock-Yogo 10% critical value of 16.38).
The second approach we employ to measuring loan-supply effects uses MLE
estimation, reported in Tables 13 and 14. We run the first stage alternatively as a probit or
a tobit and the second stage as an OLS. We were not able to estimate the full probit
model, once again, because of convergence problems, and so only three versions of the
results are reported in the two tables. In any case, we regard the full tobit results as
preferable, owing to the superiority of the continuous functional form, and to the greater
power of the instruments in the full model.
The reason we report the MLE alternative to the Wooldridge approach is that it is
possible that its greater efficiency from correctly specified functional forms will improve
the power of the instruments and the implied statistical significance of the estimates of
the effects of RFC assistance. Indeed, this is what we find. The coefficient estimates in

36
the first row of Table 14 increase in magnitude and significance in the MLE estimation
compared to those in Table 12, including for the parsimonious specification, for which
the validity of the instruments is clearer. We conclude that the apparently low power of
instruments in the parsimonious specification of Table 12 reflects the inefficiency of the
Wooldridge procedure relative to MLE. We conclude that RFC preferred stock assistance
substantially increased the loan supply of recipient banks, even after conditioning on their
survival. The estimated coefficient magnitudes of the effect of RFC assistance on loan
growth reported in Table 14 are large. For example, according to the parsimonious probit
specification, surviving RFC recipients display loan growth over the period that is 93%
higher than surviving non-recipients.

V. Conclusion
The operations of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation in Michigan during the
Great Depression provide an opportunity to investigate the effects of government loan
and preferred stock programs on distressed financial institutions during a time of
substantial failure risk. Our time period – January 1932 through December 1934 – covers
an early period in which bank failures occurred in a scattered time pattern during which
the RFC made loans to assist banks, and a later period in which failures were
concentrated in time and coincided with regional and national panics during which the
RFC purchased banks’ preferred stock to assist them.
The empirical analysis suggests that collateralized short-term loans from the RFC
made bank failure no less likely, and possibly made it more likely, while direct
recapitalizations in the form of preferred stock injections increased the likelihood of bank

37
survival. The preferred stock program owed its success to several factors: (1) It did not
burden the bank with increased debt, increased liquidity risk, or collateral requirements
that subordinated the claims of depositors, (2) the RFC was selective, and apparently
chose viable cases, not basket cases, when granting assistance, and (3) the RFC
implemented effective measures to ensure that government assistance was not abused by
banks receiving assistance. These results suggest that during a banking crisis, effective
assistance requires the government to assume a significant share of the risk of bank
failure.
Our results are robust to controlling for potential endogeneity bias by modeling
the determinants of RFC assistance alongside the determinants of failure. In doing so we
are able to identify several instruments that predict RFC assistance, including the
importance of the subject bank to the national network of banks. Michigan banks with a
greater number of correspondent relationships with money-center banks, or which were
“other reserve city” banks, were more likely to receive assistance than other banks.
Furthermore, banks located in counties with a greater proportion of manufacturing
employment, and with other harder to interpret county attributes, also were more likely to
receive assistance.
We also explore the links between RFC assistance and loan supply. The sizes of
estimates effects on loan growth over the period 1931 to 1935 are large, even after
conditioning on bank survival.
Our results reinforce the conclusions of earlier work on the effects of RFC
assistance in Illinois by Mason (1996, 2001a, 2001b, 2003) and Calomiris and Mason
(2004). That comparison is important because Illinois banks’ experience differed from

38
Michigan’s later and more severe banking problems. Furthermore, our empirical
estimation techniques improve upon the list of instruments and the econometric
efficiency of earlier estimates, which accounts for the fact that we are able to find large
and statistically significant effects of RFC preferred stock assistance not only on bank
failure risk but also on the loan supply of surviving banks. Earlier research for Illinois
had found positive and insignificant loan-supply effects; our estimated effects on loan
supply are larger and statistically significant.

39

References
Alston, Lee J., Wayne A. Grove, and David C. Wheelock. “Why Do Banks Fail?
Evidence from the 1920s.” Explorations in Economic History 31, October 1994,
409-31.
Awalt, Francis Gloyd. “Recollections of the Banking Crisis in 1933.” The Business
History Review, 43 (3), 1969, 347-71.
Butkiewicz, James L. “The Impact of a Lender of Last Resort during the Great
Depression: The Case of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation.” Explorations
in Economic History 32, April 1995, 197-216.
Calomiris, Charles W. “The Political Lessons of Depression-Era Banking Reform,”
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 26, 2010, 540-560.
Calomiris, Charles W. “Contagion and Bank Failures during the Great Depression: The
June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic.” American Economic Review 87, December
1997, 863-83.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Joseph R. Mason. “Fundamentals, Panics and Bank Distress
During the Depression,” American Economic Review, 93, December 2003, 161547.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. “Consequences of U.S. Bank Distress
During the Depression,” American Economic Review 93, June 2003b, 937-947.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. “How to Restructure Failed Banking
Systems: Lessons from the U.S. in the 1930s and Japan in the 1990s,” in
Governance, Regulation, and Privatization in the Asia-Pacific Region, Takatoshi
Ito and Anne Krueger, eds., NBER, University of Chicago Press, 2004, 375-420.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Eugene N. White. “The Origins of Federal Deposit
Insurance,” in The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to Political
Economy, C. Goldin and G. Libecap, eds., NBER, University of Chicago Press,
1994, 145–88.
Cole, Rebel A. and Jeffery W. Gunther. “Separating the Likelihood and Timing of Bank
Failure.” Journal of Banking and Finance 19, September 1995, 1073-89.
Comptroller of the Currency. Annual Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office, various years.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. “A History of the FDIC 1933-1983.”
http://www.fdic.gov/bank/analytical/firstfifty/index.html.

40
Federal Reserve Board. Banking and Monetary Statistics, 1914-1941. Washington, DC:
Federal Reserve Board, 1943.
Friedman, Milton and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, eds. A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867-1960. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1963.
Gourieroux, Christian, Alain Monfort, Eric Renault, and Alain Trognon. “Generalised
Residuals.” Journal of Econometrics 34, no. 1–2 (1987): 5–32.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (2001). “Historical,
Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-1970,”
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/3/documentation.
James, F. Cyril. The Growth of Chicago Banks, vol 2. New York: Harper and Brothers,
1938.
Jenkins, Stephen P. “Survival Analysis: Lecture Notes.” University of Essex, July 2005.
Jones, Jesse H. and Carl Howard Pforzheimer. Fifty Billion Dollars: My Thirteen Years
with the RFC, 1932-1945. New York: Macmillan, 1951.
Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor. “Can the New Deal’s Three R’s Be Rehabilitated? A
Program-by-Program, County-by-County Analysis,” with Shawn Kantor and John
Wallis. Explorations in Economic History, October 2003, 278-307.
Keehn, Richard H. and Gene Smiley. “U.S. Bank Failures, 1932-1933: A Provisional
Analysis.” Essays in Economic and Business History 4, 1988, 136-56.
Keehn, Richard H and Gene Smiley. “U.S. Bank Failures, 1932-1933: Additional
Evidence on Regional Patterns, Timing, and the Role of the Reconstruction
Finance Corporation.” Essays in Economic and Business History 11 (1993), 13145.
Kennedy, Susan Estabrook. The Banking Crisis of 1933.
University Press of Kentucky, 1973.

Lexington, Kentucky:

Lohr, Steve. “Intervention Is Bold, but Has a Basis in History.” New York Times, October
13, 2008.
Los Angeles Times. “Ford Backs Two Banks.” February 27, 1933, 1.
Mason, Joseph R. "The Political Economy of Reconstruction Finance Corporation
Assistance during the Great Depression." Explorations in Economic History 40
(2), 2003, 101-21.

41
Mason, Joseph R. "Do Lender of Last Resort Policies Matter? The Effects of
Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to Banks during the Great
Depression." Journal of Financial Services Research 20 (1), 2001a, 77-95.
Mason, Joseph R. “Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to Financial
Intermediaries and Commercial and Industrial Enterprises in the United States,
1932-37.” In Stijn Claessens, Simeon Djankov, and Ashoka Mody, eds.
Resolution of Financial Distress: An International Perspective on the Design of
Bankruptcy Laws. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank Group, 2001b, 167-204.
Mason, Joseph R. “The Determinants and Effects of Reconstruction Finance Corporation
Assistance to Banks during the Great Depression.” Doctoral dissertation,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1996.
New York Times. “Ford’s Bank Action Told.” February 15, 1933a, 2.
New York Times. “Michigan Bankers Act to Reorganize.” February 23, 1933b, 12.
New York Times. “R.F.C. Acts to Spur Bank Reopenings.” March 21, 1933c, C25.
New York Times. “Detroit Rejects ‘Wall Street’ Aid.” February 19, 1933d, 21.
New York Times. “Detroit Banks Face Hitch in Loan Here.” March 1, 1933e, 5.
New York Times. “New Detroit Banks Formed.” February 25, 1933f, 21, 25.
New York Times. “Scrip is Planned for Use in Detroit.” February 26, 1933g, N7.
Officer, Lawrence H. and Samuel H. Williamson, "Purchasing Power of Money in the
United
States
from
1774
to
2008,"
MeasuringWorth,
2009.
http://www.measuringworth.com/ppowerus/
Olson, James S. Herbert Hoover and the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, 19311933, 1st ed. Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1977.
Olson, James S. “The End of Voluntarism: Herbert Hoover and the National Credit
Corporation.” Annals of Iowa 41, Fall 1972, 1104-13.
Polk’s Bankers’ Encyclopedia. R.L. Polk and Co.: New York. Various issues, September
1931-March 1932.
Rand-McNally Bankers’ Directory. Rand McNally: Chicago. Various issues,
1929-1936.

42
“Report of Activities of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation” (monthly,
unpublished). National Archives, Records of the Clerk of the House of
Representatives, various issues.
“Reports of Condition and Income of Federal Reserve Member Banks” (unpublished
reports, Microfilm). Washington, DC: Federal Reserve Board, 1931-1935.
US House of Representatives. Hearings before the Committee on Banking and Currency,
7Ist Congress, 2nd Session, under H. Res. 141, 1930, Volume 1, pp. 163-84 and
469-70.
White, Eugene N. “The Legacy of Deposit Insurance: The Growth, Spread, and Cost of
Insuring Financial Intermediaries,” in The Defining Moment: The Great
Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, M. D. Bordo,
C. Goldin, and E. N. White, eds., NBER, University of Chicago Press, 1998, 87–
124.
Wooldridge, J.M. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge:
MIT Press, 2002.

43
Table 1: Variable Definitions
National bank dummy
Other reserve city bank
Total assets
Illiquid assets
Illiquid assets over total assets
Real estate owned over illiquid assets
Loans and discounts over illiquid assets
Net worth over total assets
Total debt
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
Net due to banks over total assets
Interest cost over total debt
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
Recoveries over total earnings
Losses over total expenses
Crop income share in county in 1930
Total number of correspondents
Number of correspondents in New York and Chicago
County population in 1930
Unemployment rate for county in 1930
Suspended deposits share of 1931 county deposits
Mortgage loan share of total loans for county
FERA share of grants for county
Manufacturing employment share in county in 1930
Loan growth Dec 1935 – Dec 1931

Bank is a national bank (1=Yes, 0=No)
Bank is in a non-central reserve city (1=Yes, 0=No)
Total bank assets
Total assets – US gov. securities – Reserves with Fed – Cash and due
from banks – Outside checks and other cash items
Illiquid assets divided by total assets
Real estate owned other than banking house divided by illiquid assets
Loans and discounts divided by illiquid assets
Bank net worth over total assets
Due to Banks + Demand Deposits + Time Deposits + US Government
Deposits +Bills Payable and Rediscounts
Bills Payable and Rediscounts divided by total debt
(Demand deposits + Due to banks) divided by total assets
(Due to banks – due from banks) divided by total assets
Interest expense divided by total debt
Loans eligible for rediscount at the Fed divided by total loans
Interest and discount on loans divided by total earnings
Total recoveries divided by total earnings
Total losses divided by total expenses
Value of crops divided by sum of value of crops + value added by
manufacturing
Total number of correspondent relationships
Number of correspondent relationships in New York and Chicago
Total population in the county in 1930
Unemployment rate for the county in 1930
(Suspended deposits in 1930 + Suspended deposits in 1931) divided by
total deposits in 1931
Amount of mortgage loans divided by total loans for the county
Amount of FERA grants divided by total grants for county
Number of wage earners in manufacturing divided by total number of
gainful workers in county
ln (Loans and discounts Dec 31 1935) – ln (loans and discounts Dec 31
1931)

44

Table 2: Summary statistics
Variable
Total assets

mean

median

sd

min

max

N

6,829,000

1,099,000

42,620,000

110,635

582,300,000

209

Illiquid assets over total assets

0.826

0.833

0.086

0.322

0.978

209

Real estate owned over illiquid assets

0.0152

0.00911

0.0188

0

0.126

209

0.13

0.124

0.0407

0.0344

0.332

209

Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt

0.0474

0.0286

0.0563

0

0.288

209

National bank dummy

0.493

0

0.501

0

1

209

Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt

0.261

0.231

0.139

0

0.981

209

Loans and discounts over illiquid assets

0.584

0.606

0.159

0.132

0.917

209

Net worth over total assets

Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts

0.156

0.131

0.123

0

0.688

209

Interest cost over total debt

0.0237

0.0135

0.0398

0.0000

0.323

204

Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings

0.593

0.591

0.201

0.0803

0.992

204

Recoveries over total earnings

0.0208

0.00146

0.0464

0

0.277

204

Losses over total expenses

0.242

0.209

0.202

0

0.787

205

Crop income share in county in 1930

0.978

0.997

0.0703

0.656

1

202

Total number of correspondents

3.756

3

3.65

1

37

209

Number of correspondents in New York and Chicago

1.88

2

1.383

0

11

209

County population in 1930

140,739

49,849

375,707

8,451

1,889,000

209

Unemployment rate for county in 1930

0.0789

0.0771

0.0296

0.0218

0.137

209

Suspended deposits share of 1931 county deposits

0.287

0.107

0.459

0

2.871

209

-0.0267

-0.0195

0.0316

-0.158

0.0962

208

Mortgage loan share of total loans for county

0.434

0.439

0.13

0.169

0.664

209

Other reserve city bank

0.0383

0

0.192

0

1

209

FERA share of grants for county

0.175

0.177

0.0574

0.0502

0.283

209

Manufacturing employment share in county in 1930

0.174

0.137

0.12

0.00518

0.474

209

Loan growth Dec 1935 - Dec 1931

-0.651

-0.648

0.527

-2.146

1.489

116

Net due to banks over total assets

45
Table 3: Banks receiving RFC loans and preferred stock assistance, and their
failure outcomes

Period 1
Loans
Period 2
Preferred stock
Period 3
Preferred stock

# of banks at
beginning

# of RFC assistance
recipients

# of RFC assistance
recipients that
failed

# of RFC assistance
non-recipients

# of RFC assistance
non-recipients that
failed

01/32

03/32-02/33

03/32-02/33

03/32-02/33

03/32-02/33

212

94

9

118

8

03/33

03/33-12/33

03/33-12/33

03/33-12/33

03/33-12/33

195

11

0

184

23

01/34

01/34-12/34

01/34-12/34

03/33-12/34

01/34-12/34

172

43

3

118

13

46

Table 4: Ex ante failure risk, liability structure, and funding cost for different bank
failure cohorts
GROUP

Statistic

Predicted
failure

Demand
deposits

Due to
banks

Time
deposits

Borrowed
Money

Cost of
funds

% RFC
loans

Failed
Jan 32 - Feb 33

Mean
Variance
N
Mean
Variance
N
Mean
Variance
N
Mean
Variance
N
Diff 1-4
Diff 2-4
Diff 3-4

0.309
0.234
12
0.073
0.125
23
0.062
0.090
16
0.039
0.080
145
0.2693***
0.0339
0.0231

0.140
0.115
12
0.300
0.177
23
0.240
0.086
16
0.251
0.129
145
-0.111***
0.0489
-0.0113

0.006
0.009
12
0.020
0.037
23
0.007
0.009
16
0.011
0.017
145
-0.0048
0.0085
-0.004

0.767
0.130
12
0.620
0.187
23
0.676
0.114
16
0.693
0.139
145
0.0734*
-0.0736*
-0.0167

0.087
0.063
12
0.061
0.052
23
0.075
0.064
16
0.037
0.050
145
0.0503**
0.0236**
0.0376**

0.041
0.077
12
0.013
0.007
23
0.020
0.020
16
0.024
0.041
145
0.0169
-0.0113***
-0.004

0.500
0.522
12
0.783
0.422
23
0.750
0.447
16
0.331
0.472
145
0.169
0.4516***
0.419***

Failed
Mar 33 - Dec 33
Failed
Jan 34 - Dec 34
Survivors

Means tests

47
Table 5: Simple probit model. Dep Var = Failure dummy (0,1).

VARIABLES
RFC assistance dummy
Log of total assets
Illiquid assets over total assets
Real estate owned over illiquid assets
Net worth over total assets
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
National bank dummy
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
Loans and discounts over illiquid assets
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts
Interest cost over total debt
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
Recoveries over total earnings
Losses over total expenses
Crop income share in county in 1930
Constant

Pseudo R2
Log-likelihood
Log-likelihood constant only
LR Chi-2 test for zero coefficients (pval)
Number of banks
Number of failures
Number of banks receiving RFC assistance

Jan32 - Feb33
Full

Jan32 - Feb33
Parsimonious

Mar33 - Dec34
Full

Mar33 - Dec34
Parsimonious

-0.4029
(0.4556)
0.0420
(0.2083)
11.2078***
(3.9898)
5.1431
(7.9620)
-3.4871
(5.6201)
6.3771**
(2.9894)
0.8782*
(0.4491)
-1.6362
(2.7259)
2.2689*
(1.1649)
-1.2912
(1.7630)
3.6971
(3.0678)
0.2649
(0.7351)
-7.9374
(5.7580)
-2.2976**
(0.9062)
16.2310
(14.3842)
-28.9016**
(14.1344)

-0.1629
(0.3489)
-0.0444
(0.1634)
10.2089***
(3.4380)
5.6048
(6.3436)
-2.3116
(3.9926)
7.0124***
(2.2730)
0.3370
(0.3194)

-1.0006***
(0.3264)
0.0876
(0.0916)
0.6808
(2.0452)
16.6746***
(5.7026)
-6.1968*
(3.3610)
5.9379**
(2.3236)
1.5940***
(0.3159)

-10.0873***
(3.2302)

-1.0593***
(0.3508)
-0.0624
(0.1259)
3.8240*
(2.0210)
10.5144*
(6.1663)
-7.9845**
(3.7608)
5.4288**
(2.3866)
1.9263***
(0.3604)
2.0368*
(1.1625)
1.0122
(1.0407)
-0.7461
(1.1701)
-0.3177
(3.0231)
0.4251
(0.8522)
-5.2796*
(3.0003)
0.2828
(0.6626)
-1.7413
(2.2902)
-2.9938
(3.4864)

0.377
-28.13
-45.14
4.14e-05
196
12
84

0.282
-36.87
-51.37
0.000171
209
14
92

0.352
-61.61
-95.04
2.49e-06
184
39
50

0.303
-68.96
-98.95
3.28e-08
195
40
54

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

-3.1971
(2.5201)

48
Table 6: Simple log-normal duration model. Dep Var = log (days to failure).

VARIABLES
RFC assistance dummy
Log of total assets
Illiquid assets to total assets
Real estate owned to illiquid assets
Net worth over total assets
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
National bank dummy
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
Loans and discounts to illiquid assets
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts
Interest cost over total debt
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
Recoveries over total earnings
Losses over total expenses
Crop income share in county in 1930
Constant
ln_gam

Log-likelihood
Log-likelihood constant only
Wald Chi-2 test for zero coefficients (pval)
Number of banks
Number of failures
Number of banks receiving RFC assistance

Jan32 - Feb33
Full

Jan32 - Feb33
Parsimonious

Mar33 - Dec36
Full

Mar33 - Dec36
Parsimonious

0.8540
(0.6054)
0.0006
(0.2881)
-14.4457***
(5.4293)
-9.3540
(10.2992)
9.3406
(6.7888)
-7.9487**
(3.9173)
-1.0821*
(0.5767)
3.0034
(3.4893)
-2.8684*
(1.6255)
1.4367
(2.1776)
-4.8160
(4.0975)
-0.7265
(1.0266)
9.0121
(6.2040)
2.5930*
(1.3917)
-12.7862
(19.3692)
33.9623*
(19.1707)
0.3029**
(0.1399)

0.4402
(0.5130)
0.0946
(0.2355)
-14.7900***
(5.0424)
-11.2892
(10.2457)
4.7992
(5.8220)
-9.9201***
(3.1463)
-0.3616
(0.4076)

1.7097***
(0.4961)
-0.2107*
(0.1277)
0.2773
(2.9952)
-24.0576***
(6.8557)
8.9359*
(5.0665)
-8.8869***
(2.9139)
-2.4390***
(0.4177)

20.0639***
(5.0586)
0.4283**
(0.1754)

1.6467***
(0.4815)
0.0029
(0.1653)
-4.0628
(2.4748)
-13.4654*
(6.9177)
9.8151**
(4.9501)
-7.6245***
(2.9549)
-2.7188***
(0.4230)
-2.5626*
(1.4795)
-0.9896
(1.4299)
0.6556
(1.5063)
0.4407
(4.6608)
-0.6225
(1.2018)
6.8541*
(4.0151)
0.0873
(0.8856)
3.5165
(2.5401)
10.1937**
(4.5412)
0.3991***
(0.0978)

-38.05
-56.28
0.0308
196
12
84

-49.25
-64.42
0.00242
209
14
92

-111.2
-148.6
0
184
40
50

-119.8
-153.6
0
195
41
54

12.0517***
(3.7548)
0.4745***
(0.0892)

49
Table 7: First stage probit of Wooldridge’s three-stage method
(Dep Var = RFC assistance dummy)
VARIABLES
Log of total assets

Jan32 - Feb33
Full

Jan32 - Feb33
Parsimonious

Mar33 - Dec34
Full

0.1214
0.1853
-0.3498**
(0.1452)
(0.1237)
(0.1589)
Illiquid assets to total assets
5.0248**
2.2480
-4.0364**
(2.0594)
(1.5840)
(2.0251)
Real estate owned to illiquid assets
3.1094
6.7679
-13.8917*
(6.1446)
(5.2754)
(8.2310)
Net worth over total assets
-6.6669**
-2.8000
-3.5245
(2.9848)
(2.6535)
(3.1756)
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
9.9167***
7.8627***
-0.2560
(2.1137)
(2.0443)
(2.3208)
National bank dummy
0.2649
0.1481
0.0339
(0.2813)
(0.2288)
(0.2897)
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
2.4312**
-2.0909*
(0.9773)
(1.0985)
Loans and discounts to illiquid assets
0.7499
0.1339
(0.9359)
(0.9748)
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts
-1.5581
-2.5742**
(1.1640)
(1.1677)
Interest cost over total debt
1.5598
-0.7270
(2.3380)
(3.0651)
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
-0.3372
1.5375**
(0.6529)
(0.6849)
Recoveries over total earnings
-2.8766
-1.1462
(1.9965)
(2.5652)
Losses over total expenses
-0.1352
-0.5807
(0.5897)
(0.6021)
Crop income share in county in 1930
-2.6746
-5.1292*
(2.7195)
(2.7212)
Total number of correspondents
-0.0970*
-0.1122**
-0.1041*
(0.0560)
(0.0537)
(0.0539)
Number of correspondents in New York and Chicago
0.1172
0.2235
0.3907**
(0.1706)
(0.1612)
(0.1761)
Log of county population in 1930
0.0079
0.2449*
-0.6720***
(0.2084)
(0.1342)
(0.2317)
Unemployment rate for county in 1930
-9.8401**
-6.0360
-9.2573*
(4.8512)
(3.8857)
(5.4336)
Net due to banks over total assets
3.7682
2.6101
1.9270
(4.1035)
(3.8267)
(4.3278)
Mortgage loan share of total loans for county
-1.3936
-1.6390
(1.1253)
(1.1417)
Suspended deposits share of 1931 county deposits
0.0238
0.0443
(0.2827)
(0.3013)
Other reserve city bank
-0.3355
1.0449*
(0.7963)
(0.6312)
FERA share of grants for county
1.9529
1.7989
(2.3356)
(2.5577)
Manufacturing employment share in county in 1930
0.6886
5.3416***
(1.1190)
(1.4517)
Constant
-2.7372
-6.9657***
20.4351***
(4.6761)
(2.3450)
(5.5362)
Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Mar33 - Dec34
Parsimonious
-0.0258
(0.1259)
-1.4151
(1.5287)
-6.8961
(5.9172)
-2.4622
(2.6005)
-0.2226
(1.9650)
0.0274
(0.2254)

-0.0971**
(0.0484)
0.2898*
(0.1625)
-0.0683
(0.1296)
0.1244
(3.6460)
-0.3335
(3.5986)

1.8572
(2.4689)

50
Table 8: Final stage, Wooldridge’s three-stage method. Dep Var = Failure dummy.
VARIABLES
Predicted probability of RFC assistance
Log of total assets
Illiquid assets over total assets
Real estate owned over illiquid assets
Net worth over total assets
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
National bank dummy
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
Loans and discounts over illiquid assets
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts
Interest cost over total debt
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
Recoveries over total earnings
Losses over total expenses
Crop income share in county in 1930
Constant

Number of banks
Number of failures
Number of banks receiving RFC assistance
Centered R2
Adjusted R2
Anderson-Rubin Wald (significance of endog, chi-sq stat)
Anderson-Rubin Wald (significance of endog, pval)
Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid, pval)
Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid, stat)
Cragg-Donald Wald F (weakid, stat)
Stock-Yogo weakid 10% critical values (maxIV)
Endogeneity test (Chi-sq(1) stat)
Endogeneity test (p-val)

Jan32 - Feb33
Full

Jan32 - Feb33
Parsimonious

Mar33 - Dec34
Full

Mar33 - Dec34
Parsimonious

-0.0641
(0.1251)
-0.0062
(0.0162)
0.4048
(0.3123)
1.0067
(0.9037)
-0.0828
(0.3225)
0.7647
(0.5927)
0.0198
(0.0417)
-0.1392
(0.1422)
0.1202
(0.0908)
-0.1449
(0.1797)
0.4372
(0.7491)
0.0199
(0.0942)
-0.1363
(0.2293)
-0.0931*
(0.0540)
0.0485
(0.1527)
-0.2632
(0.3900)

-0.0284
(0.1265)
-0.0098
(0.0166)
0.4846**
(0.2407)
0.8291
(0.9621)
-0.0729
(0.3684)
1.1316*
(0.6019)
-0.0018
(0.0349)

-0.8505*
(0.4354)
0.0266
(0.0249)
-0.1977
(0.4893)
2.3518
(1.8571)
-1.6869*
(0.8902)
1.4183**
(0.7052)
0.3411***
(0.0745)

-0.2374
(0.3447)

-0.3839**
(0.1647)
-0.0123
(0.0282)
0.2199
(0.4231)
2.0055
(1.7150)
-1.5793**
(0.7423)
1.3659**
(0.5584)
0.3552***
(0.0716)
0.1818
(0.2197)
0.1525
(0.1791)
-0.4243
(0.2770)
-0.1950
(0.4070)
0.2084
(0.1719)
-1.0993***
(0.4262)
0.0695
(0.1471)
-0.4327
(0.4723)
0.4885
(0.8623)

195
12
84
0.124
0.0506
0.269
0.604
0.000811
13.89
13.00
16.38
0.0651
0.799

208
14
92
0.120
0.0467
0.00648
0.936
0.00852
7.539
7.678
16.38
0.110
0.740

183
38
50
0.274
0.209
5.579
0.0182
8.92e-06
25.24
26.75
16.38
1.542
0.214

194
39
54
0.0868
0.00472
4.051
0.0441
0.0156
6.368
5.968
16.38
2.137
0.144

Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

0.1755
(0.7642)

51
Table 9: First stage, bivariate tobit log-duration. Dep Var = log (Days to RFC assist)
VARIABLES
Log of total assets

Jan32 - Feb33
Full

Jan32 - Feb33
Parsimonious

-0.0500
-0.1008**
(0.0816)
(0.0402)
Illiquid assets to total assets
-0.9747*
-0.8839
(0.5901)
(0.6243)
Real estate owned to illiquid assets
-1.3821
-2.4902
(1.9465)
(1.8189)
Net worth over total assets
1.2482
-0.2963
(1.0550)
(0.9991)
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
-3.1648***
-2.7218***
(0.6368)
(0.6692)
National bank dummy
0.0083
-0.0367
(0.1098)
(0.0832)
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
-0.4518
(0.3226)
Loans and discounts to illiquid assets
-0.2839
(0.2820)
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts
0.2190
(0.3407)
Interest cost over total debt
0.2861
(0.9005)
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
0.2911
(0.1946)
Recoveries over total earnings
0.3989
(0.7831)
Losses over total expenses
-0.1116
(0.2076)
Crop income share in county in 1930
-1.3804*
(0.7875)
Total number of correspondents
0.0116
0.0275
(0.0190)
(0.0175)
Number of correspondents in New York and Chicago
-0.0253
-0.0425
(0.0757)
(0.0561)
Log of county population in 1930
-0.0834
-0.0591
(0.0735)
(0.0449)
Unemployment rate for county in 1930
4.2360***
3.2350**
(1.5645)
(1.2676)
Net due to banks over total assets
-1.1723
-0.3009
(1.2172)
(1.3230)
Mortgage loan share of total loans for county
0.1139
(0.4153)
Suspended deposits share of 1931 county deposits
-0.0994
(0.0752)
Other reserve city bank
0.0869
(0.2014)
FERA share of grants for county
-0.9169
(0.9777)
Manufacturing employment share in county in 1930
-0.3535
(0.5169)
Constant
9.3434***
8.3720***
(1.5416)
(0.8099)
ln(sigma1)
-1.2246***
-1.2346***
(0.0665)
(0.0503)
Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Mar33 - Dec36
Full
0.0542
(0.0736)
1.0055
(0.8097)
1.1328
(2.7292)
1.3265
(1.2341)
1.1760
(0.9218)
-0.1885*
(0.1125)
0.4587
(0.4347)
-0.3394
(0.3580)
0.8620*
(0.4557)
-0.2131
(1.2206)
-0.3795
(0.2829)
0.3592
(1.0011)
0.2826
(0.2951)
1.9292
(1.1924)
0.0712***
(0.0184)
-0.1493**
(0.0619)
0.1899**
(0.0827)
2.5718
(1.9048)
-0.7251
(1.4082)
0.8096*
(0.4324)
0.0436
(0.1049)
-0.1503
(0.2610)
-0.9156
(0.7949)
-1.2029**
(0.4892)
1.0890
(2.6122)
-0.3970**
(0.1855)

52
Table 10: Second stage, bivariate tobit log-duration. Dep Var = log (Days to Failure)

VARIABLES
Log of days to RFC assistance

Jan32 - Feb33
Full

0.0800
(0.0737)
Log of total assets
0.0096
(0.0230)
Illiquid assets to total assets
-0.0011
(0.3392)
Real estate owned to illiquid assets
-1.7933*
(1.0880)
Net worth over total assets
0.2335
(0.6217)
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
-0.2807
(0.4170)
National bank dummy
0.0334
(0.0568)
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
0.3302
(0.2045)
Loans and discounts to illiquid assets
0.0247
(0.1672)
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts
0.0613
(0.1938)
Interest cost over total debt
-0.3393
(0.4291)
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
-0.1474
(0.1122)
Recoveries over total earnings
-0.1609
(0.4687)
Losses over total expenses
0.0639
(0.1489)
Crop income share in county in 1930
-0.0436
(0.3304)
Constant
5.4175***
(0.9137)
Ln(Sigma2)
-0.7934***
(0.0654)
atan(Rho12)
-0.2759*
(0.1623)
Rho12
-0.2831
Log pseudolikelihood
-152.5
Number of banks
195
Number of failures
12
Number of banks receiving RFC assistance
84
Robust standard errors in parentheses,
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Jan32 - Feb33
Parsimonious

Mar33 - Dec36
Full

-0.0807
(0.0875)
0.0080
(0.0183)
-0.4480
(0.3343)
-1.7262
(1.1944)
0.3439
(0.5679)
-1.2484**
(0.5470)
0.0337
(0.0487)

-0.8950***
(0.2888)
-0.0358
(0.0493)
-0.3785
(0.9100)
-2.9847
(3.2587)
3.1802**
(1.3950)
-1.0120
(1.0431)
-0.7572***
(0.1347)
-0.3927
(0.5654)
-0.2104
(0.3881)
0.8871
(0.6026)
-0.0755
(1.4002)
-0.4245
(0.3506)
1.7217
(1.1400)
0.0459
(0.3669)
1.4281
(0.9689)
12.8397***
(2.6606)
-0.5405***
(0.0756)
0.7410**
(0.3095)
0.9149
-301.6
183
40
50

6.7230***
(0.8367)
-0.7413***
(0.0518)
-0.0019
(0.1530)
-0.0019
-179.3
208
14
92

53
Table 11: Loan Growth: Wooldridge Three Stage Method: First stage, Probit, only
survivors through 1935. Dep Var = RFC assistance dummy.
VARIABLES
Log of total assets
Illiquid assets over total assets
Real estate owned over illiquid assets
Net worth over total assets
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
National bank dummy
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
Loans and discounts over illiquid assets
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts
Interest cost over total debt
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
Recoveries over total earnings
Losses over total expenses
Crop income share in county in 1930
Total number of correspondents
Number of correspondents in New York and Chicago
Log of county population in 1930
Unemployment rate for county in 1930
Net due to banks over total assets
Mortgage loan share of total loans for county
Suspended deposits share of 1931 county deposits
FERA share of grants for county
Manufacturing employment share in county in 1930
Constant
Pseudo R2
Log-likelihood
Log-likelihood constant only
LR Chi-2 test for zero coefficients (pval)
Number of banks
Number of banks receiving RFC stock assistance
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Full

Parsimonious

-0.1035
(0.2259)
-2.2207
(2.8459)
-17.7440*
(9.3484)
-6.0015
(4.9315)
6.1027*
(3.1813)
0.1039
(0.4921)
-2.0545
(1.8333)
-0.8944
(1.3014)
-2.0087
(1.6241)
-4.2569
(5.1089)
3.6247***
(0.9803)
-3.5602
(3.9870)
0.8915
(1.0344)
131.9727***
(37.8384)
0.1329
(0.1929)
-0.1505
(0.2821)
-0.4904
(0.3412)
0.4107
(7.5312)
-0.3268
(6.0087)
-0.7401
(1.4757)
-0.0656
(0.3273)
12.6545***
(4.0870)
10.0360***
(2.7121)
-126.7968***
(39.8363)
0.324
-45.79
-67.70
0.00468
104
37

-0.0732
(0.1683)
-0.8848
(1.8963)
-4.4528
(7.8164)
-6.1776*
(3.3091)
2.9050
(2.8658)
0.1738
(0.2944)

0.1394
(0.1344)
0.0565
(0.2176)
0.0605
(0.1685)
5.9868
(5.1588)
0.1811
(4.6216)

0.4709
(3.0385)
0.0768
-70.64
-76.51
0.496
115
44

54
Table 12: Loan Growth: Wooldridge Three Stage Method: Second and Third stage, 2SLS.
Dep Var = loan growth.
VARIABLES
RFC assistance dummy
Log of total assets
Illiquid assets over total assets
Real estate owned over illiquid assets
Net worth over total assets
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
National bank dummy
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
Loans and discounts over illiquid assets
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts
Interest cost over total debt
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
Recoveries over total earnings
Losses over total expenses
Crop income share in county in 1930
Constant

Centered R2
Adjusted R2
Anderson-Rubin Wald (significance of endogenous, chi-sq stat)
Anderson-Rubin Wald (significance of endogenous, pval)
Kleibergen-Paap rk LM (underid, pval)
Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F (weakid, stat)
Cragg-Donald Wald F (weakid, stat)
Stock-Yogo weakid 10% critical values (maxIV)
Endogeneity test (Chi-sq(1) stat)
Endogeneity test (p-val)
Number of banks
Number of banks receiving RFC stock assistance
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Full

Parsimonious

0.3901*
(0.2102)
-0.0199
(0.0632)
-2.6490***
(0.6820)
-3.6461
(3.7875)
2.0565
(1.3972)
-0.3307
(0.8516)
-0.1607
(0.1242)
-0.1247
(0.4524)
-0.0370
(0.3950)
0.6683
(0.5182)
1.1584
(0.9861)
-0.0292
(0.3342)
0.5160
(0.8242)
0.2659
(0.3086)
-0.7087
(0.6331)
2.0532*
(1.2167)

0.5070
(0.3884)
-0.0645
(0.0516)
-2.5036***
(0.6738)
-3.6492
(3.6041)
1.8447
(1.4288)
-0.2266
(0.8759)
-0.1471
(0.0957)

0.334
0.220
3.264
0.0708
9.30e-05
30.00
22.46
16.38
0.528
0.468
104
37

0.240
0.190
2.002
0.157
0.0384
5.044
4.298
16.38
0.693
0.405
115
44

1.9687**
(0.9509)

55
Table 13: 1st stage, Joint MLE, includes survivors through 1935.
Full
First stage Tobit
Log of days to RFC
assistance
Log of total assets
-0.0877
0.1267
(0.1590)
(0.0777)
Illiquid assets to total assets
-1.0623
1.1917
(1.9471)
(0.9971)
Real estate owned to illiquid assets
-3.7115
4.6104
(7.4956)
(4.3834)
Net worth over total assets
-6.3850*
4.3579***
(3.2923)
(1.5592)
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
3.8176
-0.9318
(2.6244)
(1.2749)
National bank dummy
0.1992
-0.0502
(0.3092)
(0.1713)
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
-0.1536
(0.5926)
Loans and discounts to illiquid assets
0.0193
(0.4924)
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and discounts
1.0365
(0.6670)
Interest cost over total debt
0.4885
(1.6955)
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
-0.6798*
(0.3526)
Recoveries over total earnings
0.8347
(1.2314)
Losses over total expenses
-0.1514
(0.3792)
Crop income share in county in 1930
0.9503
(1.7985)
Total number of correspondents
0.0952
-0.0142
(0.1102)
(0.0727)
Number of correspondents in New York and Chicago
0.0991
-0.0645
(0.1572)
(0.0916)
Log of county population in 1930
0.0882
0.2096*
(0.1243)
(0.1182)
Unemployment rate for county in 1930
2.2911
3.2016
(3.9787)
(2.7596)
Net due to banks over total assets
-2.0226
-1.2168
(3.7949)
(2.1251)
Mortgage loan share of total loans for county
0.4124
(0.5549)
Suspended deposits share of 1931 county deposits
0.0751
(0.1513)
Other reserve city bank
-1.1674**
(0.5196)
FERA share of grants for county
-2.8142*
(1.5192)
Manufacturing employment share in county in 1930
-1.4805**
(0.6262)
Constant
0.7612
0.9374
(2.7992)
(3.0416)
lnsig_1
-0.5975***
-0.7824***
(0.1372)
(0.1082)
Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
VARIABLES
(Dependent Variable)

Parsimonious
First stage Probit
RFC assistance dummy

Parsimonious
First stage Tobit
Log of days to RFC
assistance
0.0298
(0.0760)
0.4250
(0.8898)
1.1739
(3.2923)
3.4066**
(1.4344)
-0.4100
(1.2594)
-0.1725
(0.1332)

-0.0554
(0.0548)
-0.0850
(0.0849)
-0.0764
(0.0635)
-0.0036
(1.9470)
-0.4915
(1.9687)

6.7588***
(1.3941)
-0.6501***
(0.1395)

56
Table 14: 2nd stage (Loan Growth), Joint MLE, includes survivors through 1935.

VARIABLES
RFC assistance dummy

Parsimonious Probit-OLS
Second stage OLS

Illiquid assets to total assets
Real estate owned to illiquid assets
Net worth over total assets
Bills payable and rediscounts over total debt
National bank dummy
Demand deposits and due to banks over total debt
Loans and discounts to illiquid assets
Loans eligible for rediscount over total loans and
discounts

Parsimonious Tobit-OLS
Second stage OLS

-0.4078*
(0.2132)
-0.0270
(0.0517)
-2.6528***
(0.6865)
-2.9688
(3.7077)
2.5512*
(1.3966)
-0.0722
(0.9742)
-0.2063
(0.1354)
-0.1914
(0.4569)
-0.1004
(0.3557)
0.8139

-0.5887***
(0.1495)
-0.0955**
(0.0427)
-2.5224***
(0.6580)
-3.4973
(2.8429)
2.4702**
(1.2041)
0.1037
(1.0701)
-0.2259**
(0.1126)

0.9337***
(0.2308)

Log of days to RFC assistance
Log of total assets

Full Tobit-OLS
Second stage OLS

-0.0871*
(0.0502)
-2.3149***
(0.7483)
-2.9507
(3.3847)
2.6204*
(1.3535)
-0.5529
(1.1462)
-0.1783
(0.1225)

(0.5314)
0.9337
(1.2824)
Interest and discounts on loans over total earnings
-0.0778
(0.3150)
Recoveries over total earnings
0.7104
(0.9920)
Losses over total expenses
0.2247
(0.3055)
Crop income share in county in 1930
-0.1645
(0.9557)
Constant
1.8812*
4.5331**
(1.0621)
(1.7877)
ln (sigma2)
-0.5975***
-0.5900***
(0.1372)
(0.0707)
Rho_12
-0.8113***
0.3641
Log-likelihood
-136.9
-150.4
Number of banks
115
107
Number of banks with RFC stock assistance
44
40
Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Interest cost over total debt

6.5298***
(1.4134)
-0.4636***
(0.0779)
0.7221***
-177.1
115
44

Figure 1: Bank failures and RFC loan and preferred stock assistance recipients, January 1932 – December 1934

58
Figure 2: Histogram of Second Period (Post-March 1933) Residuals

(a) Deviance residual of RFC assistance dummy (full model, probit)

(b) Generalized residual of log of days to RFC assistance (full model, tobit)
Yellow bins are the histogram of the errors. Tan curve is the kernel fitted density function of the residuals: the
probit residual is the deviance residual after probit; the tobit residuals are the generalized residuals derived
according to Gourieroux et al (1987). The red curve is the normal density function.

