                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION, EXCHANGE RATES, AND UNCONVENTIONAL
                      POLICY IN AN OPEN ECONOMY

                                       Luis Felipe Céspedes
                                         Roberto Chang
                                         Andrés Velasco

                                       Working Paper 18431
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18431


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




We are indebted to participants of the Seventh Workshop of the Latin-American Finance Network,
participants of seminars at the London Business School, the University of Maryland, and the Central
Bank of Peru and especially Gian María Milesi-Ferretti and Anton Korinek, for insightful comments
on a previous version which circulated with the title "Exchange Market Intervention as Unconventional
Monetary Policy". The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Luis Felipe Céspedes, Roberto Chang, and Andrés Velasco. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Intermediation, Exchange Rates, and Unconventional Policy in an Open Economy
Luis Felipe Céspedes, Roberto Chang, and Andrés Velasco
NBER Working Paper No. 18431
October 2012
JEL No. E58,F34,F41

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper develops an open economy model in which financial intermediation is subject to occasionally
binding collateral constraints, and uses the model to study unconventional policies such as credit facilities
and foreign exchange intervention. The model highlights the interaction between the real exchange
rate, interest rates, and financial frictions. The exchange rate can affect the financial intermediaries'
international credit limit via a net worth effect and a leverage ratio effect; the latter is novel and depends
on the equilibrium link between exchange rates and interest spreads. Unconventional policies are nonneutral
if and only if financial constraints are binding in equilibrium. Credit programs are more effective if
targeted towards financial intermediaries rather than the corporate sector. Sterilized foreign exchange
interventions matter because the increased availability of tradables, resulting from the sterilizing credit,
can relax financial frictions; this perspective is new in the literature. Finally, self fulfilling expectations
can lead to the coexistence of financially constrained and unconstrained equilibria, justifying a policy
of defending the exchange rate and the accumulation of international reserves.


Luis Felipe Céspedes                                   Andrés Velasco
Universidad Adolfo Ibañez                              Columbia University
lfcespedes@uai.cl                                      School of International and Public Affairs
                                                       420 West 118th Street
Roberto Chang                                          New York, NY 10027
Rutgers University                                     and Oxford University
Department of Economics                                and also NBER
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
chang@econ.rutgers.edu
1         Introduction

In recent years, and especially in response to the global financial crisis, fiscal and monetary
authorities around the world have been willing to deploy a broad range of new instruments. This
has been true even for central banks that had previously adopted inflation targeting. Indeed,
central banks have engaged in all kinds of "unconventional" policies, including the creation
and expansion of liquidity and credit facilities, the manipulation of reserve requirements, and
intervention in the foreign exchange market.1
        These developments contrast with the textbook inflation targeting regime, in which a central
bank sets a single policy interest rate to hit an inflation target. But, while there is consensus
in that unconventional policies were somewhat successful in preventing a deeper crisis, it is fair
to say that they (and their apparent success) remain poorly understood. As a consequence,
it is unclear whether unconventional policies should be added to the policymakers’ standard
arsenal or, instead, they should be put back into an emergency toolkit, to be resorted to only
in extreme crisis situations.
        A satisfactory resolution of these and related issues clearly requires the development of a
theory in which unconventional policies can potentially matter. This, in turn, means that the
theory must embody financial frictions, since models of perfect financial markets usually imply
that unconventional policies are irrelevant or superfluous.2
        Accordingly, the purpose of this paper is twofold. First, it develops an open economy model
in which financial intermediation can sometimes be subject to binding collateral constraints.
The model is kept as simple as possible, which allows us to derive several implications analyt-
ically, yielding significant insights. Second, we use the model to study unconventional policies,
including credit facilities and foreign exchange intervention.
        The model is designed to highlight the interaction between the real exchange rate, interest
    1
     A recent review of relevant developments and literature in Latin America is Cespedes, Chang and Velasco
(2012). Chang (2007) provides a similar discussion, but focuses on the period preceding the global crisis.
   2
     This is a consequence of Ricardian Equivalence (Barro 1974, Wallace 1981). For more recent discussion, see
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Cespedes, Chang and García Cicco (2011).



                                                      2
rates, and financial intermediation. It assumes that firms produce capital by aggregating two
goods, one tradable and the other nontradable. The real exchange rate is then defined as the
relative price of the two goods.
   To finance capital investment, firms borrow from domestic financial intermediaries or banks.
Banks, in turn, can finance their loans out of their own net worth or by borrowing from the
world market. A simple moral hazard problem is assumed which means that, as in other models,
there is an international collateral constraint: the amount that local bankers can borrow abroad
is limited by a multiple of their net worth, the latter expressed in tradables.
   In this context, a real exchange depreciation, by reducing the tradables value of the non-
tradables portion of banks’ net worth, has a detrimental eﬀect on the credit limit. But there
is also an equilibrium eﬀect: a real depreciation can increase lending interest rates and, as a
consequence, increase the banks’ maximum leverage ratio. This is intuitive, as higher lending
rates improve the franchise value of domestic banks. The net worth impact of the real exchange
rate on loan supply has been noted before in the literature, but the eﬀect on leverage is novel.
Taken together, the two opposite eﬀects mean that loan supply can have a positive or negative
relation with the real exchange rate.
   The demand for domestic bank loans depends on firms’ investment and, hence, on the real
exchange rate and the interest rate on loans. These two variables must also ensure equilibrium
in the market for nontradables. The economy’s overall equilibrium is then characterized by two
schedules giving the supply of and demand for bank loans as functions of the real exchange
rate.
   We show that, depending on parameters and initial conditions, including the distribution
of net worth, the collateral constraint may or may not bind in equilibrium. If it does not,
the lending interest rate equal the world rate, which leads to an eﬃcient outcome in which
investment increases to the point at which the marginal return to capital equals the world
interest rate. If the collateral constraint binds, however, the domestic lending rate is higher
than the world interest rate and the real exchange rate is more depreciated than in the absence of


                                                3
financial frictions, resulting in an ineﬃciently low level of financial intermediation, investment,
and welfare. In such a situation, the economy is more vulnerable to exogenous shocks, which
are amplified by the endogenous response of interest rate spreads and the exchange rate.
       In this context, we discuss several policies with "unconventional" flavor. One is a redistri-
bution of initial wealth from firms or households to banks, which can be interpreted as a bank
recapitalization program financed with taxes. We show that the policy is inconsequential if the
collateral constraint does not bind in equilibrium. But if the constraint binds, the policy can
lower domestic lending rates, strengthen the real exchange rate, and boost lending, investment,
and welfare. That a wealth redistribution can be beneficial in models with financial frictions is
known at least since Bernanke and Gertler (1989), but our results go beyond that observation
in at least two ways. First, the redistribution policy helps if and only if financial constraints
are binding. This suggests the more general point that unconventional policies can be eﬀective
if and only if and when financial frictions bite.3
       Second, we show that redistributing domestically owned nontradables towards banks can
improve eﬃciency, which may be surprising since the collateral constraint is a limit only on bor-
rowing tradables. This result obtains because in a financially constrained equilibrium domestic
banks lever their net worth severalfold, so that taking away one unit of wealth (in tradables or
nontradables) from firms to give it to banks increases the firm’s loan demand by one unit but
increases the banks’ loan supply by more than one unit.
       To discuss government credit facilities and exchange rate interventions, we assume that the
government can borrow an exogenous amount of tradables at the world interest rate. This
can be interpreted in various ways — for instance, as a credit line granted by an international
institution, or as previously accumulated foreign exchange reserves. Then we ask how those
government resources can be used most eﬃciently.
       The government can lend its tradables to the corporate sector or to financial institutions.
Such government credit programs are irrelevant, again, if financial constraints do not bind in
   3
    This is consistent with the often heard claim, by central bankers, that in a financial crisis unconventional
policies can be justified as "the traditional monetary transmission mechanisms can break down".


                                                       4
equilibrium. If they do, government credit programs are beneficial, and in that case — we also
show — they are more eﬀective if targeted towards the banks. The reason once more is that
banks can lever up the government credit to raise its international credit limit, with the result
of a larger increase in the supply and quantity of loans than if the government credit had been
granted to firms.
   Another policy alternative is a sterilized foreign exchange operation, in which the gov-
ernment uses its available tradables (which we can think of as foreign reserves) to purchase
nontradables, oﬀsetting this operation with a purchase of government debt or with a credit to
firms or banks. We show that such an operation is equivalent to the government lending the
tradables directly. While the result may seem nearly trivial, it is quite significant: here the
eﬀects of sterilized interventions are explained not by the impact of the intervention on asset
prices but, rather, by the impact of the sterilizing credit on financial constraints. In this sense,
the model oﬀers a completely new perspective on the impact of sterilized foreign exchange
intervention.4
   A final issue that we focus on is the possibility of multiple equilibria. We show that an eﬃ-
cient equilibrium can coexist with a financially constrained one if the elasticity of the lending
rate with respect to the exchange rate (which depends on the economy’s fundamental paramet-
ers) is suﬃciently low. In such a case, a "threat" to intervene in the foreign exchange market to
prevent exchange rate depreciation can prevent self fulfilling pessimism and switches from good
to bad equilibria. This result is of interest since it can potentially rationalize recent episodes
of reserves accumulation in emerging economies: the government must be ready to intervene if
market expectations were to turn adverse, even if intervention need not happen in equilibrium.
   This paper is related to several strands in the literature. In emphasizing the links between
financial frictions, relative prices, leverage, and aggregate outcomes, it follows Bernanke and
Gertler (1989), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), and many others since. Recognizing that exchange
rates can add a significant open economy component to those links follows Krugman (2000)
   4
     Our results can also potentially help understanding why empirical evidence on the eﬀects of sterilized
intervention is very mixed.


                                                    5
and Cespedes, Chang, and Velasco (2004).
   Our focus on unconventional policies is shared with several recent contributions, including
Curdía and Woodford (2009) and Gertler and Karadi (2011), that assume frictions in the
financial intermediation process and investigate the role of government policy in alleviating
them. In that vein, our paper is closest to Christiano and Ikeda (2012), which compares the
implications of several simple financial frictions models for the impact of unconventional policies,
including some that we also study. Our model, however, is richer than the ones in Christiano-
Ikeda in several ways, especially in featuring a crucial interaction between exchange rates and
interest rates and a significant interplay of these two variables with leverage and the valuation of
net worth. As a consequence, for those policies that are analyzed in both Christiano and Ikeda
(2011) and our paper, we obtain richer and more nuanced policy inferences. In addition, our
model goes further in allowing for the analysis of foreign exchange intervention and in showing
that multiple equilibria, with the attendant policy consequences, can occur in our model.
   Finally, our paper is reminiscent of models of the interaction between international and
domestic collateral constraints, exchange rates, and liquidity, particularly Caballero and Krish-
namurthy (2003) and Holmstrom and Tirole (2011, chapter 6). While the theoretical approaches
have a lot in common, the details and concerns are quite diﬀerent. A main focus of those papers
is the determination and management of international liquidity, an issue about which our paper
has little to say. On the other hand, our paper’s framework goes beyond theirs in allowing for
levered financial intermediation and its subtle interplay with exchange rates and interest rates.
This, in turn, yields an analysis of recent unconventional policies that has no counterpart in
Caballero-Krishnamurthy or Holmstrom-Tirole.
   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the model, focusing on a simple version
(with Cobb Douglas production of capital) for ease of exposition. We characterize equilibria
in section 3. We then explore implications for unconventional policies in section 4. Section 5
discusses a more general version of the model, the possibility of multiple equilibria, and the
policy implications of such multiplicity. Section 6 concludes.


                                                 6
2     The Model

We focus on a small open economy with two periods and two goods, one traded (also referred
to as the foreign good) and another nontradable (or home good). The real exchange rate is the
relative price of tradables in terms of nontradables.
    The economy is inhabited by a representative household. It also has firms and banks that
belong to the household. In the first period, tradables and nontradables can be combined to
obtain capital that can be used for production in the second period. Firms buy capital, financing
investment out of inherited net worth or by borrowing from a set of domestic banks. Banks,
in turn, finance their loans by borrowing from the international capital market subject to a
collateral constraint which depends on their own net worth. The collateral constraint reflects
underlying financial frictions and can result in credit rationing, as we will see.


2.1    Households

For simplicity, the household consumes only traded goods and in the second period only. Since
the household owns banks and firms, its consumption in the second period equals the repres-
entative bank´s and the representative firm´s profits:


                                           = Π + Π

    There is no fundamental uncertainty, so firms and banks maximize second period profits.


2.2    Capital Production

In the first period, capital can be obtained by combining tradables and nontradables through a
conventional aggregator function. For the time being, we assume that the aggregator is Cobb
Douglas:
                                                 1−
                                           =                                           (1)



                                                7
where  and  respectively denote inputs of nontradables and tradables,  is a constant in
the unit interval, and  = 1  (1 − )1−  It follows that the price of capital in terms of the
home good, , is given by
                                             =  1−                                         (2)

where  is the price of tradables in terms of nontradables, which we will refer to as the real
exchange rate.
   It also follows that, if  is the aggregate demand for capital, the optimal input of nontra-
dables must be
                                      =  =  1−                                       (3)

   For simplicity, we will mostly assume that nontradables have no other role, so the preceding
expression gives the aggregate demand for nontradables.


2.3    Firms

The representative firm can purchase capital in the first period in order to produce  tradables
in the second period according to
                                            =  

where  and  are positive constants, with  ≤ 1
   In the first period, the firm has some inherited endowment of tradables ( ) and nontradables
( ). In addition, it can borrow from banks. Without loss of generality, assume that bank
loans are denominated in tradables. Hence the firm’s budget constraint in the first period,
expressed in tradables, is
                                                  
                                         =  +  +                                           (4)
                                                   

where  is the amount borrowed by the firm. In turn, second period profits are


                                         Π =  − 


                                                8
where  is the interest rate on bank loans.
   The firm’s demand for capital is then given by


                                      −1 =                                           (5)

                                                =  −                                      (6)


the last equality following from 2. This expression emphasizes that the firm’s demand for capital
depends on the real exchange rate and the cost of borrowing.
   Note that the firm’s demand for capital is independent of its endowments, although the
latter determine the amount borrowed from banks. Also, note that we allow  or  to be
negative, in whose case they represent inherited corporate debt.


2.4    Banks

As mentioned, firms borrow from domestic banks, which in turn can borrow from the world
capital market subject to a collateral constraint. The assumption that firms cannot borrow
directly from the world market can be rationalized as an extreme version of Holmstrom and
Tirole (1997) and others.
   Letting  denote the amount that the bank borrows from the world market in the first
period, the quantity of loans that the bank can extend to firms is

                                                      
                                        =  +  +
                                                      

where  and  denote the bank’s endowment of tradables and nontradables.
   We denote the interest rate on foreign loans by ∗  so that the bank’s profits are


                                        Π =  − ∗ 


   The bank maximizes profits subject to its first period budget constraint and to a collateral

                                               9
constraint:
                                        − ∗  ≥ 

where  is a parameter, 0    1
   The collateral constraint can be rationalized in several ways. For example, we can follow
Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and assume that, in period 2, bankers can default on the foreign
debt and abscond with a fraction  of the payments made to the bank by firms. Then the
collateral constraint is necessary to prevent absconding.
   The collateral constraint may or may not bind in equilibrium. If it does not,  must equal
∗  and amount of loans is determined by demand. The incentive constraint then reduces to
 −  ≥  or, using the budget constraint,

                                            ∙        ¸
                                          1       
                                       ≤     +                                            (7)
                                                 

   On the other hand, if the collateral constraint binds, combining it with the budget constraint
gives the bank’s supply of loans:

                                  ∙        ¸                ∙        ¸
                         ∗                       1             
                   = ∗             +      =                +                            (8)
                      − (1 − )             1 − (1 − )       

where we have defined  = ∗ as the (gross) spread.
   Remarkably, loan supply is a multiple of the bank’s net worth  +  which we assume to
be positive. The multiplying factor is the leverage ratio 1[1 − (1 − )] which must be greater
than one and finite in equilibrium; the latter requires   1(1 − ). The interpretation is the
same as in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and other models with collateral constraints: (1 − ) is
the portion of its loan portfolio that the bank can pledge to foreign investors; the bank has to
finance the diﬀerence between this value and the cost of capital, ∗ , out of its own resources.
In other words, ∗ − (1 − ) is a measure of the bank’s "down payment" for the credit it
obtains. The equation tells us that the bank leverages its capital as much as possible to finance



                                               10
loans.
    As in many recent models, relative prices can aﬀect the supply of loans through their impact
on the bank’s net worth: here, if  is positive, a real depreciation (an increase in ) reduces
the value of the bank’s endowment of nontradables and hence net worth in terms of tradables.
A more novel aspect of our specification is that relative prices, here the loan rate  can in
addition aﬀect the leverage ratio: an increase in  or equivalently in the spread , increases
the pledgeable value of the bank’s loans and, hence, the leverage ratio.



3     Equilibrium

This section shows that equilibrium can be characterized in a relatively simple but insightful
way. Market clearing for nontradables yield an intuitive link between the real exchange rate and
the demand for capital. This and optimal investment conditions then give a relation between
the real exchange rate and the interest rate. Finally, the firm’s budget constraint gives the
corporate demand for loans as a function of the real exchange rate or, equivalently, of the
interest rate spread. Equilibrium is then given by the demand and supply of loans, the latter
given by the analysis in the last section.
    The demand for nontradables is given by 3. Supply is equal to the aggregate endowment of
nontradables,  +  ≡ . Hence,


                                            1− =                                        (9)


    This links the real exchange rate to the demand for capital: an increase in the latter implies
an increase in the demand for nontradables and hence, given that the supply is fixed, an increase
in their relative price (a fall in , or a real appreciation).
    Now, recall that 6 gives the firm’s demand for capital as a function of the real exchange rate




                                                 11
and of the interest rate  Combining it with the preceding equation we obtain

                                                            ³  ´1−
                                    =  +(1−)(1−) 
                                                               

   This is a key link between interest rates and the real exchange rate. An increase in the
interest rate  reduces the firm’s demand for capital, and hence demand for nontradables,
leading to a real depreciation.
   It is useful to define a particular value of  say 0  by

                                                              ³  ´1−
                                         +(1−)(1−)
                                  ∗ = 0                
                                                               

That is, 0 is the value of the real exchange rate in the absence of financial frictions (i.e. if
 = ∗ ). The previous two expressions then yield a much simpler one:

                                              µ        ¶+(1−)(1−)
                                                 
                                    = ∗ =                                                  (10)
                                                 0

   We are now ready to characterize equilibrium in the market for loans. Demand for loans is
given by 4:

                                               
                            =          − ( +     )
                                                 
                                                      
                                  =  − 1− − ( +      ) that is,
                                                     
                                               
                                =     − ( +    )                                        (11)
                                               

where we have used 2 and 9 for the second equality. The first term in the last expression, 
is the tradables value of investment. Under our maintained assumptions, this value must fall
if  increases. The second term is the tradables value of the firm’s endowment. If   0,
this falls with an increase in  so the impact of a real depreciation on loan demand can be
ambiguous. However, the first term dominates is, in particular,   0 , i.e. if the bank has


                                                  12
a positive endowment of nontradables. Focusing on this case for now, 11 gives the demand for
loans as a decreasing function of the real exchange rate.
      The supply of loans is given by 7-8 of the previous section, rewritten here for convenience:

                                       1      
                                ∈ [0 ( +    )] if  = 0
                                             0
                                                 ∙         ¸
                                         1              
                                  =                +        if   0                              (12)
                                    1 − (1 − )         

with  given by 10. In words, if  = 0 ,  = 1, and banks are content with lending up to a
multiple 1 of their net worth, the latter valued at the exchange rate 0  If   0 the spread
 is greater than one and the banks are financially constrained. Then they lend a multiple of
their net worth, the leverage ratio being determined by  and therefore, via 10, by the real
                  5
exchange rate.
      In the region   0 banks are credit constrained. A real depreciation then changes loan
supply via two opposite channels. If  is positive, a depreciation reduces the tradables value
of the typical bank’s net worth and, hence, pushes loan supply down. But a depreciation also
increases the spread  via 10 and, hence, it increases the leverage ratio. Hence, when banks
are constrained, a real depreciation has ambiguous eﬀects on loan supply. The elasticity of 
with respect to  is, in fact, not too hard to obtain:

                               ∙            ¸
                                          (1 − )
                       
                            =−                +              [ + (1 − )(1 − )]
                               +       1 − (1 − )

      The two terms in the RHS correspond, respectively, to the net worth eﬀect and the leverage
eﬀect, and have obvious interpretations. The net worth eﬀect is large, in particular, when the
bank’s nontradables endowment is large as a fraction of its total endowment. The leverage
eﬀect is large if the spread,  is large or if the financial frictions parameter  is small.
      For concreteness, for now we will focus on the case in which the leverage eﬀect dominates
  5
    Note that the necessary condition   1(1 − ) together with 10 impose a corresponding upper bound on
the set of  consistent with equilibrium.



                                                   13
the net worth eﬀect, and so the supply of loans increases with  in the constrained region But
we will see later that it is not too hard to find conditions under which  falls with  in that
region.
      Figure 1 depicts the supply of loans for the baseline case.6 The quantity of loans is measured
along the horizontal axis; the point 0 is given by 1 ( + 
                                                             0
                                                                ) The real exchange rate is measured
against the vertical axis.
      In Figure 2, a downward sloping demand for loans is added. The figure assumes that the
demand curve cuts the supply schedule at a loan amount,  in the figure, less than 0  Then
the equilibrium exchange rate is   = 0  and the economy is financially unconstrained. In this
case, of course,  = ∗ and  = 1
      Alternatively, Figure 3 depicts a case in which the demand curve cuts the supply schedule
at a loan amount  that exceeds 0  The equilibrium real exchange rate is then given by
   0  The interest spread  is then given by 10 and must be greater than one; equivalently,
  ∗  In this situation the economy is financially constrained, in the sense that the collateral
constraint must bind.
      The comparative statics of this model are now easy to trace. Consider, in particular, a fall
in  representing less stringent collateral requirements. This moves the point 0 to the right,
and, by via the leverage ratio, it also increases the slope of the loan supply curve if    0 
The result is depicted in Figure 4. If the economy was initially constrained, a fall in  results
in a real exchange rate appreciation and higher intermediation. It also implies a fall in  and
 In this sense, financial frictions can result in excessively weak exchange rates.
      More generally, this stripped down model sheds light on the subtle interactions between
international borrowing constraints, interest rates, and the exchange rate. If the collateral
constraint binds in equilibrium the domestic lending interest rate is above the world rate.
Domestic banks would like then to borrow more tradables but cannot: tradables are too scarce
(relative to a situation with no financial frictions). In turn, since tradables are combined with
  6
      Figures are collected at the end of the paper.



                                                       14
nontradables for capital production, the scarcity of tradables reduces the marginal product
of nontradables, and hence their price, below eﬃcient levels. And the ineﬃciently weak real
exchange rate can lower the net worth of the banks, tightening the borrowing constraint even
further.
        The feedback loop between asset prices and borrowing constraints is present in many related
papers, following Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). The relevant price in our model is not, however,
the value of stocks, as in much of the literature, but the real exchange rate. Amd changes in
the real exchange rate matter not only through their eﬀect on the net worth of banks but also
through the leverage ratio. This has been studied less often.7 And because the tightness of
the borrowing constraint depends on this relative price, policy induced changes in the domestic
economy can have implications for international capital flows. We turn now to this issue.



4         Some Policy Implications

4.1         Redistribution and Banks’ Net Worth

If the collateral constraint is binding in equilibrium, a policy induced redistribution of initial
resources can improve matters. Gains are possible because domestic banks can only post their
own net worth as collateral for borrowing internationally, but the banks’ net worth is smaller
than the resources that the economy as a whole has access to.
        Suppose, in particular, that the government taxes away some of the firms’ nontradables
endowment and gives the proceeds to the banks. This can be regarded as a bank recapitalization
policy financed with a corporate tax. In our notation, this entails a reduction in  matched
by an increase in   keeping  fixed.
        Our expressions for loan demand and supply, 11 and 12, imply that the impact of the
policy must be as depicted in Figure 5. Both loan demand and supply move horizontally to
the right, but the supply schedule moves farther. In fact, 11 and 12 reveal that the horizontal
    7
        A recent notable exception is Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci and Young (2011).


                                                       15
displacement of the supply schedule is equal to the displacement of the demand curve multiplied
by the leverage ratio, and hence greater than one.
       The intuition is simple. At any fixed value of  and hence of  and  (because of 10), a one
unit reduction in  has no eﬀect on the firm’s demand for capital, and hence it induces the
firm to increase its borrowing by 1 tradables. In contrast, a one unit increase in  increases
the bank’s net worth by 1 but bank loans increase by 1 times the leverage ratio.
       In Figure 5, the equilibrium moves from   to   , with increased financial intermedi-
ation and a stronger exchange rate (lower ). Concomitantly, the spread  and the lending
interest rate  fall. Domestic consumption and welfare improve.
       Clearly, a suﬃciently large redistribution can potentially bring about an equilibrium in
which the collateral constraint does not bind. Whether this is possible or not depends on the
diﬀerent parameters of the model, particularly the relative size of the nontradables endowment
and their initial distribution.
       That wealth redistribution can be welfare improving in the presence of financial frictions has
long been known (see e.g. Bernanke and Gertler 1989). What may be more surprising in this
context is that redistributing nontraded endowments can be useful even though the economy
faces an international collateral constraint, which involves only traded goods. The reason, of
course, is that transferring nontraded goods to the bank increases its net worth, which can be
levered up to result in a net increase in financial intermediation.


4.2       Government Credit Programs

The recent use of unconventional monetary policies has motivated much recent research. One
example of such policies are central bank lending facilities to the private sector. To examine this
issue, let us assume that the government has the opportunity of borrow a given amount  of
tradables in the world market at the world interest rate ∗  We do not ask how the government
                                                                                        8
acquires such opportunity, although it is not hard to think of explanations.                Instead we focus
   8
    For example, one can assume that the government can borrow in the world market subject to a collateral
constraint that is less stringent to the one applying to banks. Alternatively,  can be thought of as a credit

                                                     16
on how the government can best use its credit.
    Clearly, the credit line  is irrelevant if the collateral constraint does not bind in equilibrium,
so we focus on the interesting case in which it does. Consider, first, the possibility that the
government borrows  in the first period to lend that amount to firms at the market interest
rate  In the second period, the government collects  in debt repayments, cancels its foreign
debt, and transfers any diﬀerence ( − ∗ ) to the household as a lump sum subsidy.
    The reader can easily check that this policy leaves the private demand and supply of loans,
11 and 12, unaﬀected. The only change is that the equilibrium in the market for loans is given
not by  =  but by  =  +  For a graphical interpretation, the total supply of loans
can be added to Figures 1 to 3 and is simply given by the schedule  displaced horizontally by
the amount  As mentioned, the policy does not aﬀect equilibrium outcomes if the collateral
constraint did not initially bind (except that it does reduce the amount of private intermediation
by  ).
    If the constraint was initially binding, the policy results in increased total intermediation, a
stronger real exchange rate, and a lower interest spread. Note that, on the other hand, private
intermediation must fall, since the exchange rate appreciates and  and  fall. In this sense
there is some crowding out, even in the case in which the equilibrium is initially ineﬃcient.
Figure 6 depicts this case.
    If  is large enough, the resulting equilibrium involves no ineﬃciency, with  = ∗  In fact,
it is instructive to compute the smallest  that does the trick, which we denote by   (the
 for "direct lending"):

                                                 µ        ¶
                                                        1      
                                         =     −  +      − ( +    )
                                            0        0          0

    This follows easily from 11, 12, and the market clearing condition  =  + The intuition
is simple. If there were no financial frictions, firms would borrow the diﬀerence between their
demand for capital and the value of their net worth: these are the first two terms in the RHS.
line available from international financial institutions.


                                                            17
But at the frictionless exchange rate domestic banks can at most raise the multiple 1 of the
value of their net worth. To bring about the frictionless outcome, the government credit must
at least cover the shortfall.
   Alternatively, suppose that the government borrows  and lends that amount to the banks
at cost, that is, at the world interest rate ∗  Crucially, we assume that the government can
enforce repayment of its loan perfectly.
   Analyzing this policy is just a little more involved. Bank profits are now


                                     Π =  − ∗ ( +  )


where, as before,  denotes the amount borrowed by the bank from international lenders, and
 the amount the bank lends domestically. The first period budget constraint of the bank
becomes:
                                              µ        ¶
                                                    
                                    =  +  +  +
                                                    

   Finally, the collateral constraint is now


                                 − ∗ ( +  ) ≥  − ∗ 


   Combining the last two expressions, we obtain:

                                          1              
                                ≤                [( +    ) + ]
                                     1 − (1 − )        

   This tells us that the bank’s loan supply increases by  times the leverage ratio. This is
depicted in Figure 7: because the leverage ratio is greater than one, the horizontal displacement
of the bank’s loan supply curve is greater than  As a consequence, financial intermediation
is greater and the exchange rate stronger than when the government lends  directly to the
firms.



                                               18
   For a slightly diﬀerent perspective, compute the minimum  that brings spreads to one:

                                    ∙    µ        ¶             ¸
                                                1      
                               =      −  +      − ( +    )
                                    0        0          0
                                =  


   From the previous,       which confirms that government lending to banks is more
powerful than government lending to firms. The key to understand this result is to realize that
a government loan to the bank not only allows the latter to lend more, but also to borrow
further from the world capital market and to increase lending by even more. Eﬀectively, the
bank does not use  to expand lending directly, but rather to post it as collateral and lever
it up, which allows loan supply to increase by more than  the multiplier being the leverage
ratio.


4.3      Exchange Market Intervention

A diﬀerent variety of unconventional policies is foreign exchange market intervention, which has
come back into fashion in Latin America and elsewhere. Our model does not feature currency
but it does feature an exchange rate which is determined in the market for nontradables, so we
can examine a policy that looks pretty much like actual intervention policy.
   To examine this, it is useful to reinterpret  not as a credit line available to the government
but as a stock of international reserves. In some sense this is just a semantic issue, because
the opportunity cost of holding reserves is still the world rate ∗  But regarding  as reserves
enhances the correspondence of the policy to be examined with foreign exchange intervention.
   Hence, in this context, a intervention operation is one in which, in the initial period, the
government uses  to buy nontradables in the market, and sterilizes this by using the nontra-
dables thus obtained in an oﬀsetting operation, such as providing credit to the private sector
or purchasing government securities. We look at these alternatives in turn.
   Suppose, first, that the sterilizing operation is a credit to firms, and that the government


                                               19
charges firms  units of tradables in period 2 for each unit of nontradables lent to them.
Then a little thought should convince the reader that the outcome must be the same as if the
government had lent the  tradables directly to the firms, charging them an interest rate 
(To see this, note that after receiving the borrowed  nontradables the firms can just sell
them immediately for  tradables in the spot market. Also, the cost of borrowing for the firms
is exactly the same as under direct lending.) In other words, this flavor of sterilized foreign
exchange interventions is equivalent to a policy of directly lending tradables to firms.
   The description just given is still somewhat awkward because, in a sterilized intervention, the
government lends nontradables in the first period but collects tradables in the second period.
This is necessary because we assumed that nontradables play no role in the second period.
But it is also easily fixed, following e.g. Holmstrom and Tirole (2011). Specifically, modify the
model so that households consume nontradables as well as tradables in the last period, and that
the two goods are perfect substitutes. Also, assume that households have a suﬃciently large
endowment, say  0  of nontradables in the second period so that, in any equilibrium, the real
exchange rate is one. Then, in the description of the previous paragraph, one can suppose that
firms are asked to repay  units of nontradables in the last period per unit of nontradables
borrowed in the first period. Then the analysis is exactly the same (with the added feature that,
in the second period, firms must sell  units of tradables to the household to obtain the
 nontradables they need to repay their debt to the government; in turn, the government
sells the  nontradables back to the household.)
   The analysis then has two notable implications: sterilized foreign exchange intervention
can aﬀect real outcomes, alleviate financial frictions, and improve welfare; and the kind of
intervention just discussed is equivalent to a direct lending policy. In the real world, of course,
the equivalence can break down in favor of intervention or direct lending. For example, it
may be relatively more costly for a government to lend tradables than to lend nontradables
(think about government lending in foreign currency versus home currency). Then sterilized
intervention would have an edge.


                                                20
       The analysis is similar if the government sterilizes foreign exchange intervention by increas-
ing credit to the bank rather than to firms. If the government charges to the bank ∗ 
(tradables or nontradables, in the extension discussed above) per unit of nontradable lent, the
outcome must be the same as in the case of lending the  tradables to banks.
       Finally, what if the government sterilizes a foreign exchange intervention by purchasing its
own debt? To allow for this possibility, assume that the domestic bank initially holds some
government securities, each unit of securities being a promise to ∗ tradables in the second
period. Also, assume that the bank has financed its securities holdings by borrowing the
needed amount abroad at the world’s interest rate ∗ . Finally, assume that the holding of
government securities does not aﬀect the bank’s incentive constraint; this is indeed appropriate
if, for instance, in the second period the government cancels its securities after the bank repays
its own foreign debt.9
       The assumptions just made imply that the bank’s holding of government securities has no
impact on its profits nor its decision problem. Now assume that, as before, the government
uses the  tradables it has in the first period to purchase nontradables, and that it uses the
nontradables thus raised to retire its own securities. Then it is only a matter of accounting
to verify that the outcome is exactly the same as if the sterilizing operation had been a credit
to the bank.10 The conclusion is that sterilizing the foreign exchange intervention via retiring
government securities is equivalent to sterilizing it via a credit to banks. And, a fortiriori, this
kind of sterilized foreign exchange intervention is also equivalent to just giving  as a direct
credit to the bank.
       The conclusion is that sterilized intervention can be eﬀective, but that the details can matter
a lot. Here the key detail is whether the sterilizing operation ends up allocating the  tradables
   9
     We are not concerned here what was the origin of the government debt. We assume, however, that the
service of the debt in the last period is financed with lump sum taxes on households. Otherwise we would
have to discuss how changes in the amount of debt are related to distortionary taxation eﬀects, which would
needlessly cloud the discussion of sterilized intervention.
  10
     In particular, the operation leaves the bank with an amount of nontradables worth  tradables in the first
period (the tradables value of the retired public debt), and reduces the bank’s second period income by ∗ 
tradables (because of the reduction in the bank’s holding of public debt). These are the same implications of a
credit of  tradables or  nontradables to the bank at (tradables) interest rate ∗ .


                                                      21
to the firms or the banks. It is more powerful to give  to the banks because this allows them
to lever that amount in the international capital market.
       Finally, let us stress that the perspective just oﬀered on sterilized interventions is distinct-
ively new. The extant literature11 oﬀers two basic theories on how sterilized intervention can
aﬀect real outcomes: a portfolio balance view, which relies on the assumption that assets are
imperfect substitutes in terms of risk and return, so that sterilized intervention can aﬀect real
allocations by changing the relative supply of currencies; and a signaling view, which starts
by positing asymmetric information between policymakers and the public, so that sterilized
intervention can matter if it conveys information about future policy. In our model assumes
no uncertainty and features assets that are perfect substitutes, so there are portfolio balance
eﬀects of sterilized intervention. And intervention has no signaling value either, as the model
features no asymmetric information.



5        Generalizations and Multiple Equilibria

For the sake of clarity and concreteness, we have imposed strong assumptions on the model. In
this section we speculate on interesting issues that arise under more general assumptions.
       Much of our analysis has relied on the form of the loan supply function 12, and in particular
on the fact that loan supply increases with the real exchange rate  if collateral constraints
bind, that is, if   0  Recall that this reflects the relative strength of two opposing eﬀects,
one on net worth and another on the leverage ratio: a real depreciation reduces net worth
(assuming   0) but increases the leverage ratio to the extent that the spread  increases. In
our basic formulation, the leverage eﬀect dominates the net worth eﬀect, so that  increases
with  But we see that, for this to be the case, the elasticity of the spread to  (given by
10) must be large enough. Since the link between  and  reflects optimal production and
investment decisions, changes in fundamentals can easily aﬀect it and, hence, the shape of the
  11
    See e.g. Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1996, especially pages 593-595). For a more recent discussion with emphasis
on recent developments, see Disyatat and Galati (2007).



                                                    22
loan supply curve.
   To examine this conjecture, in this section we generalize 1 so that capital is produced instead
via a C.E.S. aggregator function:

                             h                                 i(−1)
                                     1−1               1−1
                           =  1      + (1 − )1 


where again  and  denote inputs of nontradables and tradables. This implies that the price
of capital must be
                                    £                 ¤1(1−)
                                  =  + (1 − ) 1−                                        (13)

generalizing 2, while the demand for nontradables must be


                                            =  


   In equilibrium, of course,  =  so that the demand for capital is linked to its price by


                                           = 


   In turn, the firm’s demand for capital is still given by 5, which combined with the previous
expression gives
                                      ¡      ¢−1
                                           = 

   Finally, combining the preceding expression with 13 and rearranging, we obtain the key
relation between the spread and the real exchange rate:

                                                ³  ´1−
                                 = ∗ =                 Ψ()                              (14)
                                               ∗ 

where we have defined
                                                     
                           Ψ() ≡
                                     [ + (1 − ) 1− ][1−(1−)](1−)


                                                23
   This generalizes 10. Note that the elasticity of  with respect to  is equal to the elasticity
of Ψ and the latter is

                            Ψ0                        (1 − ) 1−
                                = 1 − (1 − (1 − ))
                             Ψ                        + (1 − ) 1−

which is always positive but less than one. When  = 1, the elasticity reduces to  + (1 − )(1 −
), as in the baseline case (see 10). If  is smaller, the elasticity also falls.
   Now the loan supply curve is given again by 12, but with  given by 14 instead of 10 (and
with 0 defined as the value of  such that the last term of 14 equals one).
   As discussed, the extra parameters allow for configurations in which the elasticity of  with
respect to  is small enough so that the net worth eﬀect of a real depreciation dominates the
leverage ratio eﬀect. This means, in particular, that the loan supply schedule can look like the
one in Figure 8, with a flat portion at 0 and then loan supply being decreasing in 
   The derivation of loan demand is straightforward following the previous analysis. We leave
the details to the reader and just note the result:

                                     ∙        ¸
                                     1−             
                                 =     +   
                                                − ( +    )
                                                     

   As in the baseline case, the demand for capital (the first term in the RHS) decreases with
 Hence the demand for loans decreases with  unless  is large, a case that we ignore.
   With a downward sloping loan supply schedule, the possibility arises of multiple equilibria,
as in Figure 9. In the figure,  denotes an equilibrium in which the collateral constraint
does not bind, while it does bind at  0 . The financially constrained equilibrium features a
weaker exchange rate, a positive interest spread, and less financial intermediation, production,
consumption, and welfare.
   In this case animal spirits, especially of foreign lenders, can determine the outcome. Suppose
that foreign lenders believe that there will be a "good" equilibrium in which the exchange rate
is "strong", as given by 0  They then understand that the value of the bank’s net worth is


                                                  24
more than enough to warrant the bank’s foreign debt, so they lend to the bank what the latter
needs. The supply of loans is then relatively large, so that the lending rate is ∗ and, with
costs, investment and production expand. This increases the demand for nontradables, which
raises their relative price, leading to a strong exchange rate, confirming expectations. If lenders
believe, in contrast, that the equilibrium will be very "bad", with a weak exchange rate, they
must also believe that the bank’s net worth has little value in tradables, which leads to credit
rationing. (In this equilibrium, the weak exchange rate is associated with a higher spread
and hence a larger leverage ratio, but the eﬀect must be small, as discussed.) Loan supply
falls drastically, which increases the interest spread and results in a weak exchange rate, again
confirming expectations.
   The possibility of multiple equilibria suggests additional policy implications of our model. If
equilibria in which financial constraints do and do not bind coexist, as in Figure 9, a government
commitment to "do all it takes " to prevent the real exchange rate from depreciating excessively
can kill the bad equilibrium, leaving only the good one. Perhaps to make the claim believable,
the government may find it necessary to have access to a large enough "war chest" of tradables
(the  of the previous section) that they can use to intervene. As in other models with multiple
equilibria, however, the government would not have to intervene and spend the war chest if it
can convince the markets that its commitment is in fact credible.
   Our analysis, then, suggests that it may well be the case that the potential for self fulfilling
exchange rate crashes, and the associated credit crunches, that explains why many inflation
targeting central banks include in their charters a commitment to intervene if the real exchange
rate becomes unduly misaligned. It may also help understanding why those very same inflation
targeters keep large reserve stocks and seek swap lines abroad, even though in theory they are
not supposed to be intervening in the foreign exchange market.




                                                25
6     Final Remarks

In recent years, central banks throughout the world, including many that claim to be bound
to inflation targeting, have used a varied toolkit of unconventional policies. In particular, they
have intervened regularly in currency markets, in spite of the scant empirical evidence in favor
of intervention, of the dearth of theories justifying it, and of the fact that inflation targeting
central banks are supposed to let the currency float. A related paradox is that a central bank
that floats the currency need not accumulate foreign exchange reserves. Yet in the last decade
the world’s central banks have gone on a massive reserve accumulation drive, both before and
after the crisis.
    Why is there a gap between what central banks do and what they say they do? When are
unconventional policies eﬀective, and what are they eﬀective at? Why is there a new-found
enthusiasm for tweaking the value of market exchange rates, in spite of so many unsuccessful
experiences with fixed rates over the last few decades? These questions can only be addressed
within a theoretical framework. In this paper we build the simplest possible model that does
this job. We consider an economy with only two goods, traded and non-traded, so that we
define a real exchange rate. In this economy, financial constraints may or may not bind. They
do in times of financial stress, and the exchange rate interacts in important ways with interest
rates and financial imperfections.
    Armed with these observations we analyze the eﬀects of diﬀerent policies: capitalizing banks
(with tax financing), lending to banks and lending directly to firms, as well as intervening in
the exchange market. Three kinds of results merit highlighting. First, government lending
policies have real eﬀects when financial constraints bind. In addition, while the government can
lend its tradables to the corporate sector or to financial institutions, we find that government
credit programs are more eﬀective if targeted towards the banks. The reason is that banks can
lever up the government credit to raise its international credit limit, with the result of a larger
increase in the supply and quantity of loans, and a stronger relaxation of financial constraints,
than if the government credit had been granted to firms.

                                                26
   Second, in a sterilized foreign exchange intervention operation the government uses its avail-
able tradables, which we can think of as foreign reserves, to purchase nontradables, oﬀsetting
this operation by purchasing its own debt or by lending to either firms or banks. This operation
is equivalent to the government lending the tradables directly. This is, in fact, a new perspective
on the impact of sterilized foreign exchange intervention: the eﬀects of sterilized interventions
are explained by the impact of the sterilization on financial constraints.
   Third, the "threat" to intervene in the foreign exchange market, even if intervention does
not happen in equilibrium, can help prevent self-fulfilling pessimism and a move from a "good"
equilibrium to a "bad" outcome in which the exchange rate would be much depreciated. This
is the case in the presence of multiple equilibria, in which case reassuring market participants
that the real exchange rate will always be at the level associated with the good equilibrium is
indeed stabilizing.
   So unconventional policies do matter —indeed, they can have beneficial eﬀects– whenever
financial constraints matter. In this sense, the observed use of such policies during crisis times
is vindicated by the results of the model. Holding reserves also makes sense as a device to
prevent a crisis (here, a jump from a good to a bad equilibrium) from occurring.
   Conversely, if a non-crisis period is defined (somewhat arbitrarily) as one in which financial
constraints are not binding, then the unconventional policies studied here are unnecessary in
tranquil times. Hence our model does not provide a rationale for the pattern of intervention
and reserves accumulation observed, for example, in some Latin countries prior to the global
financial crisis.




References

 [1] Barro, R., “Are government bonds net wealth?,”Journal of Political Economy 82(6), 1974,
     1095-1117.




                                                27
 [2] Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler, “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations”,
    American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 1. (March 1989), pp. 14-31

 [3] Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy, "Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial Development and
    Underinsurance", Journal of Finance 58, 2 (2003), 867893.

 [4] Céspedes, L., R. Chang, and J. García Cicco, “Heterodox Monetary Policy,” in: Monetary
    Policy Under Financial Turbulence, Luis Cespedes, Roberto Chang, and Diego Saravia,
    eds., Banco Central de Chile, 2011, 219-282

 [5] Cespedes, L., R. Chang and A. Velasco. “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate Policy,”
    American Economic Review, 94 (2004), 1183-1193.

 [6] Cespedes, L., R. Chang and A. Velasco, "Is Inflation Target Still On Target", working
    paper, Inter American Development Bank, 2012.

 [7] Chang, R. , “Inflation Targeting, Reserves Accumulation, and Exchange Rate Management
    in Latin America,” Papers and Proceedings, II International FLAR Conference, Fondo
    Latinoamericano de Reservas, 2007.

 [8] Christiano, L. and D. Ikeda, "Government Policy, Credit Markets, and Economic Activity",
    NBER Working Paper 17142, 2011

 [9] Curdia, V., and M. Woodford, “Credit Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy," working
    paper, 2009.

[10] Disyatat, P. and G. Galati, "The eﬀectiveness of foreign exchange intervention in emerging
    market countries: Evidence from the Czech koruna," Journal of International Money and
    Finance, 26(3), 2007, 383-402.

[11] Eggertsson, G. and M. Woodford, "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Mon-
    etary Policy, " Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2003), 139-235.



                                              28
[12] Gertler, M. and P. Karadi, “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy”, Journal of
    Monetary Economics, January 2011

[13] Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki, “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business
    Cycle Analysis,” working paper, 2010.

[14] Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
    Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(3), 1997, 663-691.

[15] Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole, Inside and Outside Liquidity, MIT Press, 2011.

[16] Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore, “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy, 1997, v105 (2,
    April), 211-248.

[17] Krugman, P., "Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem, and Financial Crises, " in: Inter-
    national Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honor of Robert P Flood (P. Isard, A.
    Razin and A. Rose, eds.), Springer 2000.

[18] Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoﬀ, Foundations of International Macroeconomics, MIT Press,
    1996.

[19] Wallace, N., “A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations,”The American
    Economic Review, 71 (1981), June, pp. 267-274.




                                               29
                                                            9/10/2012




     Real Exchange Rate




                                               Ls




    S0




                                                    Loans
                          L0

                               Figure 1




     Real Exchange Rate




                                               Ls




S0 = S e



                                          Ld
                                                    Loans
                    Le    L0


                                Figure 2




                                                                   1
                                                   9/10/2012




Real Exchange Rate




                                      Ls


Se

S0
                                     Ld




                                           Loans
                     L0 Le


                       Figure 3




Real Exchange Rate




                                           Ls
                        E
                               E’
Se
S0
                                     Ld




                                           Loans
                             L0 Le


                       Figure 4




                                                          2
                                                                         9/10/2012




Real Exchange Rate




                                                                    Ls

                     Eold                 Enew

S0                                                                  Ld




                                                              Loans



                            Figure 5




Real Exchange Rate



                                                 Ls

                                                           Ls + F




S0
                                                      Ld




                                                              Loans
                       L0        L0 + F


                            Figure 6




                                                                                3
                                                                             9/10/2012




Real Exchange Rate

                     Ld

                                                   Ls

                                                   Ls + F
                                                                    Ls,new



S0




                                                            Loans
                          L0      L0 + F   L0new


                                Figure 7




Real Exchange Rate


          Ls




S0




                                                            Loans
                          L0

                               Figure 8




                                                                                    4
                                             9/10/2012




Real Exchange Rate




                Ld
        Ls



                     E’
S0
                      E



                                     Loans
                             L0

                          Figure 9




                                                    5
