                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE FRIENDS FACTOR:
HOW STUDENTS’ SOCIAL NETWORKS AFFECT THEIR ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT AND WELL-BEING?

                                                   Victor Lavy
                                                   Edith Sand

                                              Working Paper 18430
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w18430


                            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           October 2012




      We thank the Education Department of Tel-Aviv-Yafo Municipality and Yossef Shub, the CEO of
      Optimal Scheduling Systems, for making the data available for this study. Agnia Galesnik and Elior
      Cohen provided excellent research assistant. We also benefited from comments from Gigi Foster, Michael
      Friedman, Analia Schlosser, Tali Regev, Yona Rubinstein, Fabian Waldinger, and from seminar participants
      at the Hebrew University, Tel Aviv University, University of Warwick, University of Haifa, Ben Gurion
      University, Bank of Israel, at a conference in the Chinese University of Hong Kong, and at the Economic
      Workshop in IDC. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
      the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

      NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
      reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
      NBER publications.

      © 2012 by Victor Lavy and Edith Sand. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
      paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
      is given to the source.
The Friends Factor: How Students’ Social Networks Affect Their Academic Achievement
and Well-Being?
Victor Lavy and Edith Sand
NBER Working Paper No. 18430
October 2012
JEL No. D8,J0

                                                ABSTRACT

In this paper, we estimate the influence of social relationships on educational attainment and social
outcomes of students in school. More specifically, we investigate how losing different types of social
relationships during the transition from elementary to middle school affect students' academic progress
and general well-being. We use social relationships identified by the students themselves in elementary
school, as part of a unique aspect of the Tel Aviv school application process which allows sixth-grade
students to designate their middle schools of choice and to list up to eight friends with whom they
wish to attend that school. The lists create natural “friendship hierarchies” that we exploit in our analysis.
We designate the three categories of requited and unrequited friendships that stem from these lists
as follows: (1) reciprocal friends (students who list one another); and for those whose friendship requests
did not match: (2) followers (those who listed fellow students as friends but were not listed as friends
by these same fellow students) and (3) non-reciprocal friends (parallel to followers). Following students
from elementary to middle school enables us to overcome potential selection bias by using pupil fixed-effect
methodology. Our results suggest that the presence of reciprocal friends and followers in class has
a positive and significant effect on test scores in English, math, and Hebrew. However, the number
of friends in the social network beyond the first circle of reciprocal friends has no effect at all on students.
In addition, the presence of non-reciprocal friends in class has a negative effect on a student’s learning
outcomes. We find that these effects have interesting patterns of heterogeneity by gender, ability, and
age of students. In addition, we find that these various types of friendships have positive effects on
other measures of well-being, including social and overall happiness in school, time allocated for homework,
and whether one exhibits violent behavior.


Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Mount Scopus
Jerusalem 91905
ISRAEL
and University of Warwick, England
and also NBER
msvictor@mscc.huji.ac.il

Edith Sand
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978,
ISRAEL
edith.sand@boi.org.il
I. Introduction
         There are many educational programs or practices that separate students from their
social network in school or class. For example, policies that enhance school choice in order to
increase school productivity (by introducing competition among schools) often detach
students from their childhood social network.1 Other policies that often lead to students being
separated from their friends include educational reforms that redesign school zones or
catchment areas, programs which expand student access to high-performing schools,2 or
reassigning students when they advance to a higher grade in primary school.3 Social and
welfare programs, such as the US Moving to Opportunity, also detach children from their
childhood social environment.4 The consequences of such social detachment are usually not
taken into account in policy making circles, even though it is well documented in the
sociology and psychology literature that students' social circles are important for their
academic performances and overall development (Wentzel 1993, Roseth et al. 2008).5
         In this paper we investigate the influence of social relationships on educational
attainment and social outcomes of children in school while carefully addressing the
identification and the causal nature of the relationship. We base our analysis on a school
choice program that started in Tel- Aviv in 1994 which allowed students who completed
primary school to choose their middle school.6 While much of the literature on school choice
compares the benefits that accrue to students who receive their first school choice relative to
students who did not, this paper highlights another important and generally overlooked angle

1
  Many countries have pursued this type of policy. See for example papers on the U.S. (Cullen et al. 2005),
(Angrist et al. 2011); U.K (Gorad 2001); New Zealand (Fiske and Ladd 2000); and Colombia (Angrist et al.
2002).
2
   For example, the recently approved Boston Public School's proposal to reallocate facilities in an effort to
expand access to high performing schools has faced strong opposition from parents of children who under the
new plan will be detached from their childhood environment [http://www.change.org/petitions/mayor-thomas-
menino-stop-bps-superintendent-johnson-s-plan-to-uproot-mission-hill-school-k-8-2].
3
  For example, the Wake County school district has moved up to five percent of the school population in any
given year during the 1990s in order to balance schools' racial and income composition (Hoxby and Weingarth
2005).
4
  For an analysis of the Moving to Opportunity Experiment, see Katz et al. 2001, Katz et al, 2007, and Kling et
al. 2005.
5
  Many papers emphasize the social difficulties that students face during the transition from elementary school to
middle school due to puberty (Wigfield et al. 1991), and changes in social relationships with peers, family, and
authority figures (Elias et al. 1985, Eccles et al. 1993, Rudolph et al. 2001). This literature stresses the important
role of friendships in the adjustment process of students to the new school environment and even suggests that
there are long run implications of adjustment difficulties in middle school to latter educational attainments
(Wentzel 1998, Wentzel et al. 2004, Nelson and Debacker 2008, Veronneau et al. 2008). Furthermore,
friendships ties among children (especially of reciprocal nature) and the related parental networks are also both
central dimensions of social capital and its effect on human capital underscoring the importance of the potential
negative effect of breaking down social networks of adolescents (Coleman 1988).
6
  See Lavy (2010) for a further analysis of the effect of the Tel Aviv choice program on student achievements
and behavioral outcomes.

                                                          1
of this process: the importance of maintaining one's social circle throughout middle school.7
Our evidence suggests that taking into account the students' social circle can create a better
assignment of students among and within schools in general and improve the design of school
choice programs in particular.
        For our research, we take advantage of a unique dataset from a Tel Aviv school choice
program that allows us to analyze the students’ social relationships as they are undergoing a
major transition, from elementary to middle schools. These social relationships are identified
by the students themselves as the result of an unusual aspect of the Tel Aviv school
application process, which allows sixth-grade students to designate their middle schools of
choice and to list up to eight friends with whom they wish to attend that school. The lists
create natural “friendship hierarchies” that we exploit in our analysis. We designate the three
categories of requited and unrequited friendships that stem from these lists as follows:
reciprocal friends (students who list one another), and for those whose friendship requests did
not match: followers (those who listed fellow students as friends but were not listed as friends
by these same fellow students) and non-reciprocal friends (those who were listed by fellow
students but did not reciprocate by putting the same students on their own lists).
        Using these data, we examine the consequences of the school transition on the number
of a student’s friends and the types of friendships. Then, we estimate the effect of these
relationships on their educational attainment and social well-being. Since the assignment of
students in school is not random, the number and types of students' social relations can be
correlated with the schools and the students' characteristics. Following students from
elementary (sixth grade) to middle school (eighth grade) enables us to overcome potential
selection bias by using the fixed-effect methodology. This methodology eliminates student
and school or class unobservables that could be correlated with the error term and solves the
correlated effect problem. We further demonstrate that the changes between sixth and eighth
grade in the number of the various types of friendship are not correlated with observable
background characteristics, evidence that reduces further the likelihood that our results are
derived by selection bias.
        Our results suggest that the presence of reciprocal friends in class has a positive and
significant effect on test scores in English, math, and Hebrew. This effect is limited to the first
circle of such friends, while any extensions of the social network have no effect on the

7
  The optimal design of school choice programs is the focus of much recent research. For example, in a recent
serious of studies, Abdulkadiro et al. 2003, 2005, 2011 and Pathak and Sönmez (forthcoming), analyze the
optimal design of admission rules in school choice programs where students take into account strategic
considerations when submitting their preferences for schools.

                                                     2
academic performance of students.8 The presence of followers also has significant positive
effects on student outcomes and this effect also carries to outside of the classroom. Non-
reciprocal friends in class and in school have the opposite (negative) effect on a student’s
learning outcomes. We also examine the effect of the "quality" of reciprocal friends, which
we measure by their parental schooling, and find that it has a positive effect on cognitive
outcomes. We also find that these effects have interesting patterns of heterogeneity by gender,
ability, and student age. In addition, we present in the paper other effects of these various
types of friendships on other measures of well-being, including social and overall happiness
in school, time allocated for studying at home, and whether one exhibits violent behavior.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II, we present a review of the
literature. In section III, we present our data. Section IV explains the identification and
estimation methodologies. We detail our results in section V and offer conclusions and policy
implications in section VI.


II. Literature Review
        From childhood to adolescence, social relationships play a central role in shaping
individuals' attitude toward education (Coleman 1961). The psychology and sociology
literature suggests that various kinds of relationships have different impacts on individual
behavior9. This literature has examined the relationship between friendship networks and
children’s educational outcomes and social well being, but it presents evidence that is
generally cross-sectional in nature, with little attention paid to a potential correlation between
omitted variables friendship.
        Many papers have studied extensively the role of social interactions in shaping
individual behavior and their influence on economic activity and address selection bias




8
  This result differs from that of Calvo-Amengol et al. (2009) which presents evidence on the importance of an
individual position in the network for their educational achievements (given by their Katz-Bonacich centrality
measure).
9
  Friendships ties among children, especially of reciprocal nature are said to be a source of emotional support
(Hartup 1996, Crosnoe et al 2003, Vaquera and Kao 2008); help to deal with problems (Azmitia and
Montogomery 1993); and can also function as academic resources (Cauce 1986). The effect of popularity and
social status on educational outcomes is more ambiguous. While most of the literature emphasis the fact that
centrality in a peer group is usually associated with promoting students' self-esteem, since aggressive children
often holds central position within their peer group, it can also promote aggression and decrease children's
academic outcomes (Salmivalli et al. 1997). Research examining the different types of rejected children suggests
that negative peer experiences may exacerbate academic difficulties by undermining motivation to attend school
or by increasing the exposure to other marginalized peers who de-value academic success (Buhs and Ladd 2001).

                                                       3
problems.10 The literature on social interactions in education focuses mainly on peer effects
on educational outcomes. However, many of these papers are prone to severe selection bias
problems. Several papers identified peer effects by investigating the implications of random
assignments of college students in dormitories or classes on the students' grades (Sacerdote
2001, Zimmerman 2003, De Giorgi et al. (2010)). Alternatively, several studies have
examined the effects of small changes in the characteristics of classrooms throughout the
years on the average attainments of students in these classrooms (Hanushek et al. 2003, Lavy
and Schlosser 2011, Lavy et al. 2012a, Lavy et al. 2012b).
        Another related difficulty in the literature is the reflection problem. As explained by
Manski (1993), there is a difficulty in distinguishing between the endogenous effects (how
individual outcomes are affected their peers' outcomes) from the exogenous effects (the
influence of the peers' exogenous characteristics). Bramoullé et al. (2009) characterize the
necessary and sufficient conditions for solving this problem within the social networks
framework, by examining broad social networks that include only partially overlapping
groups of friends. In other words, the paper exploits networks that extend beyond a given
student’s immediate friends to include friends of friends, and use the characteristics of friends
of friends as instrumental variable to identify the impact of the student's friends. Similarly,
Lin (2010) uses detailed data on adolescents’ friendships links from the National Longitudinal
Study of Adolescent Health, and finds that both endogenous and exogenous effects exist in
student academic attainments. In assessing to what extent early friendship choices play a role
in an individual’s later educational attainments (after more than 10 years), Patacchini et al.
(2011) find significant effects only linked with friends in grades 10-12 but not from friends
made in lower grades.
        Finally, another form of social relationship that is addressed in our paper is the broad
social network of the students, beyond the first circle of friends. The impact of broader forms
of social interactions such as children's social networks is usually associated with the social
capital embodied in networks that takes the form of more trust and cooperation among
children in the network (Coleman 1988). Empirically, however, this issue had been addressed
(to the best of our knowledge) only by Calvo-Amengol et al. (2009) who show that the


10
   For example, many papers have investigated the importance of social interactions in explaining the way that
new information is diffused (such as the diffusion of new technologies (Conley and Udry 2010) and the
dissemination of information about job openings (Granovetter 1973)); patterns of risk sharing behavior
(Fafchamps and Lund 2003, De Weerdt and Dercon 2006); and decisions regarding education, participation in
welfare programs, criminal activity, and fertility (Bertrand et al. 2000; Bayer et al. 2009).


                                                      4
educational outcomes of students are proportional to their position in the network, given by
their Katz-Bonacich centrality measure.


III. Data
A. Data Sets
        In this paper we use a unique database of friendship networks of students that
participated in the Tel Aviv school choice program in 2000-2004. A new school choice
program started in Tel Aviv in September 1994. It replaced a busing integration program that
assigned some students to schools in the city out of their school district. The choice program
allowed students who completed primary school a choice of a middle school. Each student
could choose from a set of five schools, three of which were outside his school district. The
school choice program opened the possibility for a better match between students and schools,
and the system had the potential to increase school productivity by introducing competition
among schools.
        Within this framework, each student, at the end of sixth grade, was asked to rank their
preferred five middle schools, and to list up to eight peers with whom they would like to be
assigned in middle school. In case of excess demand for enrollment in one school, students
were assigned with one or more of their chosen peers to a subsequent school, so as to
maintain a balanced enrollment across schools based on socio-economic level, educational
achievement, gender, and disciplinary record. On average 93 percent of the students received
their first school choice and most of the remaining 7 percent received their second choice. Out
of the students that nominated at least one friend (94.5 percent did so), 93 percent had indeed
at least one nominated friend in the same middle school and 87 percent had two such
nominated friends. However, the respective means are much lower when nominated friends
are counted in the same class, 82 and 61 percent.
        The empirical analysis of this paper is based on the Tel Aviv municipality's
administrative records of sixth-grade students in schools that participated in the Tel Aviv
school choice program, for the years 2000 and 2002 and 2003. The cohort of 2001 is not
included in this study because the essential data on school choice and friendships are not
available.11 These records contain an individual identifier, a school and class identifier in the
sixth and seventh grades, sixth-grade tests scores in math, Hebrew and English (the average


11
   We obtained the data from the School Authority of Tel Aviv and the files for the 2001 cohorts were erased
from their archive by mistake.

                                                     5
grade in each subject during sixth grade), and student preferences for middle school
enrollment and friend assignments.
         In order to test the effect of changing a student's friendship network on their
educational and social outcomes during the transition from elementary school to middle
school, we combine this dataset on student social network with data from two additional
sources. The first is administrative records from the Israel Ministry of Education for the three
cohorts that we study. Each student’s record contains their class identifier, school identifier,
and demographic information (gender, ethnicity, number of siblings, and level of parents’
education). The second source of data is the GEMS records (Growth and Effectiveness
Measures for Schools - Meizav in Hebrew) collected by the Division of Evaluation and
Measurement of the Ministry of Education.12 This dataset includes test scores of eighth-
graders from a series of tests (in math, science, Hebrew and English) and data from fifth-
through ninth-grade students’ surveys that include questions addressing various aspects of
class environment and student behavior.13
         The final merged Panel data set includes data from sixth- and eighth-grade student
questionnaires, test scores for 2000-2002, 2002-2004 and 2003-2005, and student
characteristics.14 Table 1 presents descriptive statistics, for the size, number of schools, and
number of classes for the Panel data set. We use data for the three sixth grade cohorts: 2000,
2002 and 2003. The school choice program included 42 secular primary schools and 14
secular middle schools15. Nearly every primary-school student (about 97 percent) in those
schools took part of the program and listed at least one of the two preferences – the preferred
school enrollment or peer assignments.16 The sample included 1018 students from the 2000
cohort, 929 from the 2002 cohort, and 913 in the 2003 cohort. The table indicates that the
cohorts are similar across a host of variables: parental education, average family size, and
ethnicity.



12
   The GEMS is not administered for school accountability purposes, and only aggregated results at the district
level are published. For more information on the GEMS see the Division of Evaluation and Measurement
website (in Hebrew): http://cms.education.gov.il/educationcms/units/rama/odotrama/odot.htm.
13
   The GEMS is administered at the midterm of each school year to a representative 1-in-2 sample of all
elementary and middle schools in Israel, so that each school participates in GEMS once every two years. The
proportion of students tested is above 90 percent, and the rate of questionnaire completion is roughly 91 percent.
The raw test scores uses a 1-to-100 scale that we transform into z-scores to facilitate interpretation of the results.
14
   Since every school is sampled once in two years, we observe only half of the sixth- and eighth-grade cohorts
in each pair of years.
15
   The number of middle schools presented in the paper refers only to middle schools with GEMS test scores.
16
   If a student listed his or her preferred school but not his or her preferred peers (about 6 percent of the
students), we assume that he did not have friends with whom he or she wanted to be with in middle school.

                                                          6
B. Definition and measurement of friendship types
         In this study we are able to distinguish between different types of friendships such as
reciprocal versus non-reciprocal. In particular, our database allows us to map students' social
networks in elementary schools and in middle schools (after the students’ new
assignments).17 By using the students' peer preferences we are able to define seven different
types of students' social relations: (1) self-nominated friends - students which individual i
wants to be with in middle school; (2) overall followers - students who want to be with
individual i in middle school; (3) reciprocal friends - the nominated friends who reciprocated
with friendship nominations; (4) followers - students who nominated individual i but were not
reciprocally nominated as friends by i; (5) non-reciprocal friends - students nominated by
individual i but who did not reciprocate with friendship nominations of student i; (6) wide
social network - includes all reciprocal friends of reciprocal friends and so on of student i,;
and (7) narrow social network - includes only the two first circles of reciprocal friends.
         Table 2 lists the descriptive statistics of these social relations at the classroom level
(columns 1-3) and at the school level (columns 4-6). The table indicates that the number of
reciprocal friends, followers, and non-reciprocal friends is much lower than the number of
self nominated friends or overall followers since the definitions of the former take into
account the reciprocal nature of the relationship. The number of self nominated and reciprocal
friends in class and in school varies from zero to eight. The range in the number of overall
followers is wider, from zero to 20 in sixth grade and from zero to 13 in eighth grade. The
range in the size of the largest social network is from zero to 35 in sixth grade and from zero
to 23 in eighth grade.
         The table indicates that on average students have more reciprocal friends than either
followers or non-reciprocal friends across almost all groups. For example, the number of
reciprocal friends in class is 3.1 in sixth grade while the number of followers is 2.48. In
addition, the table indicates that all types of friendships decline between sixth and eighth
grade. For example, the number of reciprocal friends drops by about half to 1.50 in eighth
grade and the same pattern is observed in the count of various friends at the school level.18
The sharp decline in the number of both self nominated and reciprocal friends is due to the
city authority not guaranteeing the assignment of all requested friends to the same school nor
17
   It should be noted that our definition of friendships differ from the one usually used in the psychology and
sociology literature that relies mainly on more direct questionnaires regarding students' social relationships.
18
   Another expression of these changes is the observed decline in the proportion of students who have at least
one reciprocal friend in middle school. Only 84 percent of the students had at least one reciprocal friend in
school and only 70 percent had at least one such friend in class whereas the respective rates in sixth grade were
much higher.

                                                        7
to the same class. We will rely on this significant variation in number of friendships by types
between sixth- and eighth-grade schools and classes when we estimate the friends’ effect on
students test scores. Similarly, the mean number of friends in the largest social network in
class is 9.92 in sixth grade and drops sharply to 3.33 in eighth grade.
       We also compare social relationships according to subgroup in Table A1. For
example, the table indicates that girls have more social relationships of all kinds than boys.
Younger students have fewer reciprocal friends and followers and more non-reciprocal friends
than students who are in the same grade but older. Students of highly educated parents have
more reciprocal friends, fewer non-reciprocal friends and considerably more followers than
students of low-skilled parents. These patterns are consistent at the class level as well as at the
school level.
       As a final comment, we note that reciprocal friendship signals ‘stronger’ and more
committed relationship than the other types of friendships and this is evident in the correlation
of this type of friendship with preferences for schools. For example, 86 percent of a student’s
reciprocal friends chose the same school as their first choice, while the comparable statistic
for followers is 79 percent and for non-reciprocal friends is only 70 percent.


IV. Identification and Estimation
       The main goal of this paper is to estimate the effect of students' social relationships on
their academic and social outcomes. As noted, the data allows us to track students from sixth
grade in primary school to eighth grade in middle school. We use this feature to construct a
longitudinal dataset at the student level to examine how changes in the number of friends and
by types of friendships lead to changes in students' test scores and general well-being. The
transition from primary to middle school is based on students’ school and peer choices. Thus,
the quality of middle school (resources, teachers, and other measures of real and perceived
schooling quality) and the assignments of peers are endogenous. In order to resolve the
potential selection bias that arises from endogeneity and omitted variables, we use an
identification strategy that contrasts the change in exposure to the various type of friends
from grades six to eight among students who followed the same elementary-to-middle-school
transition path, and even among students who were in the same class in both sixth and eighth
grades. The primary-school and middle-school fixed effects control for all the characteristics
of the schools. The regression’s within-class estimation, based on including sixth grade and
eighth grade class fixed effects (which absorb the school wide fixed effects), also control for
class-level unobserved characteristics, such as variation in teacher quality, class size,
                                                8
classroom climate, and average classroom peer quality.19 We will consider this model, as well
as extending it to include individual fixed effects. The within-pupil estimation eliminates all
unobserved characteristics that do not change between sixth and eighth grades. More
formally, we assume that the cognitive achievements of pupils in grades six and eight are
determined by the following equations:
(1) yicjt  i  c   j   t  1RFicjt  2 Ficjt  uc  icjt
     8            8     8     8        8          8      8     8



(2)            6
              yicjt  i  c6   j6   t6  1RFicjt6  2 Ficjt6  uc6   icjt
                                                                                6



where y icjt denotes the outcome of student i, from class c, subject j and year t; i is the student
fixed effect;  c is the class/school fixed effect;  j is the subject fixed effect;  t is the year
fixed effect; RF is reciprocal friends; and F is for followers. We will use three measures of
reciprocal friends (RF): (1) a narrower definition that includes only own reciprocal friends;
(2) a very wide definition that includes all reciprocal friends in the social network.; (3) a
definition that includes only the first two circles of reciprocal friends. The error term in the
equation includes a school-specific random element u c that allows for any type of correlation
within observations of the same school across classes and an individual random element  icjt .
Differencing equations 1 and 2 yields:
(3) yicjt8  yicjt6  (c8  c6 )  ( 8j   j6 )  ( 8j   6j )  1 ( RFicjt8  RFicjt6 )  2 ( Ficjt8  Ficjt6 )  (uc8  uc6 )  ( icjt8   icjt6 )
The coefficients of interest are β1 and β2, which capture the effects of the two different types
of friendships. For the purpose of comparison, we will also present OLS estimates of
regressions that include only cohort and subject dummies as controls and OLS estimates that
also include a pupil’s individual characteristic as controls, including the mother’s and father’s
years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status, and ethnic origin, and indicators
for missing values in these covariates.
              We will also present estimates from a specification where we add to equation (3) an
interaction term of the primary-school and middle-school fixed effects and of the primary-

19
  Students in Israel’s primary and middle schools are rarely grouped into classes on the basis of ability or family
background; in fact, such practices are forbidden by law. Therefore, classes in primary schools with multiple
classrooms at the same grade level are typically formed on a random basis as classes are formed in a way that
creates social integration by mixing students from different socioeconomic backgrounds. A 1968 education
reform established a three-tier structure of schooling in Israel: primary (grades one-six), middle (seven–nine),
and high (10–12). The reform established neighborhood school zoning as the basis of primary enrollment and
integration, sometimes with busing of students out of their neighborhoods in middle and high school. Tracking
and sorting of students in primary- and middle-school classes were outlawed, and the law is strictly enforced.
Since all classes within a grade are composed of students who are on average of equal ability teachers are
assigned to classes more or less randomly. As a result, the possibility of better teachers seeking to avoid
assignment to lower-performing classes is irrelevant, as is the likelihood of “teacher-shopping” by parents. We
note here also that the lack of tracking in primary and middle schools in Israel also rules out the possibility that
class composition changes across subjects. Therefore, the students in a given class rank the same teachers.


                                                                                         9
school class and the middle-school class fixed effects. In these specifications the
identification is based on students who had exactly the same transition path: in the first
specification we compare students who attended the same primary and the same middle
school and in the second specification students that attended the same class in primary school
and the same class in middle school. Naturally, we include in each of these two specifications
the respective main effects of the interaction terms and implicitly the pupil fixed effect as
well. We will also test whether the estimates obtained from these additional specifications are
sensitive to controlling for student’s background characteristics. These sensitivity tests will
provide indirect evidence about whether the change in number of different types of
friendships is correlated with student’s predetermined characteristics which we will also test
directly by running standard balancing regressions.


V. Results: Effect of Types of Friendships on Academic Outcomes
A. Main Results
       Table 3 reports the estimated effect of the number of friends by type of friendship on
pupils’ academic success according to equations 1-3. The test scores in all three subjects
(math, English, and Hebrew) are pooled together, and each regression has subject and cohort
fixed effects. Each estimate presented in the first four columns comes from a separate
regression. We estimate the impact of reciprocal friends (column 1), followers (column 2),
wide social network (column 3), and wide social network minus reciprocal friends (column 4)
on academic outcomes. The last three columns (columns 5-7) show the coefficients from one
joint regression that includes the number of reciprocal friends, followers, and wide social
network minus reciprocal friends together. Panel A shows results at the class level and Panel
B shows results at the school level. We report results for five different specifications.
       The simple OLS estimates in columns 1-4 are significant for the four types of
friendships, indicating that friendships have a significant and positive effect on pupil
academic performance. The estimates for reciprocal friends and for followers are robust to the
addition of pupil characteristics: parents’ levels of schooling, number of siblings, and ethnic
background. Remarkably, these estimates are also robust to adding school fixed effects or
class fixed effects to the regression. In fact, comparing the estimates of these two treatments
in the first row (OLS regressions without any controls) to those in the fourth row (regressions
with class fixed effects and pupil characteristics) shows almost identical estimates. However,
while a model that includes pupil fixed effects and class fixed effects leads to a sharp decline
of about two thirds in the estimates of both reciprocal friends and followers, these estimates
                                                10
still remain with the same sign and significantly different from zero. This result may suggest
that the selection bias for these two measures of friendship is mainly at the pupil level.
           The change in the estimates of the wide social network, with and without the first
circle of reciprocal friends measure, show a different pattern as these two estimates fall
sharply once we control for pupil characteristics: the effect of the wide social network falls by
two thirds to 0.004 (sd=0.002) and the effect of the wide social network without the first
circle of reciprocal friends even becomes negative.20 However, once we add the school or the
class fixed effects, these two estimates increase again to their level at the first row and are
statistically significant. However, a model that includes pupil fixed effects and class fixed
effects leads to a sharp decline in both estimates, and both estimates are not significantly
different from zero.
           In columns 5-7 of Table 3 we report estimates from regressions that include the
number of reciprocal friends, followers, and the size of the wide social network (minus
reciprocal friends) as treatment variables. The table indicates that the estimates for reciprocal
friends and followers in columns 5 and 6 respectively are only marginally lower than the
respective estimates in columns 1 and 2 despite some degree of collinearity between the two
friendship measures. Similar to above, adding the pupil fixed effects changes the estimates
sharply relative to the specification with class fixed effects and student characteristics. The
table indicates that the estimate of reciprocal friends declines from 0.071 in the fourth
specification to 0.019 when pupil fixed effects are included in the regression. This result
implies that the addition of one reciprocal friend raises test scores in all three subjects by
0.019 standard deviation of the test scores distribution. This is a relatively small effect.
However, if we compare two students, one without any reciprocal friends in class and a
second with eight reciprocal friends in class (the maximum observed in the data in sixth or
eighth grade), the latter student will experience a gain in each subject by 0.15 of a standard
deviation, a boost which is non-trivial.
           Furthermore, the estimate of followers declines from 0.060 in the fourth specification
to 0.035 when pupil fixed effects are included in the regression. Interestingly, the estimated
effect of followers is larger than that of reciprocal friends as an increase of one follower will
improve test scores in all three subjects by a 0.035 standard deviation. This implies that an
increase from zero followers to the mean number of followers in primary school (2.48) will
improve average test scores by a 0.087 standard deviation. Similarly, an increase from zero


20
     Appendix Table 2 reports these estimates for the 'narrower' social network.

                                                          11
followers to 15 followers (the maximum observed in primary school) will improve test scores
by more than half a standard deviation, which is a dramatic difference. As an additional way
to assess the overall magnitude of these estimates, we simulate how one’s academic success
would change if the transition to middle school did not entail changing their social circle. In
other words, we model the dynamics of the circumstances as if students were able to stay with
all of their childhood friends. Based on the summary statistics in Table 2, we assume the
students would have on average an additional 1.60 reciprocal friends and 1.81 followers.
Based on the estimates for our preferred specification with class and student fixed effects
(columns 5 and 6), this scenario increases their score by 0.096 standard deviations.
       The table also indicates in column 7 that the effect of the wide social network is
negative and is not significantly different from zero in all specifications. This suggests that
beyond the first circle of reciprocal friends, one's social network has no effect on pupil
academic results. In appendix Table A2 we present estimates where we replace the 'wide'
social network variable with a 'narrower' measure that only includes the first two circles of
reciprocal friends. These estimates reaffirm our finding from Table 3 that any social network
beyond reciprocal friends has no effect on pupil academic performance. Significantly, this
result differs from that of Calvo-Amengol et al. (2009) which presents evidence on the
importance of an individual position in the network, given by his Katz-Bonacich centrality
measure, for his educational achievements.
       In Panel B, we change the treatment variable from number of friends in class to their
number in school. The table shows several interesting results. First, similar to the pattern that
we found in Panel A, the estimates for the first four specifications are very stable across all
columns for our school-level friendship measures. In addition, there is a sharp drop in the
estimates once we add the pupil fixed effects. Second, the table shows that the estimated
effect of followers on test scores is significant, and the coefficient is similar in size (0.033) to
our Panel A estimate (0.038). However, the elasticity of the effect for this friendship is much
lower than the respective estimate in Panel A since the mean of this treatment in school is
much larger than the respective mean in class. Third, the coefficient of reciprocal friends
diminishes practically to zero. One possibility for this result is that there are very small
differences between sixth and eighth grades in the number of reciprocal friends in school. For
example, the mean number of reciprocal friends in primary school is 3.50, and in middle
school it is 2.72, a difference of only 0.78 friends in one’s school. In contrast, difference in
the number of reciprocal friends at the class level from elementary to middle school is 1.60.
However, this does not seem to be the explanation because we also observe small differences
                                                12
in the number of followers in school between sixth and eighth (1.17) grades; yet the estimated
effect of this type of friendship in school remained positive and significant. Fourth, the effect
of the social network measures at the school level is practically zero as was the case when we
measured it at the class level. Consequently, in the rest of the paper, we will measure the
social network by counting only the first circle of reciprocal friends and not include any other
measure of the social network beyond this first circle.21
         Non reciprocal friends are students who “rejected” the friendship offer of a student. In
this section we examine whether this type of friendship has an effect on student academic
achievement. Research examining the different types of rejected children suggests that
negative peer experiences may exacerbate academic difficulties by undermining motivation to
attend school or by increasing the exposure to other marginalized peers who de-value
academic success (Buhs and Ladd 2001). We examine the effect of the three different types of
friendships (reciprocal friends, followers, and non-reciprocal friends) by including each
separately in a regression with different specifications and by including all three together.
These estimates are presented in Table 4 and the focus of the table is on measures friendships
at the class level. The estimates of reciprocal friends and of followers can be compared to the
respective estimates presented in Table 3.
         First, the table indicates that the pattern of how the estimates change as we vary the
regression specification is very similar to what we observed in Table 3. Interestingly, the
effect of non-reciprocal friends presented in columns 3 and 6 does not vary across the first
four specifications, but drops sharply in our preferred specification with pupil fixed effects.
Second, the table indicates that the estimates of reciprocal friends and followers are identical
to the respective estimates presented in Table 3. This result implies that adding non-reciprocal
friends to the regression leaves all other parameter estimates unchanged, indicating that the
conditional correlations between these friendship measures are low.
         The most interesting result in Table 4 is the sign and size of the effect of non-
reciprocal friends. The number of non-reciprocal friends has a negative effect and its point
estimate in the regressions is identical to the estimates of reciprocal friends. This pattern is
identical in all five specifications. For example, the effect of non-reciprocal friends is -0.027
(sd=0.006) in column 3 and is -0.014 (sd=0.006) in column 6 in our preferred specifications.

21
  We noted in the data section that 93 percent of students received their first school choice. Our results will be
biased if receiving second choice affected the number of friends in school or in class and also affected test
scores directly. To assess this threat for the validity of our interpretation of causal effect we estimated the
models of Table 3 and Table A2 keeping in the sample only students who received their first choice school. The
results are identical to those reported in the paper and are available from the authors upon request.

                                                       13
These two estimates almost completely offset the effect of reciprocal friends when the two
friendship types (reciprocal and non-reciprocal) are measured in class. This conclusion is also
correct when we compare the elasticities of these two effects since the mean of reciprocal
friends in class (3.1 in sixth grade and 1.5 in eighth grade) and the mean of non-reciprocal
friends in class (2.38 in sixth grade and 0.66 in eighth grade) are not very different. When we
include in the regression the measure of self-defined (nominated) friends instead of the two
separate measures the estimated effect is practically zero. These results are presented in
columns 4-5 in Table A3. This important result can explain why studies that measured peer
quality on the number of friendships without distinguishing the two types of friendships
obtained zero effects for peer measures.
         In Table 5, we present results of estimating equation (3) with interactions. Panel B
estimates the effects of the interaction of the primary and middle school fixed effects and
Panel C estimates the effects of the interaction of the primary class fixed effects and the
middle school class fixed effects. In both of these respective panels, the first difference
specification accounts for the pupil’s fixed effect. In each panel we report results from two
specifications, without and with controls for pupil’s background characteristics. In all the
regressions for the table we include only the classroom level of reciprocal friends (column 1),
followers (column 2), and both (columns 3 and 4) as treatment variables. We exclude the
broader measures of the friendship network due to our Table 3 results which suggested that
they have no effect on test outcomes. As well, the effects for our other friendship measures
are not sensitive to this exclusion.
         In order to better assess the impact of our interaction terms, Panel A presents our
baseline results (an estimate of equation (3)) without any of the interaction terms. The effect
of both friendship types are identical to the respective estimates presented in Table 3, where
the effect of reciprocal friends on test scores is 0.018 (sd=0.007) and for followers is 0.035
(sd=0.006) for our preferred specification.22 Adding the interaction term for primary and
middle school fixed effects in the first row of Panel B leaves the original estimates almost
unchanged, where the effect of reciprocal friends on test scores is 0.017 (sd=0.008) and for
followers is 0.031 (sd=0.005). Similarly, controlling for pupil characteristics leaves these two
estimates almost unchanged (second row of Panel B). As well, the results in Panel C are very




22
   This is another indication that including or excluding the social network measure from the regression does not
affect at all the estimates of reciprocal friends and followers.

                                                       14
similar to out Panel B results, which indicates that the class interaction terms have only a
marginal effect on our baseline results.23
         The results in Table 5 are significant for two reasons. First, the table indicates that the
interaction terms had no significant effect on our results. This implies that there is no need to
base our estimates on a comparison of students who attended the same school or class in
primary school and the same school or class in middle school. Second, the table indicates that
our results were unaffected by controlling for student characteristics. This implies that
changes in the number of friends or the types of friendships are not correlated with student
characteristics. In other words, there is no selection bias due to any correlation between the
treatment measures and observable characteristics of students that are highly correlated with
potential outcomes of students.
         In Table 6, we present additional evidence regarding this important threat to our
identification strategy. In particular, the table presents "balancing tests" for the number and
different types of friends in class where we regresses directly student characteristics on the
treatment measures. We examine seven student characteristics: gender, number of siblings,
father’s years of education, mother's years of education, and three ethnicity indicators (child
or parents born in Asia/Africa, Europe/America, or in Israel). The estimates presented in the
tables are the regression coefficients of each of these student characteristics on the number of
friends of a given type. We include as controls the cohort, primary and middle school class
fixed effects, and their interaction. Each column presents estimates for one of the following
friendship types: self-nominated friends, reciprocal friends, followers, non-reciprocal friends,
wide social network, and narrow social network.
         Overall, the table indicates that there is no evidence of a relationship between these
characteristics and the change in number of friends of each type. First, there are 42 estimates
presented in Table 6 and only 3 are significant or marginally significant. Second, regarding
the two main friendship types that we use in Table 5 (reciprocal friends and followers), only
father’s year of schooling for followers is significant and "unbalanced" (column 3). In
combination with our Table 5 results, the overall evidence suggests that there is no systematic
imbalance in the relationship between student characteristics and the change in the number of
friends between sixth and eighth grade.


23
  It should be noted that one notable difference between the panels is that the effect of reciprocal friends on test
scores 0.029 (sd=0.012) is larger in Panel C than in Panels A and B. However, this difference most likely reflects
differences in the sample size as there are relatively few students in the sample who advanced from the same
class in primary school to the same class in middle school.

                                                        15
B. Results Based on an Alternative Identification Strategy
          In the previous section, the main potential limitation of the identification strategy is
that the number of middle-school reciprocal friends might be a function of the number of
primary-school friends. In order to explicitly control for the effect of these lagged friendships,
in this section, we estimate a model with eighth-grade test scores as the dependent variable
and the number of friends by type in eighth grade as our treatment variable. At the same time,
we will control for the number of sixth-grade friends by type, for sixth-grade test scores, as
well as for individual characteristics, school fixed effects, and class fixed effects. 24 We
estimate the following model:

(4) yicjt  c   j   j  1 RFicjt  1 RFicjt  2 Ficjt  2 Ficjt   yicjt   X icjt  uc   icjt
     8       8     8     8         8           6          8          6         6                 8      8




where    X icjt     denotes characteristics of student i, from class c, subject j and year t. The
coefficients of interest are β1 and β2. The identification strategy here is selection based on
observables. The identification assumption is that conditional on class and subject fixed
effects, sixth-grade test scores, student characteristics, and the number of sixth-grade
friendships by type, the number of friends in eighth grade can be considered randomly
assigned.
          In Table 7 we report estimates for equation (4), our alternative identification strategy.
In columns 1-4, we report estimates from one joint regression for the impact of the number of
reciprocal friends and followers on eighth grade test scores. The table reports estimates for the
following specifications: (1) OLS regression models with no controls (except subject and
cohort dummies); (2) models with lagged controls; (3) models with pupil characteristics; (4)
models with school fixed effects; and (5) models with class fixed effects. In the sixth row, we
report estimates from a regression where we add lagged sixth-grade test scores as controls.
          The estimates in column 1 show that reciprocal friends have a positive effect on test
scores, and the simple OLS estimate is 0.108. The estimate declines only marginally to 0.091
after controlling for the number of sixth-grade friendships. However, the estimate drops
sharply to 0.044 when we add student characteristics as controls. Adding school or class fixed
effects leaves the estimate practically unchanged, but adding the sixth-grade test score lowers
the estimate slightly to 0.038. Note that this estimate is about twice the estimate reported in
Table 3 (0.018). Significantly, the sensitivity of our estimate of reciprocal friends to student
characteristics and lagged test scores is an indication that we cannot exclusively rely on the


24
  Even though this model utilizes only the cross section data for eighth grade, it is still possible to use school
and class fixed effects since the treatments vary by student.

                                                               16
cross section regression model in identifying the effect of reciprocal friends on test scores. In
column 2, we also control for lagged sixth-grade test scores. The results of the last
specification imply that the effect of sixth-grade reciprocal friends (which was seen as
marginal above) is nearly zero (0.007).
         Furthermore, while the pattern of the estimated effect of followers from the first to the
fifth specification in column 3 is somewhat different than the pattern for the estimated effect
of reciprocal friends, the end result is similar: the estimated effect of eighth-grade followers
on eighth-grade test scores is positive and significant. Interestingly, the effect of followers on
test scores in this table (0.031) is very similar to the respective estimated effect presented in
Table 4 (0.035), and the standard deviation errors of these two estimates are also very similar.
         Overall, the results from Table 7 do not rule out the possibility that the number of
middle-school reciprocal friends and followers might still be correlated with students'
unobservables. We therefore consider an alternative identification strategy that is based on a
model which yields a value added equation (the change in test score between sixth and eighth
grades) that is conditional on the number of friends in primary school. Assuming that the test
scores for sixth grade students are only a function of the current number of the two different
types of friendships, we consider the following model:
(5)
           6
          yicjt  i  c6   j6   t6  1RFicjt6  2 Ficjt6  uc6   icjt
                                                                            6



In this equation, test scores in sixth grade are not dependent on previous friends since we are
assuming that primary school is the initial period where students develop school childhood
friendships. However, we do allow for childhood friendships formed during primary school to
have an effect on academic performance during middle school. We then specify the following
relationship for eighth grade where all terms in the equation have the same notation as in the
sixth-grade equation:
(6)     8
      y icjt   i   c8   8j   t8  1 RFicjt
                                                8
                                                      2 Ficjt
                                                            8
                                                                  1 RFicjt
                                                                         6
                                                                               2 RFicjt
                                                                                      6
                                                                                           u c8   icjt
                                                                                                     8



(7)
       8
      yicjt  yicjt6  (c8  c6 )  ( j8   j6 )  ( 8j   6j )  1 RFicjt8  (1  1 ) RFicjt6  2 Ficjt8  ( 2  2 ) Ficjt6  (uc8  uc6 )  (icjt8  icjt6 )

         This equation leads to a regression specification with both current and lagged number
of friendships by type as determinants of test score value added between sixth and eighth
grades. Assuming that student characteristics remains constant between the two grades, the
student's fixed effect term is dropped from equation (7) by the difference operator as does the
subject fixed effects. However, the class or school fixed effects are included in equation (7)
since the students are in two different classes (or schools) in the two grades. Notably, the



                                                                                   17
main difference between equation (7) and equation (3) (our main model) is that equation (7)
allows for the effects of current and lagged friendships to be different.
       In Table 8 we report estimates for equation (7). Columns 1-2 present the estimates in
which each type of friendship is used separately in the regression. In columns 3-4 we present
estimates in which eighth grade reciprocal friends and followers are included jointly in the
regression. In column 1, the OLS estimate is 0.041, and it drops to 0.016 after student
characteristics are added to the regression. Adding school or class fixed effects only changes
the estimate marginally. For example, with class fixed effects the results of reciprocal friends
on value added test scores is 0.028 (sd=0.009). In column 2, the estimates show a different
pattern with little variation from the simple OLS estimate (0.038) to the class fixed effect
estimate (0.041). The results in columns 3-4 follow approximately the same pattern of the
estimates presented in columns 1-2 with respect to the effect of the variation in specification
on the point estimates. Furthermore, the estimates in column 3-4 for our class fixed effect
specification are nearly identical to the respective estimates in columns 1-2. However, the
most remarkable result in Table 8 is that the effect of reciprocal friends and followers based
on our preferred specification (with class fixed effects, student characteristics and sixth-grade
measures of friendships) are identical to the respective estimates in Table 5 based on pupil
and the class primary and middle school class fixed effects and their interaction fixed effect.
For example, the effect of reciprocal friendships on test scores in the table is 0.025, while the
respective estimate in Table 5 is 0.029. Similarly, the effect of followers on test scores in the
table is 0.031, while the respective estimate in Table 5 is 0.032. Remarkably, two alternative
identification models with different assumptions lead to the same results. The similar results
in both Tables 5 and 8 mutually endorse our findings, giving us additional confidence that our
results and our identification of the mechanisms at work are accurate.
C. Estimated Effects by Subject
       The results reported in the previous sections assumed that the effect of each of the
friendships types is the same in all subjects. In this section, we test this assumption by
considering the effect of each of the friendships on each subject separately. In Table A4, we
present evidence that is based on estimating a separate regression for each subject, using the
full specified regression that includes class fixed effects and pupil fixed effects. The results
are remarkably similar across subjects at the class level. For example, the estimated effects of
reciprocal friends in class on test scores are 0.017 for math, 0.024 for Hebrew, and 0.013 for
English. While the subject-specific estimates are naturally less precise than our pooled
estimates, each of these three estimates is close to the average estimate (0.018) obtained in
                                               18
our Table 5 estimates (column 3, second row) when all the subjects were pooled together.
Similarly, the table indicates that estimated effects of followers on test scores – 0.039 for
math, 0.033 for Hebrew, and 0.032 for English – are similar to the average estimate (0.035)
obtained for followers in our Table 5 estimates. Overall, these results suggest that the effect of
each type of friend is similar across subjects.
D. Nonlinear Effects
    In this section, we consider the nonlinear effects of friends. These results are motivated
by the following questions: how large does the social network of reciprocal friends and of
followers need to be in order to have a meaningful effect on students? Is there a threshold of a
minimum number of friends needed in order to impact academic achievements? We
parameterize nonlinear effects of friendship by transforming the continuous measures of
number of friends into seven dummy indicators. Our dummies are based on the number of
reciprocal friends where the first indicator is a dummy variable for students with zero friends;
the second indicator is for students with one reciprocal friend; and so on until the seventh
indicator for students with six or more such friends. A similar set of seven dummies is defined
for the number of followers.
    In Table A5 we present estimates for the non-linear effects of these two sets of
friendships. In columns 1-2, friendship is measured at the class level and in columns 3-4
friendship is measured at the school level. The estimates are based on a specification with
class and pupil fixed effects with the dummy variable for not having any friends eliminated.
The table indicates that not all of the estimates in column 1 are statistically significant.
Therefore, it is difficult to determine whether that the effect of reciprocal friends is linear. The
estimates of the effect of followers suggest stronger evidence for linear effects. However, the
pattern of change of the estimates is irregular. For example, there seems to be a 'jump' in the
estimates at two points: when one shifts from three to four friends and again when one has six
or more friends. The estimates in columns 3-4 present are more mixed. For example, the
coefficients of reciprocal friends fluctuate in sign and none is significantly different from
zero. Similarly, the effect of followers in school is positive only from three and more such
friends, which may suggest some nonlinearity. Overall, the evidence seems to suggest that the
effect of reciprocal friends and followers on test scores is partially nonlinear.
E. Heterogeneous Treatment Effects of Friendships on Test Scores
    In order to gain more insight on the effects of friendship on students’ test scores, in this
section, we explore the heterogeneous effects of friendships across different dimensions. In
Table 9 we present estimates based on three different stratifications of the full sample, using
                                                  19
our preferred specification that includes class fixed effects and pupil fixed effects. Panel A
reports the heterogeneous treatment effects of friendship types by gender and Panel B reports
results separately by father’s years of schooling (above and below the median – 13 years).25
Panel C presents evidence separately for young and older children of a given cohort.26
     Interestingly, Panel A suggests that the respective estimates for boys and girls are very
similar. The table suggests that while the effect of reciprocal friends is slightly higher for girls
than for boys (0.030 versus 0.021), the difference between the two estimates are not
statistically different. Similarly, the estimated effect of followers in class is nearly the same
for both genders (0.037 versus 0.036). Panel B suggests that the effects of friendship types are
generally larger for the students with low levels of parental education. For example, the effect
of reciprocal friends is 0.017 (sd=0.010) for students from families with low levels of
education and only 0.010 (sd=0.011) for students from families with high levels of education.
Similarly, the effect of followers upon students from families with low levels of education is
also almost twice as large then the effect on students from families with high levels of
education (0.045 (sd=0.009) versus 0.024 (sd=0.008)). This suggests that the social network
of friendships is more important for children from lower socioeconomic status. One
explanation for this result may be that for students whose parents have low education levels,
friends might be the principal source of information for academic decisions and for
motivation and involvement in school (Crosnoe 2002, Crosnoe et al. 2003).
     Panel C presents the estimates for the heterogeneity of peer effect by age of pupils. The
“young” group includes pupils born in the later part of the cohort year (from July to
December) while the “old” group includes pupils born in the earlier part of the cohort year
(from January to June). This approach may be uncommon, but we posit that the relative age
within a classroom may be significant. Indeed, the table indicates that there are large and
interesting heterogeneous treatment effects by age. The table indicates that the effect of
reciprocal friends in the classroom is positive and significant for the younger students. In
contrast, the effect of reciprocal friends for the older students is not significant. Similarly, the
effect of followers is positive and large for the younger students. While the effects are also


25
   Students with missing values in parental education (4 percent of the total sample) are excluded from this
analysis. The results are not sensitive to the inclusion of these students in the low or high education group.
Results based on stratifying the sample by mother’s schooling are very similar to those based on father’s
schooling. These results are available from the authors upon request.
26
   It should be noted that an alternative way to measure heterogeneous effects would have been to use interaction
terms for these subgroups. However, in this type of approach, the treatment-interaction terms may pick up
variations by gender or parental schooling in the effects of other covariates included in the regressions. For this
reason, we choose to stratify our sample, although this means our estimates are based on a smaller sample.

                                                        20
positive and significant for the older students, the effects are stronger among the younger
students (0.041 versus 0.022).27
     As a concluding remark for this section, it is important to note that the evidence about the
heterogeneous treatment effects of the different friendship types is also important from an
identification perspective. As noted in the data section, classes within schools are formed
randomly with respect to parental schooling, student’s gender, and age. For this reason, any
unaccounted-for sorting or selection of the number of friends by type and across classes
within schools should not be differentiated by gender, parental schooling, or by age. 28 Thus,
our table 8 results suggest that differential effects by gender, parental-schooling, and age is
another indication that potential omitted selections or sorting factors (as well as the possibility
of endogeneity of the number of friends by type) cannot account for the results we present in
this paper.29
F. Effect of Quality of Reciprocal Friends
         In this section we examine whether the quality of reciprocal friends in terms of their
family socioeconomic status has an effect on student achievements. Previous studies that
estimated peer effects have used different friends’ characteristics as measures of their quality.
For example, Ammermueller and Pischke (2009) used the number of books at home as
proxies for parental schooling levels and Lavy et al. (2012b) used grade repeating as one
quality determinant. Similarly, Lavy, et al. (2012a) used the proportion of low and high
achievers in one’s school environment, and Hanushek et al. (2003) used lagged measures of
peer achievements. In this paper we use the mean of the father’s or mother’s years of
schooling among reciprocal friends as a measure of the quality for this type of friend.
         In columns 1 and 2 of Table 10 we present estimates of the effect of these two
education measures when each is used separately in the regressions with a varying degree of
additional controls, from a simple OLS to the specification that includes class and pupil fixed
effects. The estimates are very similar in the first four specifications. In the fifth specification,
with class and pupil effects, only the estimate of father’s schooling is statistically significant


27
   We also tried a variation in which we divided the “old” into two groups: those born within the cohort year,
and those older. However, the results were very similar for these two groups. These results are available from the
authors upon request.
28
   We also estimated the heterogeneous effects while including non reciprocal friends as a treatment measure.
All estimates of this type of friendship were negative though the size of the effect varied by sub-groups. These
results are available from the authors.
29
   This conclusion is also supported by the lack of any systematic relationship between the changes in the
number of friends by type and student's background characteristics. These balancing tests for each of these sub-
samples are not presented in the paper and are available from the authors upon request.


                                                       21
and it is double the size than the estimate for mother’s years of schooling, 0.011 (sd=0.006)
versus 0.005 (sd=0.007). We therefore decided to use the mean of the father’s years of
schooling among reciprocal friends as a measure of quality for this friendship group in the
joint regression.
           In columns 3-5 of Table 10 we presents the estimates of the effect of reciprocal and
follower friendships on test scores in regressions that include the quality of reciprocal friends
(as measured by the mean years of schooling among their fathers). The table indicates that the
estimates in column 3 are almost identical to those in column 1, implying that the education
level of the fathers for reciprocal friends is not highly correlated with each of the two types of
friendships. For example, our preferred specification with class and pupil fixed effects
indicates that the effect of this quality measure on test scores is 0.010 (sd=0.006) in column 3
versus 0.011 (sd=0.006) in column 1. The table also indicates that the effect of the two
friendship types is similar to those reported in columns 4-5 of Table 3. For example, the effect
of followers in column 5 is 0.035 (sd=0.006), which is identical to the respective estimates in
Table 3. Similarly, the effect of reciprocal friends in column 4 is 0.017 (sd=0.007) versus
0.018 (sd=0.007) in Table 3. Overall, these results offer additional support for our core
results.
           In Panel B, we present estimates for our preferred specification with class and pupil
fixed effects at the school level rather than at the classroom level. Columns 1 and 2 indicate
that the effect of the mean levels of education for the fathers and mothers of reciprocal friends
at the school level are very similar. However, the effect is less pronounced than our Panel A
estimates. Similarly, column 3 reports similar estimates to our estimate at the classroom level.
The table also indicates that the effect of the number of reciprocal friends in class is not
statistically different from zero (0.007, sd=0.011) and the effect of followers is similar to our
Panel A results (0.032, sd=0.008) and precisely measured. As well, both of these estimates are
similar to the equivalent estimates reported in Table 3. Overall, the results suggest that
reciprocal friends have an impact in class but not in school, but followers are important both
in class and in school.
G. Effect of Types of Friendships on Behavioral Outcomes
           In this section, we consider the effects of friendship on behavioral outcomes. This
analysis is based on the following four questionnaire items30: (1) “I was involved in violence
(physical fights) in school many times this year”; (2) “Sometimes I’m scared to go to school

30
  In these questions, students are asked about the extent to which they agree with a series of statements by using
six-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly agree) to 6 (strongly disagree).

                                                       22
because there are violent students”; (3) “I feel well-adjusted socially in my class”; (4) “I am
satisfied in school”. The students also report the time spent (in weekly hours) doing
homework in each of the four subjects, and we use the reported total number of weekly hours
spent on homework in all subjects as one of our outcomes.
       In Table 11 we report estimates of the effect of reciprocal friends and followers on
each of the five behavioral outcomes. We report estimates from a regression that includes
each friendship type separately (columns 1-2) and from a regression that included the two
treatments jointly (columns 3-4). Panel A reports estimates from a specification that includes
class and pupil fixed effects and Panel B presents the estimates from a simple OLS regression
without any controls except year dummies.
       The estimates in Panel A of Table 11 suggest that the presence of more friends in the
classroom reduces fear and intimidation from school violence and bullying and improves
social satisfaction and school satisfaction. However, the number of friends does not have any
discernible effect on personal involvement in violence in school or on homework. Focusing
on the results in columns 3-4, we see that the effect of followers is significant for three
outcomes: intimidation from school violence (-0.048, sd=0.020), social satisfaction (0.064,
sd=0.020) and school satisfaction (0.034, sd=0.019). The estimated effects of reciprocal
friends has the same signs as the effect of followers, but only its effect on overall satisfaction
from school is statistically significant (0.055, sd=0.025). Note that although the estimates
presented in columns 1-2 (obtained from regressions with each treatment entered separately)
reveal the same pattern as that of the estimates in columns 3-4, the estimates are generally
much larger. Similarly, the OLS estimates presented in Panel B of Table 10 are relatively
larger, an indication that they are highly biased upward.
       In Table 12, we examine whether the effects of friendship types on behavioral
outcomes vary by gender. The evidence suggests that boys are affected more by the number
of friends. For example, the table suggests that followers reduce boy's violent behavior (-
0.076, sd=0.036) fear of school violence (-0.047, sd=0.033), improves sharply social
satisfaction (0.070, sd=0.031) and school satisfaction (0.096, sd=0.031). As well, the effect of
reciprocal friends on boys has a similar pattern, although the only significant results is the
effects on school satisfaction (0.081, sd=0.042). Relative to these effects on boys, the effects
of reciprocal friends and followers on girls are much less clear, and no clear pattern emerges.




                                               23
VI. Conclusions
         In this paper we study the effect of a student's social relationships in class and in
school on their educational achievement and social well-being. For our research, we are able
to take advantage of a unique dataset from a Tel Aviv school choice program that allows us to
analyze the students’ social networks as they are undergoing a major transition from
elementary to middle schools. This transition enables us to overcome potential selection bias
that results from the students' school and friendship choices during the application process by
using fixed-effect methodology. Using an alternative estimation strategy, based on cross
section data of eighth grade students that control for sixth grade's test score and number of
friendship by type, reinforces our main findings.
         Our results suggest that the presence of reciprocal friends and followers in class has a
positive and significant effect on test scores in English, math and Hebrew, while non-
reciprocal friends has an opposite (negative) effect. However, beyond the first circle of
reciprocal friends, the effect of the rest of the social network has no effect on students'
academic performance. To assess the overall magnitude of the effect size of these estimates
we simulate how one’s academic success would change if the transition to middle school did
not entail changing their social circle. We find that if on average students have the same
number of friends at class and school as they had in primary school it would have increased
their score by 0.056 of a standard deviation.31 Alternatively, if we refer only to the impact of
reciprocal friends, it would have increased the student's grade by 0.043 of a standard
deviation. We also found that friendships were more important for girls, students with low
parental schooling, and young students relative to their age cohort.32 Our results also suggest
that the effects of these various types of friendships are also important for the general well-
being of students. The presence of more friends of any type in the classroom reduces fear and
intimidation from school violence and bullying, and improves social satisfaction and school
satisfaction.
         The evidence we present is relevant for education policy makers, in particular with
regard for the design of school choice program. Since our study addresses the importance of
students' social relationships on academic achievement and general well-being, the research



31
   This estimate is based on the summary statistics in Table 2 which indicates that students would have on
average an additional 1.60 reciprocal friends, 1.80 followers, and 1.72 non-reciprocal friends.
32
   It should be noted that this simulation addresses only the direct effect of social relations, thought other studies
suggest that there might be additional positive peers effects at the classroom level that result from the better
educational performance of peers (see (Lin 2010), (De Giorgi et al.2010)).

                                                         24
has the potential to improve the way students are assigned among and within schools, and
advance our understanding of the social dynamics implicit in school choice programs.


VI. References
Abdulkadiroglu. A,, Yeon-Koo Che, and Y. Yasuda (2011). “Resolving Conicting
      Preferences in School Choice: the Boston Mechanism Reconsidered." American
      Economic Review, 101(1), 399-410.

Abdulkadiroglu, A. and Tayfun Söonmez (2003). “School Choice: A Mechanism Design
      Approach." American Economic Review, 93(3), 729-747.

Abdulkadiroglu, A., Parag A. Pathak, Alvin E. Roth, and Tayfun Söonmez (2005). “The
      Boston Public Schools Match." American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
      96, 368-371.

Ammermueller, A. and J. S. Pischke (2009). “Peer effects in European Primary Schools:
     Evidence from PIRLS.” Journal of Labor Economics, 27(3), 315-348.

Angrist, J. Bettinger, E., King. E, and M. Kremer (2002): “Vouchers for Private Schooling in
       Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment,” American Economic
       Review, 92, 1535–1558.

Angrist, Joshua D., Pathak, Parag A. and Christopher R. Walters. (2011). Explaining Charter
       School Effectiveness." NBER Working Paper No. 17332

Azmitia, M. and R. Montgomery (1993). "Friendship, Transactive Dialogues and the
      Development of Scientific Reasoning." Social Development, 2, 202-221.

Bayer P., Hjalmarsson R. and D. Pozen (2009). “Building Criminal Capital behind Bars: Peer
       Effects in Juvenile Correction.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1), 105-
       147.

Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2000. ‘‘Network Effects and
       Welfare Cultures.’’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3), 1019–55.

Bramoullé, Y., Djebbari, H. and B. Fortin (2009). “Identification of Peer Effects through
      Social Networks.” Journal of Econometrics, 150(1), 41-55.

Buhs, E. and G. Ladd (2001). "Peer Rejection as Antecedent of Young Children's School
      Adjustment: An Examination of Mediating Processes." Developmental Psychology,
      37, 550-560.

Calvo Armengol, A., Patacchini E., and Y. Zenou (2009). “Peer Effects and Social Networks
      in Education.” Review of Economic Studies, 76(4), 1239-1267.

Cauce, A. (1986). "Social Networks and Social Competence: Exploring the Effects of Early
       Adolescent Friendships." American Journal of Community Psychology, 14, 607–628.


                                            25
Coleman, J.C. (1961). "The Adolescent Society: The Social Life of the Teenager and Its
      Impact on Education". Free Press; New York.

Coleman J.C. (1988). “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital”. American Journal of
      Sociology, 94, 95–120.

Conley, T.G. and C.R. Udry (2010). “Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple in
      Ghana”. American Economic Review, 100(1), 35-69.

Crosnoe R. (2002), "High School Curriculum Track and Adolescent Association With
      Delinquent Friends". Journal of Adolescent Research,17, 143–167.

Crosnoe, R., Cavanagh S., and G.H. Elder (2003). "Adolescent Friendships as Academic
      Resources: The Intersection of Friendship, Race, and School Disadvantage."
      Sociological Perspectives, 46, 331–352.

Cullen, J., Jacob, B. and S. Levitt (2005). “The Impact of School Choice on Student
       Outcomes: An Analysis of the Chicago Public Schools,” Journal of Public Economics,
       89, 729–760.

De Giorgi, G., Pellizzari, M. and S. Redaelli (2010). “Identification of Social Interactions
      through Partially Overlapping Peer Groups.” American Economic Journal: Applied
      Economics, 2(2), 241-275.

De Weerdt, J. and S. Dercon (2006). “Risk-Sharing Networks and Insurance Against Illness.”
     Journal of Development Economics, 81(2), 337-356.

Eccles, J.S., Wigfield, A., Midgley, C., Reuman, D., MacIver, D. and H. Feldlaufer. (1993).
       "Negative effects of traditional middle schools on students’ motivation." The
       Elementary School Journal, 93, 553-74.

Elias, M.J., Gara, M, and M. Ubriaco. (1985). "Sources of stress and support in children’s
       transition to middle school: An empirical analysis." Journal of Clinical Child
       Psychology, 14, 112-18.

Fafchamps, M. and S. Lund (2003). “Risk Sharing Networks in Rural Philippines.” Journal of
      Development Economics, 71(2), 261-287.

Fiske, E. B., and H. F. Ladd (2000). "When Schools Compete: A Cautionary Tale."
        Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Gorad, S. (2001). “The Long Term Impact of School Choice in the United Kingdom,”
       Occasional Paper 13, National Center for the Study of Privatization in Education,
       Columbia University, New York.

Granovetter, M. (1973). “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of Sociology. 78(6),
      1360-1380.

Hanushek, E. A., Kain, J. F., and S. G. Rivkin (2003). “Does Peer Ability Affect Student
      Achievement?” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18(5), 527-544.

                                            26
Hartup, W. (1996). "Cooperation, Close Relationships and Cognitive Development." In W.
       Bukowski, A. Newcomb, and W. Hartup (Eds.), The Company they Keep: Friendships
       in Childhood and Adolescence, 213-236. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

Hoxby, C. and G. Weingarth (2005). "Taking Race Out of the Equation: School Reassignment
      and the structure of Peer Effects," Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.

Katz, Lawrence F., Kling, Jeffrey R. and Liebman, Jeffrey B. (2001)"Moving to Opportunity
       in Boston: Early Results from a Randomized Mobility Experiment," Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 116(2), 607-654.

Kling, Jeffrey R.; Liebman, Jeffrey B. and Katz, Lawrence F. (2007) "Experimental Analysis
       of Neighborhood Effects," Econometrica, 75(1), 83–119.

Kling, Jeffrey R.; Ludwig, Jens and Katz, Lawrence F. (2005) "Neighborhood Effects on
       Crime for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher
       Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (1), 87–130.
Lavy, Victor (2010). “Effects of Free Choice among Public Schools”. Review of Economic
       Studies. 77(3), 1164-91.

Lavy, Victor and A. Schlosser (2011). “Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer Effects at
      School.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2), 1-33.

Lavy, Victor, Olmo, Silva and Felix Weinhardt (2012a). “The Good, The Bad and The
      Average: Evidence on Ability Peer Effects in Schools.” Journal of Labor Economics,
      30(2), 367-414.

Lavy, Victor, Paserman, D. and A. Schlosser (2012b). “Inside the Black Box of Ability Peer
       Effects: Evidence from Variation in Low Achievers in the Classroom.” Economic
       Journal, 122, 208-237.

Lin, X. (2010). “Identifying Peer Effects in Student Academic Achievement by Spatial
      Autoregressive Models with Group Unobservables.” Journal of Labor Economics,
      28(4), 825-860.

Manski, C.F. (1993). “Identification of Endogenous Effects: The Reflection Problem.”
      Review of Economic Studies, 60, 531-542.

Nelson, R. M. and T. K. Debacker (2008). “Achievement Motivation in Adolescents: The
       Role of Peer Climate and Best Friends.” The Journal of Experimental Education,
       76(2), 170-189.

Patacchini, E., Rainone, E. and Zenou Y. (2011), “Dynamic Aspects of Teenage Friendships
       and Educational Attainment.” CEPR Discussion Papers 8223.

Pathak, A. Parag, and Tayfun Sönmez. (forthcoming) “School Admissions Reform in Chicago
       and England: Comparing Mechanisms by their Vulnerability to Manipulation”,
       American Economic Review.


                                           27
Roseth, C. J. Johnson, D. W. and R. T. Johnson (2008). “Promoting Early Adolescents'
       Achievements and Peer Relationships: The Effects of Cooperative, Competitive and
       Individualistic Goal Structures,” Psychological Bulletin, 134(2), 223-246.

Rudolph, K.D., Lambert, S.F., Clark, A.G. and K.D. Kurlakowsky. (2001). "Negotiating the
      transition to middle school: The role of self-regulatory processes." Child Development,
      72, 929-46.

Sacerdote, B. (2001). “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results from Dartmouth
       Roommates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 681-704.

Salmivalli, C., Arja, H., and K. M. J. Lagerspetz (1997). "Peer Networks and Bullying in
      Schools." Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 38, 305-312.

Vaquera, Elizabeth and Grace Kao (2008). “Do You Like Me as Much as I Like You?
      Friendship Reciprocity and Its Effects on School Outcomes among Adolescents.”
      Social Science Research, 37(1), 55–72.

Veronneau, M. H., Vitaro, F., Pedersen, S., and R. E. Tremblay (2008). “Do Peers Contribute
      to the Likelihood of Secondary School Graduation Among Disadvantage Boys?”
      Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(2), 429-442.

Wentzel, K. R. (1993). “Does Being Good Make the Grade? Social Behavior and Academic
      Competence in Middle School.” Journal of Educational Psychology, 85(2), 357-364.

Wentzel, K. R. (1998). “Social Relationships and Motivation in Middle School: The Role of
      Parent, Teachers and Peers.” Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(2), 202-209.
Wentzel, K. R., McNamara Barry, C. and K. A. Caldwell (2004). “Friendships in Middle
      School: Influences on Motivation and School Adjustment.” Journal of Educational
      Psychology, 96(2), 195-203.

Wigfield, A., Eccles, J. S., Mac Iver, D., Reuman, D. A. and C. Midgley (1991). “Transition
       during Early Adolescence: Changes in Children's Domain-Specific Self-Perceptions
       and General Self-Esteem Across the transition to Junior High School.” Developmental
       Psychology, 27(4), 552-565.

Zimmerman, D. (2003). “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural
     Experiment.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85, 9-23.




                                             28
   Table 1: Summary Statistics of Students' Characteristics by Cohort

                                                2000               2002              2003
                                                 (1)                 (2)                 (3)

Mean Father's Education                         13.38              13.42             12.70
                                                (3.55)             (3.37)            (3.43)
Mean Mother's Education                         13.74              13.73             13.08
                                                (3.10)             (3.11)            (2.99)
Mean Number of Siblings                          2.06               2.08              2.28
                                                (1.18)             (1.03)            (1.11)
Proportion of Asia/Africa Ethnicity              0.13               0.11              0.11
                                                (0.34)             (0.31)            (0.31)
Proportion of Europe/America Ethnicity           0.19               0.20              0.19
                                                (0.39)             (0.40)            (0.39)
Proportion of Israel Ethnicity                   0.57               0.57              0.61
                                                (0.49)             (0.49)            (0.49)
Number of Students                              1018                929                  913
Number of Elementry Schools                      42                  38                  37
Number of Elementry Classes                      83                  73                  76
Number of Middle Schools                          6                  8                    7
Number of Middle School Classes                   34                 32                  37
Notes: Each column is based on a different cohort. Standard deviations are reported in
parentheses.
                            Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of the Social Network:
                            Number of Friends by Type in Class and in School
                                               In Class                                     In School

                                    Mean           Min         Max              Mean         Min           Max
                                      (1)          (2)          (3)               (4)         (5)           (6)

1. Sixth Grade

A. Self nominated friends            5.48           0           8                6.49          0             8
                                    (2.54)                                      (2.68)
B. Overall followers                 5.59           0           20               6.63          0            26
                                    (3.72)                                      (4.09)
C. Reciprocal friends                3.10           0           8                3.50          0             8
                                    (2.23)                                      (2.34)
D. Followers                         2.48           0           13               3.13          0            20
                                    (2.35)                                      (2.92)
E. Non-reciprocal friends            2.38           0           8                2.99          0             8
                                    (2.14)                                      (2.30)
F. Wide social network               9.92           0           35               19.73         0            106
minus reciprocal friends            (8.83)                                      (27.48)
G. Narrow social network             3.60           0           18               4.93          0            26
minus reciprocal friends            (3.11)                                      (4.01)
N                                    8580

2. Eighth Grade

A. Self nominated friends            2.16           0           8                4.64          0             8
                                    (1.78)                                      (2.68)
B. Overall followers                 2.17           0           13               4.68          0            23
                                    (2.04)                                      (4.09)
C. Reciprocal friends                1.50           0           8                2.72          0             8
                                    (1.52)                                      (2.22)
D. Followers                         0.68           0           8                1.96          0            17
                                    (1.05)                                      (2.40)
E. Non-reciprocal friends            0.66           0           7                1.92          0             8
                                    (1.07)                                      (1.99)
F. Wide social network               3.33           0           23               11.88         0            75
minus reciprocal friends            (3.83)                                      (19.11)
G. Narrow social network             1.09           0           9                3.48          0            21
minus reciprocal friends            (1.39)                                      (3.53)
N                                    8580

Notes: The figures in the table denote the number of friends in each category. Self nominated friends (group A)
includes the nominated students the student asked to be with in middle school. Overall followers (group B) include
students who asked to be with student in middle school. Reciprocal friends (group C) is the intersection of A and B.
Followers (group D) is B-C. Non-reciprocal friends (group E) is A-C. Wide social network friends minus
reciprocal friends (Group F) includes all reciprocal friends of friends and so on, excluding the first circle of
reciprocal friends. Narrow social network minus reciprocal friends (group G) includes only the second circle of
reciprocal friends. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.
 Table 3: Estimated Effect of Number of Reciprocal Friends, Followers, and Wide Social Network on
                              Test Scores in Math, English, and Hebrew

                                Treatments incuded separately                         Treatments included jointly

                                                                  Wide                                       Wide
                                                     Wide         Social                                     Social
                         Reciprocal                              Network           Reciprocal
                                       Followers     Social                                      Followers Network
                          Friends                                 minus             Friends                  minus
                                                    Network
                                                                Reciprocal                                 Reciprocal
                                                                  Friends                                   Friends
                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)                 (5)         (6)        (7)

A. Class Level Treatments
OLS                        0.088        0.077        0.011        0.007               0.075        0.057        -0.002
                          (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.002)      (0.002)             (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.002)
OLS with Pupil             0.072        0.067        0.004        -0.002              0.067        0.055        -0.010
Characteristics
                          (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.002)      (0.002)             (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.002)
School Fixed Effect        0.083        0.075        0.011        0.005               0.070        0.057        -0.003
                          (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.001)      (0.001)             (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.001)
Class Fixed Effect         0.086        0.078        0.015        0.006               0.071        0.060        -0.003
                          (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.001)      (0.002)             (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.002)
Class and Pupil Fixed      0.027        0.038        0.003        0.001               0.018        0.035        -0.002
Effects
                          (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.002)      (0.002)             (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.002)
                           15506
B. School Level Treatments
OLS                        0.064        0.049        0.003        0.003               0.047        0.032        0.001
                          (0.006)      (0.004)      (0.001)      (0.001)             (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.001)
OLS with Pupil             0.052        0.041        0.000        0.000               0.041        0.029        -0.001
Characteristics
                          (0.006)      (0.004)      (0.001)      (0.001)             (0.006)      (0.004)      (0.001)
School Fixed Effect        0.058        0.042        0.002        0.003               0.046        0.027        0.000
                          (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.001)      (0.001)             (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.001)
Class Fixed Effect         0.059        0.043        0.002        0.003               0.045        0.030        0.000
                          (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.001)      (0.001)             (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.001)
Class and Pupil Fixed      0.015        0.033        0.000        0.000               0.007        0.032        -0.001
Effects
                          (0.010)      (0.008)      (0.002)      (0.001)             (0.011)      (0.008)      (0.001)
N                           15506
Notes: The OLS specification includes only year dummies and cohorts dummies as controls. Pupil's characteristics
includes gender, parental education, number of siblings, and dummies for five ethnicity groups. Standard errors are
clustered by class and are reported in parentheses. The estimates in columns 1-4 are each from a separate regression. The
estimates in each row in columns 5-7 are from the same regression.
      Table 4: Estimated Effect of Number of Reciprocal Friends, Followers, and Non-
              Reciprocal Friends on Test Scores in Math, English, and Hebrew

                     Treatments incuded separately                 Treatments included jointly

                                                Non-                                    Non-
                  Reciprocal                                     Reciprocal
                             Followers        Reciprocal                    Followers Reciprocal
                   Friends                                        Friends
                                               Friends                                 Friends
                      (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)          (5)          (6)

A. Class Level Treatments
OLS                  0.088        0.077          -0.079             0.064        0.047        -0.046
                    (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.007)            (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.008)
OLS with Pupil       0.072        0.067          -0.078             0.049        0.042        -0.051
Characteristics     (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.007)            (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.008)
School Fixed         0.083        0.075          -0.081             0.058        0.046        -0.045
Effect              (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.004)            (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.005)
Class Fixed          0.086        0.078          -0.082             0.059        0.047        -0.042
Effect              (0.004)      (0.004)        (0.005)            (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)
Class and Pupil      0.027        0.038          -0.027             0.015        0.031        -0.014
Fixed Effects       (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.006)            (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.006)
N                    15506
Notes: See Table 3. The estimates in columns 1-3 are each from a separate regression. The estimates in
each row in columns 4-6 are from the same regression.
Table 5: Estimated Effect of Number of Reciprocal Friends and Followers in Class on Test
                           Scores in Math, English, and Hebrew

                           Treatments incuded separately                 Treatments included jointly

                                 Reciprocal                              Reciprocal
                                                  Followers                                 Followers
                                  Friends                                 Friends
                                     (1)              (2)                     (3)               (4)

A. Class Fixed Effect Specifcation
Class Fixed Effect                  0.086            0.078                   0.070             0.059
                                   (0.004)          (0.004)                 (0.004)           (0.004)

Class and Pupil Fixed               0.027            0.038                   0.018             0.035
Effects                            (0.007)          (0.006)                 (0.007)           (0.006)

N                                   15506

B. First Difference Specification with Primary and
Middle School Fixed Effects and their Interactions

No Additional controls              0.025            0.034                   0.017             0.031
                                   (0.008)          (0.005)                 (0.008)           (0.005)

Controls: Pupil                     0.024            0.032                   0.016             0.029
Characteristics                    (0.008)          (0.005)                 (0.008)           (0.005)

N                                   7746

C. First Difference Specification with Primary and
Middle School Class Fixed Effects and their
Interaction

No Additional controls              0.038            0.039                   0.030             0.034
                                   (0.011)          (0.007)                 (0.012)           (0.007)

Controls: Pupil                     0.037            0.037                   0.029             0.032
Characteristics                    (0.011)          (0.006)                 (0.012)           (0.007)

N                                     7746
Notes: See Table 3. The estimates in columns 1-2 are each from a separate regression. The estimates in each
row in columns 3-4 are from the same regression. The School Fixed Effects Interactions includes interaction
fixed effects between elementary schools and middle schools. The Class Fixed Effects Interactions includes
interaction fixed effects between elementary classes and middle school classes.
 Table 6: Balancing Estimates of Student Characteristics of Changes in Number of Friends (By Type) in Class, Between Eighth and Sixth
                                                           Grades, Full Sample


                      Self Nominated                                                             Non Reciprocal             Wide Social            Narrow Social
                                             Reciprocal Friends            Followers
                           Friends                                                                  Friends                  Network                 Network
                              (1)                      (2)                      (3)                     (4)                      (5)                      (6)

Gender (Boy = 1)            0.183                    0.019                    -0.041                   0.164                    -0.252                   0.104
                           (0.182)                  (0.127)                  (0.123)                  (0.123)                  (0.530)                  (0.343)
Number of siblings          -0.020                   -0.017                   -0.037                   -0.003                   -0.238                   -0.134
                           (0.054)                  (0.035)                  (0.041)                  (0.052)                  (0.131)                  (0.063)
Father's years of           -0.011                   0.001                    0.031                    -0.012                   0.045                    0.017
schooling                  (0.015)                  (0.012)                  (0.014)                  (0.014)                  (0.051)                  (0.025)
Mother's years of           -0.028                   -0.017                   0.003                    -0.011                   -0.006                   -0.015
schooling                  (0.022)                  (0.015)                  (0.016)                  (0.015)                  (0.043)                  (0.033)
Ethnicity                   -0.077                   -0.030                   0.208                    -0.048                   0.104                    -0.159
Asia/Africa                (0.139)                  (0.121)                  (0.149)                  (0.105)                  (0.333)                  (0.249)
Ethnicity                   -0.059                   0.016                    0.006                    -0.075                   0.186                    0.153
Europe/America             (0.145)                  (0.107)                  (0.134)                  (0.112)                  (0.445)                  (0.237)
Ethnicity Israel            0.097                    0.120                    0.080                    -0.023                   -0.075                   0.214
                           (0.115)                  (0.086)                  (0.102)                  (0.095)                  (0.378)                  (0.182)
N                           2858                      2858                     2858                    2858                    2858                      2858
Notes: Each regression includes cohort fixed effects and interaction fixed effects between elementary class and middle school class. Standard errors are clustered at
the primary school level and reported in parentheses.
    Table 7: Estimated Effect of Reciprocal Friends and Followers from a Cross Section
                          Regression of Eighth Grade Test Scores
                                               Two Main Treatments Included Jointly

                             Reciprocal Friends                                Followers
                                            Lagged                                     Lagged
                       Main Treatment                             Main Treatment                      Lagged Score
                                           Treatment                                  Treatment
                             (1)               (2)                       (3)                (4)            (5)

OLS                         0.108                                      0.058
                           (0.011)                                     0.016

OLS with lagged             0.091            0.013                     0.016               0.036
treatment
                           (0.015)          (0.012)                   (0.020)           (0.010)

Pupil                       0.045            0.025                     0.013               0.030
characteristics
                           (0.013)          (0.010)                   (0.017)           (0.008)

School Fixed                0.050            0.028                     0.023               0.021
Effect
                           (0.009)          (0.006)                   (0.012)           (0.005)

Class Fixed Effect          0.056            0.026                     0.027               0.016
                           (0.009)          (0.006)                   (0.012)           (0.005)

Lagged Score                0.038            0.007                     0.031            -0.009            0.462
                           (0.008)          (0.005)                   (0.010)           (0.005)          (0.010)

N
Notes: In this table, the dependant variable is the eighth grade score and the regressions do not include pupil fixed
effects. The treatments are the eighth grade number of friends by types, and the lagged treatments and scores are
from sixth grade. Each row reports estimates from a single regression, including all the treatments reported, cohort
dummies and Fixed Effects when reported. Standard errors are clustered by class and reported in parentheses.
Table 8: Estimated effect of Reciprocal Friends and Followers in Class on Test scores from
                   a Value Added Regression of Eighth Grade Students

                        Treatments Included Seperately                         Treatments Included Jointly

                       Reciprocal                                           Reciprocal
                                                  Followers                                            Followers
                        Friends                                              Friends

                            (1)                       (2)                        (3)                       (4)
OLS                        0.041                     0.038                     0.037                      0.027
                          (0.016)                   (0.019)                   (0.016)                    (0.019)

OLS with pupil             0.016                     0.030                     0.013                      0.026
characteristics           (0.015)                   (0.018)                   (0.015)                    (0.018)

School Fixed               0.024                     0.038                     0.021                      0.032
Effect                    (0.009)                   (0.012)                   (0.009)                    (0.012)

Class Fixed Effect         0.028                     0.041                     0.025                      0.035
                          (0.009)                   (0.012)                   (0.009)                    (0.012)

N                          7753
Notes: In this table the dependent variable is the difference between the eighth and the sixth grade score. Each pupil
is included once, and therefore there is no pupil fixed effect. The treatments are the eighth grade number of friends
by type and the lagged - sixth grade numbers of friends by type. The estimates in columns 1-2 are each from a
separate regression. The estimates in each row in columns 3-4 are from the same regression. Standard errors are
clustered by class and reported in parentheses.
    Table 9: Estimated Effect of Number of Reciprocal Friends and Followers in Class on
                                 Test Scores, By Sub-Groups

                                  Reciprocal                                   Reciprocal
                                                     Followers                                 Followers
                                   Friends                                      Friends
                                       (1)               (2)                        (3)              (4)

A. By Gender                                    Boys                                       Girls

Class and Pupil Fixed Effects         0.021             0.037                     0.030             0.036
                                     (0.010)           (0.009)                   (0.011)           (0.008)

N                                     7940                                        7566

B. By Parental Education            High Parental Education                   Low Parental Education

Class and Pupil Fixed Effects         0.010             0.024                     0.017             0.045
                                     (0.011)           (0.008)                   (0.010)           (0.009)

N                                     6440                                        9062

C. By Student's Age                            Young                                       Old
Class and Pupil Fixed Effects         0.019             0.041                     0.010             0.022
                                     (0.012)           (0.011)                   (0.009)           (0.008)

N                                      5908                                        9656
Notes: The regressions include class and pupil fixed effects. High parental education is defined as more
than 12 years of schooling. The "Young" group includes pupils born in July-December in the cohort year
or later. The "Old" group includes pupils born in January-June in the cohort year or earlier. The estimates
in columns 1-2 are each from a separate regression. The estimates in columns 3-4 are from the same
regression. Standard errors are clustered by class and reported in parentheses.
   Table 10: Estimated Effect of The Quality of Reciprocal Friends and the
         Number of Reciprocal Friends and Followers on Test Scores
                  Quality of true friends:
                                                        Quality of true friends: treatments
                   treatments included
                                                                  included jointly
                         seperately

                  Reciprocal      Reciprocal          Reciprocal
                   Friends'        Friends'            Friends
                                                                       Reciprocal
                    Mean            Mean                Mean                             Followers
                                                                        Friends
                   Father's        Mother's            Father's
                  Education       Education           Education
                      (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)              (5)

A. Class Level Treatments
OLS                  0.055            0.062               0.051           0.073            0.053
                    (0.007)          (0.007)             (0.007)         (0.009)          (0.006)

OLS with             0.017            0.019               0.015           0.062            0.050
Pupil               (0.006)          (0.007)             (0.006)         (0.009)          (0.006)
Characteristics
School Fixed         0.033            0.038               0.031           0.073            0.056
Effect              (0.004)          (0.004)             (0.004)         (0.005)          (0.004)

Class Fixed          0.034            0.039               0.031           0.072            0.058
Effect              (0.004)          (0.004)             (0.004)         (0.005)          (0.004)

Class and            0.011            0.005               0.010           0.017            0.035
Pupil Fixed         (0.006)          (0.007)             (0.006)         (0.007)          (0.006)
Effects
B. School Level
Class and            0.012             0.008               0.012            0.007          0.032
Pupil Fixed         (0.011)           (0.011)             (0.011)          (0.011)        (0.008)
Effects
N                    15506             15506               15506
Notes: See Table 3. Panel B inludes only regressions with pupil and class fixed effects. The
estimates in columns 1-2 are each from a separate regression. Each row in columns 3-5 presents
estimates from the same regression. The quality of true friends is measured as the average father's or
mother's education of all the reciprocal friends who are in the same class as the pupil.
     Table 11: Estimated Effect of Reciprocal Friends and Followers in Class on
                                Behavioral Outcomes
                                  Treatments included
                                                                         Treatments included jointly
                                       separately

                               Reciprocal                                 Reciprocal
                                                  Followers                                  Followers
                                Friends                                    Friends
                                    (1)               (2)                      (3)               (4)

A. Specification with Pupil and Class Fixed Effectw
Involment in school fights        -0.012            0.001                     -0.012            0.003
                                 (0.026)           (0.019)                   (0.027)           (0.019)

Fear from school violence         -0.043            -0.052                    -0.031            -0.048
                                 (0.026)           (0.019)                   (0.027)           (0.020)

Overall social satisfaction       0.051             0.069                     0.035             0.064
in class                         (0.027)           (0.020)                   (0.028)           (0.020)

Overall satisfaction from         0.063             0.041                     0.055             0.034
school
                                 (0.025)           (0.018)                   (0.025)           (0.019)

Time doing homework               0.071             -0.034                    0.083             -0.045
                                 (0.093)           (0.068)                   (0.095)           (0.069)

B. Simple OLS
Involment in school fights        -0.065            -0.034                    -0.061            -0.020
                                 (0.012)           (0.011)                   (0.013)           (0.012)

Fear from school violence         -0.082            -0.052                    -0.075            -0.035
                                 (0.009)           (0.011)                   (0.010)           (0.009)

Overall social satisfaction       0.105             0.095                     0.090             0.076
in class
                                 (0.011)           (0.010)                   (0.011)           (0.012)

Overall satisfaction from         0.066             0.050                     0.059             0.037
school
                                 (0.011)           (0.010)                   (0.011)           (0.010)

Time doing homework               -0.160            -0.010                   -0.165             0.026
                                 (0.044)           (0.041)                   (0.045)           (0.039)

Notes: The regressions in panel A include class and pupil fixed effects. The OLS regressions in panel B
include only cohort dummies as controls. Standard errors are clustered by class and are reported in
parentheses. The estimates in columns 1-2 are each from a separate regression. Each row in columns 3-4
present estimates from the same regression. Standard errors are are clustered by class. Standard errors are
clustered by class and are reported in parentheses.
    Table 12: Estimated Effect of Reciprocal Friends and Followers in Class on
                        Behavioral Outcomes , by Gender
                                Treatments Included                       Treatments Included
                                     Seperately                                Together

                              Reciprocal                                Reciprocal
                                                  Followers                           Followers
                               Friends                                   Friends
                                   (1)               (2)                     (3)         (4)

A. Boys

Involment in school fights       0.003              -0.074                  0.019       -0.076
                                (0.049)            (0.036)                 (0.050)     (0.036)

Fear from school violence        -0.053             -0.052                  -0.044      -0.047
                                (0.044)            (0.032)                 (0.045)     (0.033)
Overall social                   0.054              0.074                   0.040       0.070
satisfaction in class           (0.042)            (0.031)                 (0.042)     (0.031)
Overall satisfaction from        0.101              0.105                   0.081       0.096
school                          (0.042)            (0.030)                 (0.042)     (0.031)

Time doing homework              -0.100             -0.064                  -0.088      -0.054
                                (0.159)            (0.115)                 (0.161)     (0.117)

N                                 1892

B. Girls
Involment in school fights       -0.008             0.035                   -0.020      0.038
                                (0.030)            (0.021)                 (0.031)     (0.022)

Fear from school violence        -0.033             -0.024                  -0.027      -0.020
                                (0.040)            (0.028)                 (0.040)     (0.029)
Overall social                   0.057              0.075                   0.035       0.070
satisfaction in class                              (0.031)                 (0.045)     (0.032)

Overall satisfaction from        0.044              -0.030                  0.056       -0.039
school                          (0.038)            (0.028)                 (0.039)     (0.028)

Time doing homework              0.160              -0.070                  0.196       -0.104
                                (0.144)            (0.102)                 (0.149)     (0.105)

N                                 1902

Notes: See table 11. All the regressions include class and pupil fixed effects.
On Line Appendix
           Table A1: Descriptive Statistics in Sub-Groups of the Panel Sample


                                     In Class                        In School

                            Mean      Min       Max         Mean        Min      Max
                             (1)       (2)      (3)           (4)       (5)      (6)

1. Boys
C. Reciprocal friends        2.24       0        8           3.04        0        8
                            (2.06)                           2.31

D. Followers                 1.54       0       13           2.48        0       17
                            (2.04)                           2.69

E. Non-reciprocal friends    1.51       0        8           2.44        0        8
                            (1.90)                           2.23

N                           8874
2. Girls

C. Reciprocal friends        2.36       0        8           3.18        0        8
                            (2.08)                          (2.32)

D. Followers                 1.62       0       13           2.61        0       20
                             2.02                           (2.79)

E. Non-reciprocal friends    1.53       0        8           2.47        0        8
                            (1.89)                          (2.20)

N                           8274
3. Young

C. Reciprocal friends        2.27       0        8           3.04        0        8
                            (2.05)                          (2.26)

D. Followers                 1.50       0       13           2.41        0       20
                            (1.91)                          (2.57)

E. Non-reciprocal friends    1.58       0        8           2.55        0        8
                            (1.94)                          (2.25)

N                           6468
4. Old

C. Reciprocal friends        2.31       0        8           3.15        0        8
                            (2.09)                          (2.35)

D. Followers                 1.63       0       13           2.63        0       19
                            (2.10)                          (2.83)

E. Non-reciprocal friends    1.48       0        8           2.39        0        8
                            (1.86)                          (2.19)

N                           10746
                                      Table A1: continued


                                        In Class                              In School

                              Mean        Min       Max             Mean         Min       Max
                                (1)        (2)       (3)               (4)       (5)        (6)

5. High Parental Education
C. Reciprocal friends          2.50         0         8               3.36        0          8
                              (2.10)                                 (2.35)

D. Followers                   1.74         0        13               2.85        0         19
                              (2.18)                                 (2.99)

E. Non-reciprocal friends      1.44         0         8               2.40        0          8
                              (1.85)                                 (2.19)

N                              7044

6. Low Parental Education

C. Reciprocal friends          2.16         0         8               2.93        0          8
                              (2.04)                                 (2.27)

D. Followers                   1.47         0        12               2.33        0         20
                              (1.91)                                 (2.53)

E. Non-reciprocal friends      1.57         0         8               2.49        0          8
                              (1.92)                                 (2.23)

N                              10098
Notes: The figures in the table denote the number of friends in each category in the panel sample.
High parental education is defined as more than 12 years of schooling. The "Young" group is
includes pupils born in July-December in the cohort year or later. The "Old" group includes pupils
born in January-June in the cohort year or earlier.
    Table A2: Estimated Effect of Number of Reciprocal Friends, Followers, and Narrow Social
                  Network in Class on Test Scores in Math, English, and Hebrew
                            Treatments incuded separately              Treatments included jointly

                                                          Narrow                              Narrow
                                                           Social                             Social
                                               Narrow
                      Reciprocal                          Network     Reciprocal             Network
                                   Followers    Social                             Followers
                       Friends                             minus       Friends                minus
                                               Network
                                                         Reciprocal                          Reciprocal
                                                           Friends                            Friends
                         (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)       (7)

A. Class Level Treatments

OLS                     0.088       0.077       0.034      0.026        0.087       0.064      -0.027
                       (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.004)    (0.005)      (0.008)     (0.006)    (0.006)
OLS with Pupil          0.072       0.067       0.024      0.012        0.077       0.062      -0.035
Characteristics
                       (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.004)    (0.005)      (0.007)     (0.006)    (0.006)
School Fixed Effect     0.083       0.075       0.035      0.028        0.077       0.061      -0.019
                       (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.002)    (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.004)    (0.004)
Class Fixed Effect      0.086       0.078       0.038      0.031        0.077       0.063      -0.017
                       (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.002)    (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.004)    (0.004)
Class and Pupil         0.027       0.038       0.012      0.012        0.020       0.036      -0.004
Fixed Effects
                       (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.003)    (0.005)      (0.008)     (0.006)    (0.005)
N                       15506
Notes: See Table 3.
                          Table A3: Estimated Effect of Self Defined Friends and Followers on Test Scores
                                                                                Treatments included
                             Treatments included seperately                                                            Treatments included jointly
                                                                                      jointly
                                                         Reciprocal                                                                              Reciprocal
                            Self                          Friends               Self                                Self                          Friends
                          Nominated       Followers        Mean               Nominated       Followers           Nominated       Followers        Mean
                           Friends                        Father's             Friends                             Friends                        Father's
                                                         Education                                                                               Education
                               (1)            (2)             (3)                  (4)            (5)                  (6)             (7)            (8)

A. Class Level Treatments
OLS                           0.020          0.077           0.020               0.017           0.076                -0.013         0.074           0.022
                             (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.003)             (0.006)         (0.006)              (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.003)

OLS with pupil                0.007          0.067           0.008               0.005           0.067                -0.005         0.067           0.008
characteristics              (0.006)        (0.006)         (0.003)             (0.006)         (0.006)              (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.003)

School Fixed Effect           0.017          0.079           0.013               0.018           0.080                0.001          0.078           0.013
                             (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.002)             (0.004)         (0.004)              (0.005)        (0.004)         (0.002)

Class Fixed Effect            0.017          0.082           0.013               0.021           0.084                0.006          0.082           0.011
                             (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.002)             (0.004)         (0.004)              (0.005)        (0.004)         (0.002)

Class and Pupil Fixed         -0.005         0.038           0.000               -0.002          0.038                -0.003         0.038           0.002
Effects                      (0.005)        (0.006)         (0.002)             (0.005)         (0.006)              (0.005)        (0.006)         (0.002)

B. School Level Treatments
Class and Pupil Fixed         -0.014         0.033           -0.003              -0.015          0.033                -0.015         0.033           0.000
Effects                      (0.006)        (0.008)         (0.003)             (0.006)         (0.008)              (0.007)        (0.008)         (0.003)

Notes: Self defined friends (group A) includes the students listed by student i as friends they asked to be with in middle school. The quality of self defined
friends is measured as the average father's edcuation for all the self defined friends. The OLS specification includes year dummies as controls. The vector
of pupils characteristics includes gender, parental education, number of siblings and dummies for ethnicities. Panel B inludes only regressions with pupil
and class fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The estimates in columns 1-2 are each from a separate regression. Each row in columns
3-6 presents estimates from the same regression.
   Table A4: Estimated Effect of Number of Reciprocal Friends and
 Followers in Class on Test Scores, by Subject, From a Regression with
                    Class and Student Fixed Effects

                            Reciprocal Friends                      Followers

                                     (1)                                (2)

Math                                0.017                              0.039
                                   (0.011)                            (0.009)

Hebrew                              0.024                              0.033
                                   (0.012)                            (0.010)

English                             0.013                              0.032
                                   (0.012)                            (0.010)

Notes: Each row includes estimated from a single regression. All regressions have
pupil and class fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by class and reported in
parentheses.
  Table A5: Non-Linear effect of Reciprocal Friends and Followers on Test
                                  Scores
                                         In Class                              In School

                              Reciprocal                            Reciprocal
                                              Followers                             Followers
                               Friends                               Friends
                                   (1)              (2)                  (3)               (4)

One friend                       0.040          0.045                  0.048           0.002
                                (0.028)        (0.023)                (0.044)         (0.031)
Two friends                      0.014          0.088                  -0.006          -0.022
                                (0.031)        (0.029)                (0.051)         (0.038)
Three friends                    0.082          0.101                  -0.022          0.061
                                (0.035)        (0.036)                (0.055)         (0.045)
Four friends                     0.042          0.180                  -0.053          0.112
                                (0.040)        (0.041)                (0.061)         (0.050)
Five friends                     0.089          0.209                  -0.013          0.076
                                (0.045)        (0.049)                (0.068)         (0.059)
Six or more friends              0.115          0.291                  0.031           0.200
                                 0.048         (0.047)                (0.073)         (0.063)
Notes: The estimates in columns 1-2 come from a single regression, and the estimates for columns
3-4 come from a single regression. The treatments are dummy variables for each group. The
regressions include pupil and class fixed effect.
      Table A6: Estimated Effect of The Quality of Reciprocal Friends and the Number of
          Reciprocal Friends, Followers, and Non-Reciprocal Friends on Test Scores

                      Quality of true friends:
                                                  Quality of true friends: treatments included
                       treatments included
                                                                      jointly
                             seperately

                       Reciprocal   Reciprocal   Reciprocal
                        Friends'     Friends'     Friends                              Non-
                                                              Reciprocal
                         Mean         Mean         Mean                    Followers Reciprocal
                                                               Friends
                        Father's     Mother       Father's                            Friends
                       Education    Education    Education
                           (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)

A. Class Level
OLS                       0.055        0.062        0.053        0.055       0.044      -0.051
                         (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.009)     (0.006)    (0.008)

OLS with Pupil           0.017        0.019        0.016        0.044        0.041     -0.054
Characteristics
                         (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.009)     (0.006)    (0.008)

School Fixed              0.033        0.038        0.031        0.056       0.045      -0.046
Effect                   (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.006)     (0.004)    (0.005)

Classl Fixed Effect      0.034        0.039        0.032        0.055        0.047     -0.043
                         (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.005)

Class and Pupil           0.011        0.005        0.010        0.013       0.031      -0.016
Fixed Effects            (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.007)     (0.006)    (0.006)

B. School Level
Class and Pupil           0.012        0.008        0.012        0.001       0.029      -0.026
Fixed Effects            (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.008)    (0.008)

N                        15506        15506        15506
Notes: See Table 10.
    Table A7: Summary Statistics of Pupils Behavioral Outcomes, Full Sample and By
                                        Gender

                                    Full Sample           Boys             Girls
                                          (1)              (2)              (3)
Involment in school fights               1.80              2.27             1.33
                                        (1.30)            (1.48)           (0.88)
Fear of school violence                  1.52              1.63             1.41
                                        (1.14)            (1.27)           (0.97)
Overall social feeling                   5.14              5.08             5.21
                                        (1.17)            (1.20)           (1.14)
Overall feeling in school                4.85              4.63             5.08
                                        (1.31)            (1.40)           (1.17)
Time doing homework                      8.95              8.69             9.22
                                        (4.72)            (4.93)           (4.48)
Notes: Standard deviations are reported in parentheses.
