                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    HOUSING DYNAMICS OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                           Finn E. Kydland
                                             Peter Rupert
                                            Roman Sustek

                                        Working Paper 18432
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18432


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




We thank Carlos Garriga, Martin Gervais, Paul Gomme, Peter Phillips, and Don Schlagenhauf for
invaluable discussions and seminar participants at Birkbeck, Cal Poly, Cleveland Fed, Concordia,
Glasgow, Edinburgh, NYU Stern, Sogang, UCSB, and Yonsei, as well as workshop and conference
participants at Nottingham, Regensburg, Sciences Po, SED in Cyprus, Southampton, and St. Louis
Fed for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Finn E. Kydland, Peter Rupert, and Roman Sustek. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing Dynamics over the Business Cycle
Finn E. Kydland, Peter Rupert, and Roman Sustek
NBER Working Paper No. 18432
October 2012
JEL No. E22,E32,R21,R31

                                             ABSTRACT

Over the U.S. business cycle, fluctuations in residential investment are well known to systematically
lead GDP. These dynamics are documented here to be specific to the U.S. and Canada. In other developed
economies residential investment is broadly coincident with GDP. Nonresidential investment has the
opposite dynamics, being coincident with or lagging GDP. These observations are in sharp contrast
with the properties of nearly all business cycle models with disaggregated investment. Including mortgages
and interest rate dynamics aligns the theory more closely with U.S. observations. Longer time to build
in housing construction makes residential investment coincident with output.


Finn E. Kydland                                     Roman Sustek
Department of Economics                             Social Sciences, Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara             University of Southampton
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9210                        Murray Building (Bld. 58)
and NBER                                            Southampton, SO17 1BJ
kydland@econ.ucsb.edu                               United Kingdom
                                                    rs1y10@soton.ac.uk
Peter Rupert
Dept. of Economics
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
rupert@econ.ucsb.edu
1         Introduction

Over the U.S. business cycle, ﬂuctuations in residential investment are well known to sys-
tematically lead real GDP (e.g., Leamer, 2007). These dynamics are found to be speciﬁc

to the U.S. and Canada. In other developed economies, residential investment is, more or
less, coincident with GDP. Nonresidential investment, on the other hand, has exactly the
opposite dynamics in our sample of countries, being either coincident with or lagging GDP.

        Such international evidence is in sharp contrast with the properties of nearly all business
cycle models that disaggregate investment into residential and nonresidential. The home

production models of Benhabib, Rogerson, and Wright (1991), Greenwood and Hercowitz
(1991), and McGrattan, Rogerson, and Wright (1997) predict exactly the opposite pattern:
that home investment lags the cycle and business investment leads the cycle. A business

cycle model of Gomme and Rupert (2007), featuring a more detailed disaggregation of in-

vestment and investment-speciﬁc shocks, and a multi-industry model of housing construction

of Davis and Heathcote (2005) also exhibit this anomaly.1 Gomme, Kydland, and Rupert
(2001) demonstrate that while longer time to build in nonresidential—than residential—
construction can reduce the discrepancy between models and data, it is not strong enough

to overturn the lead-lag pattern. Fisher (2007) explores the potential role of complemen-
tarities between home and business capital. He shows that a traditional home production
model can be consistent with the data if home capital positively aﬀects labor productivity
in the market sector.2
        The ﬁrst objective of this paper is to provide further empirical evidence on the dynamics
of residential and nonresidential investment. We establish that even though the strong
    1
     The reason why the models predict the opposite pattern to that in the data is that output produced by
business capital has more uses than output produced by home capital: the former can be either consumed
or invested in both business and home capital, whereas the latter can only be consumed (e.g, as housing
services). Investment in business capital thus allows greater future consumption of both types of goods,
market and home. This provides a strong incentive to invest in business capital ﬁrst, in response to a
positive total factor productivity shock.
   2
     Edge (2000), Li and Chang (2004), and Dressler and Li (2009) construct monetary models with a fo-
cus on the diﬀerent responses of the two types of investment to monetary policy shocks, pointed out by
Bernanke and Gertler (1995). Namely, that residential investment responds faster to such shocks than non-
residential investment.
lead of residential investment observed in the U.S. is shared only by Canada, international
evidence generally does not support the lead-lag pattern inherent in business cycle models;
other countries in our sample have the two types of investment, more or less, coincident
with GDP. These patterns in international data are conﬁrmed by robustness checks based

on bootstrapping.
      We then scrutinize the data in more detail in order to narrow down the potential sources
of the cyclical dynamics of residential investment. Further analysis of U.S. data reveals that:
(i) the cyclical lead of residential investment cannot be entirely attributed to Regulation Q;
(ii) the lead in residential investment is driven by those structures that rely on mortgage
ﬁnance; and (iii) it is primarily ﬁxed-rate mortgages that are used to ﬁnance growth in resi-
dential investment ahead of GDP growth. In addition, the observed dynamics of the 30-year

mortgage interest rate suggest that mortgages are relatively cheap ahead of an economic

upturn—a feature of mortgage rate data observed also in other countries. At the same time,

international data on housing starts provide insight into the cross-country diﬀerences in res-

idential investment dynamics. In particular, they show that there is much more uniformity
across countries in the dynamics of housing starts than in the dynamics of residential in-

vestment. Nearly all countries in our sample exhibit housing starts leading real GDP, which

suggests that there are signiﬁcant cross-country diﬀerences in residential time to build—a

period over which expenditures on investment projects are incurred and recorded in national
accounts. Such a possibility is conﬁrmed by available data for the U.S. and the U.K.: U.K.
time to build in residential construction appears to be twice as long as in the U.S.
      After describing the data, we calibrate a business cycle model with disaggregated in-
vestment (based on Gomme et al., 2001) and show that the presence of mortgage ﬁnance
in residential investment, together with the observed interest rate dynamics, aligns the the-
ory more closely with U.S. data.3 In particular, the model exhibits lead-lag patterns of
residential and nonresidential investment similar to those in the data, while also being in
  3
    Debt ﬁnance in our model is used only for residential investment. This assumption is justiﬁed by the
observation that in major developed economies, on average, nonﬁnancial corporations ﬁnance only 16-28%
of their ﬁxed assets through debt (Rajan and Zingales, 1995).


                                                   2
line with standard business cycle moments as much as other models in the literature. The
quantitative eﬀects of mortgage ﬁnance on investment dynamics are then analyzed in more
detail. We summarize the eﬀects of mortgages on the equilibrium in the form of a wedge in
the Euler equation for residential capital, which resembles an ad-valorem tax on residential

investment. Changes in the dynamic behavior of this wedge help us understand complicated
interactions between various aspects of mortgage ﬁnance and the dynamic behavior of in-
vestment variables. Mortgage ﬁnance has not only direct eﬀects on residential investment,
but through general equilibrium it also aﬀects nonresidential investment as households try

to keep consumption relatively smooth. While mortgage ﬁnance is crucial for producing
residential investment leading output, increasing time to build in residential construction
pushes residential investment towards being more coincident with output, even as housing

starts lead output.

       Following Iacoviello (2005), a number of authors have studied housing and housing ﬁ-

nance in business cycle models. The models of this tradition, however, usually consider

only residential capital.4 In addition, housing ﬁnance in this literature involves a sequence
of one-period loans. Although it makes the models tractable, this form of ﬁnance misses a

number of important features of mortgage contracts. In particular, their very long repayment

periods (up to 30 years) during which the principal is gradually amortized; constant period

payments (certainly in the case of a traditional ﬁxed-rate mortgage, and in the absence of

interest rate shocks also in the case of an adjustable-rate mortgage); and heavy front-loading
of interest payments. We propose a fairly accurate approximation of mortgage contracts,

which captures all of these three features. The approximation has only three state variables
and two, easy to calibrate, parameters. Its parsimonious nature thus provides a simple way
of introducing mortgages into business cycle/DSGE models that other researchers may ﬁnd
   4
    The absence of nonresidential capital in these models (one of the few exceptions is, for instance,
Iacoviello and Pavan, 2011) is perhaps motivated by a diﬀerent focus of that literature, being predomi-
nantly concerned with the interaction between borrowing constraints, home equity loans, consumption, and
monetary policy. However, as is clear from the home production literature, the presence of nonresidential
capital has important implications for the equilibrium dynamics of residential capital.




                                                   3
useful.5
        The paper proceeds as follows. The next section presents the empirical ﬁndings. Section

3 describes the model. Section 4 deﬁnes the equilibrium and characterizes the wedge due
to mortgage ﬁnance. Section 5 calibrates the model to U.S. data and presents quantitative
ﬁndings for the U.S. economy. Section 6 then investigates the quantitative eﬀects of the
various features of mortgage ﬁnance on investment dynamics and extends the model to in-
clude residential time to build. Section 7 concludes with a summary of our results and a
discussion of some avenues for future research. The paper has three appendixes. Appendix
A provides a description of the international data used in Section 2. Appendix B contains
some additional derivations related to Section 4 and describes the computation of the equi-
librium. Finally, Appendix C contains estimates of exogenous stochastic processes used for

computational experiments in Sections 5 and 6.



2         Leads and lags in investment data

Our empirical analysis is based on quarterly data for the following countries and peri-

ods: Australia (1959.Q3-2006.Q4), Belgium (1980.Q1-2006.Q4), Canada (1961.Q1-2006.Q4),
France (1971.Q1-2006.Q4), the U.K. (1965.Q1-2006.Q4), and the U.S. (1958.Q1-2006.Q4).

Although the sample is somewhat limited, these are the only countries for which the break-

down of total investment into residential and nonresidential components is available from
at least 1980 (we regard a period of about 25 years as the shortest that allows us to talk

sensibly about business cycles).6
    5
     In the literature on housing tenure choice, Chambers, Garriga, and Schlagenhauf (2009) model mort-
gages in a lot more detail than we do. Their focus, however, is on steady-state analysis.
   6
     Concerning other developed economies, the data are available as follows: Austria from 1988.Q1, Denmark
from 1990.Q1, Finland from 1990.Q1, Germany from 1991.Q1 (annually from 1970), Ireland from 1997.Q1
(annually from 1970), Italy from 1990.Q1, the Netherlands from 1987.Q1, New Zealand from 1987.Q2, (an-
nually from 1972), Portugal from 1995.Q1, and Spain from 1995.Q1. (The data sources are the OECD Main
Economic Indicators database, the OECD National Accounts database, and national statistical agencies.)
The data are also available for Japan from 1980.Q1, Norway from 1978.Q1, and Sweden from 1980.Q1.
However, for the available time periods residential investment in these countries does not exhibit ‘cyclical’
ﬂuctuations. Instead, in each of these countries the data are dominated by one episode: the ﬁnancial and
housing market crises in Norway (1987-1992) and Sweden (1990s) and the late 1980s housing boom and early


                                                     4
    All investment data are measured as chained-type quantity indexes. The reported statis-
tics are for logged data ﬁltered with the Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter; i.e., the statistics are for
percentage deviations from ‘trend’.7 The cyclical behavior of a variable x is then conve-

niently summarized by its correlations with real GDP at various leads and lags; i.e., by
corr(xt+j , GDPt ) for j = {−4, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4}, where xt+j and GDPt are deviations
from trend. We adopt the following terminology, common in modern business cycle litera-
ture: we say that a variable is leading the cycle (meaning leading real GDP) if the highest
correlation is at j < 0, as lagging the cycle if the highest correlation is at j > 0, and as
coincident with the cycle if the highest correlation is at j = 0.


2.1     Total, residential, and nonresidential investment

To set the stage, we start with correlations for total investment, usually referred to in
national accounts as gross ﬁxed capital formation (GFCF), one of the ﬁve main expenditure

components of GDP. The correlations are presented graphically in Figure 1 (the ﬁgure caption

contains the volatilities of the data). As the ﬁgure shows, in all six countries total investment

is coincident with GDP. In addition, the volatility of total investment is between 2.5 times
to 4 times the volatility of GDP; that is, in the ballpark of the much-cited volatility of U.S.

investment, which is about 3 times as volatile as GDP. Such volatilities are also broadly in
line with the prediction of a prototypical business cycle model with typical calibration.

    Figure 2 displays the cross-correlations for residential and nonresidential structures (volatil-
ities are reported in the ﬁgure caption). Residential structures include houses, apartment
buildings, and other dwellings, whereas nonresidential structures include oﬃce buildings,
retails complexes, production plants, etc. Together with equipment and software, residential
and nonresidential structures make up GFCF. We will often refer to residential structures as
‘residential investment’ and to nonresidential structures as ‘nonresidential investment’.8 The
1990s bust in Japan.
   7
     Similar results are obtained also for the Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) band-pass ﬁlter.
   8
     In the case of Belgium and France the cross-correlations are for the sum of nonresidential structures and
equipment and software as the two series are not available individually.


                                                      5
well-known empirical regularity that over the U.S. business cycle residential structures lead
GDP clearly jumps out of the chart for the U.S. This chart also shows that nonresidential
structures have the opposite dynamics, lagging GDP over the business cycle. Such a stark
diﬀerence in the dynamic properties of residential and nonresidential investment is to a lesser

extent observed also in Canada, but in the remaining countries the two types of investment
tend to be, more or less, coincident with GDP.
       Even though the cross-correlations in Figure 2 are useful descriptive statistics summa-
rizing the dynamic properties of the historical data, it would be useful to have a handle
on how robust these empirical regularities are. For example, in the case of Belgium, al-
though not clearly leading (based on our deﬁnition), residential structures tend to be more
strongly correlated with GDP at leads than at lags and nonresidential structures are in

fact lagging GDP a little. In order to assess the signiﬁcance of the leads and lags in the

data, we carry out the following robustness check. Using a block bootstrap method (e.g.,
Hardle, Horowitz, and Kreiss, 2001), 10,000 artiﬁcial data series of the same length as the

historical data are drawn for each country. Like the historical data, each artiﬁcial series is
logged and ﬁltered with the Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter, the cross-correlations are computed, and

the lead or lag (i.e., j ∈ {−4, ..., 0, ..., 4}) at which the highest correlation occurs is recorded.

Figure 3 plots the histograms of these occurrences at the diﬀerent j’s.9 For residential struc-

tures, the U.S. and Canada are the only countries for which the highest correlation is at a

lead (i.e., at j < 0) in at least 95% of the draws, while for nonresidential structures only
the U.S. has the highest correlation at a lag (i.e., at j > 0) in at least 95% of the draws.

Nevertheless, with the exception of Belgium, all countries exhibit residential investment ei-
ther leading or coincident with GDP; i.e., the highest correlation occurring at j ≤ 0 in more
than 95% of the draws. And, with the exception of the U.K., they exhibit nonresidential
investment either lagging or coincident with GDP; i.e., the highest correlation occurring at
j ≥ 0 in more than 95% of the draws. The predictions of business cycle models with dis-
   9
     The length of each block in the bootstrap is set equal to 20 quarters, which is suﬃcient to address the
serial correlation in the historical data.



                                                     6
aggregated investment, as reviewed in the Introduction, are thus not supported by available
international data. (Note that even in Belgium residential investment is not lagging, based
on the 95% conﬁdence level, and in the U.K. nonresidential is not leading, based on the same
conﬁdence level.)


2.2       Housing starts

While the U.S. and Canada look clearly diﬀerent from the other countries in terms of the
cyclical lead of residential structures, there is much more uniformity across the six countries

in terms of the dynamics of housing starts.10 The start of construction is deﬁned across
countries consistently as the beginning of excavation for the foundation of a residential
building (single family or multifamily) and every month detailed surveys of home builders

record the number of such activities.
       The top half of Figure 4 plots the cross-correlations with GDP for the historical data

(volatilities are in the ﬁgure caption). As is immediately apparent, housing starts lead GDP

in all countries, possibly with the exception of Belgium. Using a similar robustness check

as in the case of structures, the lead occurs in at least 95% of the draws in the cases of
Canada, the U.K., and the U.S. And if the signiﬁcance level is lowered to 90%, then also in

the case of Australia and France, as the bottom half of Figure 4 shows.11 Together with the
data on residential investment, the data on housing starts suggest cross-country diﬀerences

in completion times (time to build) in residential construction. Longer time to build means

that investment expenditures on a housing project are recorded in national accounts over a
  10
     The time periods used for housing starts diﬀer slightly from the time periods used for residential struc-
tures due to diﬀerent data availability. Housing starts are for the following periods: Australia (1965.Q3-
2006.Q4), Belgium (1968.Q1-2006.Q4), Canada (1960.Q1-2006.Q4), France (1974.Q1-2006.Q4), and the U.S.
(1959.Q1-2006.Q4). For the U.K., residential building permits are used instead of starts as the data on starts
are available only from 1990.Q1. Based on a strong comovement between the two data series during the
period 1990.Q1-2006.Q4, we take permits as a proxy for starts. For all countries the data come from the
OECD MEI database.
  11
     In the case of Belgium, even though starts do not lead, residential building permits lead by three quarters,
based on the cross-correlogram for historical data (based on the bootstrap test, however, a lead is signiﬁcant
only at a 70% conﬁdence level). In the other countries, building permits and starts exhibit essentially the
same lead.



                                                       7
longer period of time. Residential investment thus may not exhibit a cyclical lead in countries
with longer time to build even when housing starts do. Empirical evidence on cross-country
diﬀerences in residential time to build is discussed below.


2.3     Further details on the dynamics of residential structures

Available details on the diﬀerent types of residential construction in the U.S., and a com-
parison of the data across time periods, provide an insight into the potential sources of
the cyclical lead of U.S. residential investment. A comparison of some of the details with
available evidence from other countries also provides information about the sources of the

cross-country diﬀerences documented above. We ﬁrst discuss the relevant characteristics of
the diﬀerent types of residential structures and time periods and then present the ﬁndings.


2.3.1    Single family vs multifamily structures

Most of residential construction in the U.S. is accounted for by single family structures

(houses). Their share in residential investment is ﬁve times as large as the share of multi-

family structures (mainly apartment buildings). Whereas new houses are primarily built for

owner occupancy, most apartment buildings are built to rent (historical data from Census
Bureau’s Survey of Construction).12 For our purposes, the main diﬀerences between the two
types of structures are two-fold. First, time to build is longer for multifamily than for single

family structures. Based on historical data from the Survey of Construction, the average pe-

riod from start to completion for a typical single family structure is 6.2 months (5.6 months if
only built-for-sale houses, as opposed to custom-built houses, are counted). For multifamily
structures the average construction time is 10 months for all structure types and 13 months
for 20+ unit structures, which make up the majority of multifamily construction.
    Second, ownership of a house is ﬁnanced diﬀerently from ownership of a multifamily
  12
     Most of the historical data from the Survey of Construction used in this section are from either early
1960s or early 1970s to 2006.




                                                    8
structure.13 House purchase ﬁnance is relatively simple and standardized. Based on his-
torical data from the Survey of Construction, on average 76% of new houses are ﬁnanced
through a 30-year conventional mortgage (this includes also subprime and Alt-A mortgages
not reported separately), 18% through FHA/VA insured mortgages, and 6% are paid for with

cash. And the average loan-to-value ratio of conventional mortgages for newly-built homes
has been relatively stable at 76% (Federal Housing Finance Agency, Monthly Interest Rate
Survey, Table 10).14 Debt thus plays a major role in ﬁnancing newly-built house purchases

and its importance has been relatively stable over time. In contrast, ﬁnancing acquisitions
of new multifamily structures is more involved, heterogenous, and, as discussed below, has
changed dramatically over time.


2.3.2    Structural changes in housing ﬁnance in the 1980s

There are two reasons for splitting the U.S. sample period 1959.Q1-2006.Q4 into two sub-

periods in 1984. First, it is often argued that Regulation Q was responsible for residential

construction booms and busts in the U.S. before the 1980s, causing boom and bust cycles

in the wider economy (e.g., Bernanke, 2007). This regulation set ceilings on interest rates
that savings banks and savings and loans—the main mortgage lenders at the time—were

allowed to pay on deposits. Regulation Q was eventually abolished in 1980 and largely

phased out during the following four years. Second, the method of ﬁnancing multifamily

housing changed dramatically. As discussed by Bradley, Nothaft, and Freund (1998) and
Colton and Collignon (2001), up until mid- to late 1980s limited partnerships, ﬁnancing
apartment housing through mortgages, have been the dominant form of apartment owner-
ship in the U.S. Since then, however, they have been replaced by equity real estate investment
trusts (REITs). As a result there has been substantial substitution of equity for debt as a
  13
     Construction, as opposed to the ultimate ownership, is in both cases typically ﬁnanced by a short-term
construction loan obtained by a home builder or a developer from a bank.
  14
     The data on loan-to-value ratios exclude subprime and Alt-A mortgages. Their importance in the
aggregate has been, however, isolated only to the last three years of our sample.




                                                    9
means of ﬁnancing apartment housing.15


2.3.3      Findings

The ﬁrst two panels of Table 1 report the cross-correlations with GDP, as well as volatil-
ities, for key data related to single family and multifamily housing investment in the U.S.
The ﬁrst panel is for the period 1958.Q1-1983.Q4, while the second panel is for the period
1984.Q1-2006.Q4. The ﬁrst two rows in each panel are for the single family and multifamily
components of residential investment in national accounts, followed by starts and comple-
tions. These ‘construction data’ are then complemented with ‘ﬁnancing data’. Namely, the

net change in real mortgage debt outstanding obtained from the Flow of Funds Accounts,

Table F.217.16
       From the ﬁrst panel of Table 1 we see that single family structures clearly lead GDP in

the ﬁrst period (1958.Q1-1983.Q4), with the highest correlation coeﬃcient of 0.73 at j = −2.

Multifamily structures are, in contrast, coincident with GDP, with the highest correlation

coeﬃcient of 0.51 at j = 0. In terms of starts, however, both types of structures lead GDP,

with both having the highest correlation coeﬃcient at j = −2 (0.70 and 0.61, respectively).
The reason why multifamily structure investment from the national accounts is coincident

with the cycle is a longer time to build. As noted above, it takes about four quarters to

complete most multifamily housing construction, compared with just two quarters (at the

most) for single family houses. This is reﬂected in the dynamics of completions: while
completions of single family structures peak at j = −1, one quarter after the peak of starts,
completions of multifamily structures peak at j = 2, four quarters after the peak of starts.
Notice also that both single family and multifamily mortgages lead GDP, with the highest
  15
     Signiﬁcant changes occurred also in the market for single family housing ﬁnance. These changes, however,
occurred on the side of mortgage lenders—deregulation of the primary mortgage market and development of
a liquid secondary mortgage market through securitization (see, e.g., Green and Wachter, 2005). Mortgage
debt, nevertheless, remained the main source of ﬁnance.
  16
     Flow of Funds tables report home mortgages, deﬁned as mortgages for 1-4 family properties, and multi-
family mortgages, deﬁned as mortgages for 5+ family properties. The fraction of new construction accounted
for by 2-4 family properties is, however, negligible (completions data from the Survey of Construction). Home
mortgages are thus a good proxy for single family property mortgages.



                                                     10
correlation coeﬃcients of 0.69 and 0.46, respectively, at j = −2, the same as that for starts.
       There are three key observations concerning the second period (1984.Q1-2006.Q4). First,

investment in single family structures still leads GDP, even though the cross-correlations
at all leads and lags are weaker than in the ﬁrst period. Starts, completions, and single
family mortgages have also similar dynamics to those in the ﬁrst period, even though again
the correlations are weaker.17 Thus, although Regulation Q likely played a role in the
cyclical dynamics of residential investment in the ﬁrst period, perhaps accounting for the
stronger correlations with GDP, it cannot be the only reason for why movements in residential
investment precede movements in GDP. An additional argument against Regulation Q being
the main source of such dynamics is that a clear lead in residential investment is observed
also in Canadian data, especially for single family structures (the third panel of Table 1).

Unlike U.S. mortgage lenders, Canadian banks did not face constraints such as those imposed

by Regulation Q (Lessard, 1975).
       Second, multifamily residential investment in the second period behaves like nonresiden-

tial investment in the sense that it lags GDP; starts are coincident with GDP and completions
lag GDP by three quarters.18 Interestingly, this is despite the fact that mortgages for multi-

family housing still lead GDP, even though, like in the case of single family housing, they are

much more volatile and the correlations are weaker than in the ﬁrst period. Such decoupling

between mortgage ﬁnance and construction in the multifamily sector is consistent with the

increased role of equity ﬁnance in multifamily housing noted above.
       Third, the lead in single-family mortgages is due to ﬁxed-rate mortgages (FRMs) rather

than adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs). Up until early 1980s, the only mortgage type
available in the U.S. was essentially a 30-year FRM. But with the start of the 1980s, ARMs
  17
      The mortgage data are especially substantially less correlated with GDP at all leads and lags than in
the ﬁrst period. In addition, they are much more volatile. This is even after home equity loans (broadly
available from 1991) have been stripped out of the data. A likely explanation for the low correlations and
the high volatility is reﬁnancing, which became much more accessible during the 1980s.
   18
      The generally weaker cross-correlations of multifamily structures with GDP in the second period are
likely due to shocks speciﬁc to that market segment that occurred in the early and mid- 1980s. As discussed
by Colton and Collignon (2001), changes in the U.S. tax code in 1981 (Economic Recovery Tax Act) provided
strong incentives for apartment construction. Most of these incentives were, however, eliminated by the 1986
Tax Reform Act.


                                                    11
became an integral part of the U.S. mortgage market. Accounting on average for about 30%
of all mortgages for newly-built single-family homes (FHFA, Monthly Interest Rate Survey,
Table 18), their popularity has ﬂuctuated over time. As Table 1 reveals, over the business
cycle their fraction in total mortgages for single family newly-built homes moves in tandem

with GDP without any lead or lag. This leaves the bulk of the lead in single family mortgages
to be accounted for by FRMs.
      We close this subsection by following up on our previous discussion regarding cross-
country diﬀerences in completion times. The bottom panel of Table 1 reports the dynamics
of starts and completions in the U.K (the only other country for which completions data are
available; unlike in the U.S., direct measurement of completion times is not available). As
we can see, U.K. completions tend to peak three to four quarters after starts, an indication

of possibly twice as long time to build in the U.K. than in the U.S. (single family homes).19
      To sum up, we draw the following lessons from this subsection: (i) the cyclical lead of

U.S. residential investment cannot be entirely attributed to Regulation Q; (ii) the lead is

driven by those structures that rely on mortgage ﬁnance; and (iii) it is primarily FRMs that
are used to ﬁnance growth in residential investment ahead of GDP growth. In addition:

(iv) there may be signiﬁcant diﬀerences in residential time to build across countries, perhaps

due to technological, supply chain, or regulatory constraints, or a diﬀerent composition of

residential investment in terms of single- and multifamily structures; Ball (2003) provides
an overview of the structure and practices of housebuilding industries in diﬀerent countries,
which points to a large variation across countries along these dimensions.


2.4      Dynamics of mortgage rates

The last piece of empirical observation we report concerns the cyclical dynamics of the
mortgage rate—the nominal interest rate on mortgage loans. Even though by itself it does
not reﬂect the true costs of mortgage ﬁnance to consumers—which, as we show in the next
 19
   Completions data for the U.K. come from the Department of Communities and Local Government,
Housing Statistics, Table 222.


                                              12
section, depend on the present value of real mortgage payments (interest and amortization)
over the lifetime of the mortgage—the mortgage rate may indicate how the costs behave
over the business cycle. According to the literature (e.g., Scanlon and Whitehead, 2004;

Calza, Monacelli, and Stracca, forthcoming) the countries in our sample can be described as
either FRM or ARM countries. For each country we use the interest rate for the country’s
most common mortgage product, as reported in the above studies.
      The cross-correlations of mortgage rates with GDP (and their volatilities) are reported
in the ﬁrst panel of Table 2, which reveals a common pattern across countries: mortgage
rates are generally negatively correlated with future GDP and positively correlated with
past GDP. Thus, on average, mortgage rates are relatively low before a GDP peak, tend to
increase as GDP increases, and reach their peak a few quarters after a peak in GDP. The

second panel, which reports the same statistics for government bond yields, shows that the

cyclical dynamics of mortgage rates reﬂect the general behavior of nominal interest rates over

the business cycle, rather than factors speciﬁc to the mortgage market (for FRM countries

we take par yields on coupon government bonds of maturities close to the periods for which
FRM mortgage rates are ﬁxed; for ARM countries we take 3-month Treasury bill yields,

as mortgage rates on ARMs are set, after some initial period, as a constant margin over a

short-term government bond yield).20 Because it is real, not nominal, mortgage payments
that matter in the model of the next section, the last panel of Table 2 reports the dynamics of

inﬂation rates. We see that, with the exception of Belgium, the lead-lag pattern of inﬂation
rates is similar to that of nominal interest rates.



3       A business cycle model with mortgages

The ﬁndings of the previous section suggest that mortgage ﬁnance may be a key factor
behind the observed lead of residential investment in the U.S. business cycle. Time-to-
build in residential construction may then aﬀect the extent of such lead. To evaluate these
 20
      For future reference we also include for the U.S. the yield on 3-month Treasury bills.


                                                      13
conjectures within a theoretical framework, we introduce mortgages into a business cycle
model with disaggregated investment. We build on Gomme et al. (2001), henceforth referred

to as GKR, which shares with other models in the literature the property that in equilibrium
residential investment lags and nonresidential investment leads output (refer to footnote 1
for the intuition behind this common result).
       Before getting into details, it is worth pointing out two aspects of the model. First,
mortgage and inﬂation rates are exogenous—they follow a joint VAR(n) process with TFP
(a government ensures that the economy’s resource constraint is satisﬁed when these prices
are exogenous). This is motivated by practical considerations: given our question, it is
important to capture the lead-lag relationship between output on one hand and interest and
inﬂation rates on the other, as summarized by Table 2. Unfortunately, existing literature

does not provide a mechanism generating such dynamics endogenously.21 Second, we do not

model the underlying frictions giving rise to mortgages—mortgage ﬁnance is simply imposed

on residential investment. Modeling demand for housing ﬁnance from ﬁrst principles would

make the model too large (in terms of the state space) for business cycle analysis. For similar
reasons we also abstract from reﬁnancing and default.22


3.1       Preferences and technology

A representative household has preferences over consumption of a market-produced good

cM t , a home-produced good cHt , and leisure, which is given by 1 − hM t − hHt , where hM t
is time spent in market work and hHt is time spent in home work. The preferences are
  21
      For a discussion of this issue see Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2007), Atkeson and Kehoe (2008), and
Sustek (2011).
   22
      Gervais (2002), Rios-Rull and Sanchez-Marcos (2008), and Chambers et al. (2009) develop models with
many of the micro-level features we abstract from. Their focus, however, is on steady-state analy-
sis. Campbell and Cocco (2003) model a single household’s mortgage choice that includes reﬁnancing.
Corbae and Quintin (2011) and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2011) construct models with foreclosures, fo-
cusing on steady-state equilibria. Iacoviello and Pavan (2011) construct a model with similar features as
in Gervais (2002) and with aggregate shocks. Housing ﬁnance in their model, however, takes the form of
trading a one-period bond.




                                                   14
summarized by the utility function

                                 ∑
                                 ∞
                            E0         β t u (ct , 1 − hM t − hHt ) ,    β ∈ (0, 1),                    (1)
                                 t=0


where u(., .) has all the standard properties and ct is a composite good, given by a constant-
returns-to-scale aggregator c(cM t , cHt ). Time spent in home work is combined with home
capital kHt to produce the home good according to a production function


                                           cHt = AH G(kHt , hHt ),                                      (2)


where G(., .) has all the standard properties. In contrast to the home production literature,
we abstract from durable goods and equate home capital with residential structures when
mapping the model to data. We will therefore refer to home capital as ‘residential capital’.23
       Output of the market-produced good yt is determined by an aggregate production func-

tion
                                           yt = AM t F (kM t , hM t ),                                  (3)

operated by identical perfectly competitive ﬁrms. Here, AM t is total factor productivity

(TFP) and kM t is market capital, which we will refer to as ‘nonresidential capital’.24 Firms
rent labor and capital services from households at a wage rate wt and a capital rental
rate rt , respectively. The market-produced good can be used for consumption, investment

in residential capital, xHt , and investment in nonresidential capital, xM t . Nonresidential

capital has a J-period time to build, where J is an integer greater than one. Speciﬁcally,
  23
      cHt is thus consumption of housing services and hHt is interpreted as time devoted to home maintenance
and leisure enjoyed at home, rather than in a bar. Under enough separability in utility and production
functions, which will be imposed under calibration, the period utility function can be rewritten such that
it is a function of cM t , hM t , and kHt (Greenwood, Rogerson, and Wright, 1995). This makes it comparable
with models that put housing directly in the utility function.
   24
      Notice that in contrast to AM t , which is time varying (due to shocks), AH is constant. GKR show
that under enough separability in utility and production functions, which will be imposed under calibration,
shocks to AH do not aﬀect market variables (i.e., time spent in market work, consumption of the market-
produced good, and accumulation of the two types of capital). This is convenient as it allows us to abstract
from home-production TFP shocks, which cannot be measured outside of the model.



                                                        15
an investment project started in period t becomes a part of the capital stock only in period
t + J. However, the project requires resources throughout the construction process from
period t to t + J − 1. In particular, a fraction ϕj ∈ [0, 1] of the project must be invested in
period t + J − j, j ∈ {1, ..., J}, where j denotes the number of periods from completion and
∑J
  j=1 ϕj = 1. Let sjt be the size of projects that in period t are j periods from completion.

Total nonresidential investment (i.e., investment across all on-going projects) in period t is
thus
                                                ∑
                                                J
                                       xM t =            ϕj sjt                            (4)
                                                   j=1

and the projects evolve as

                                sj−1,t+1 = sjt ,     j = 2, . . . , J,                     (5)

                                 kM,t+1 = (1 − δM )kM t + s1t ,                            (6)

where δM ∈ (0, 1). For now, residential capital is assumed to have only one-period time to

build and therefore
                                 kH,t+1 = (1 − δH )kHt + xHt ,                             (7)

where δH ∈ (0, 1). The assumptions regarding time to build of the two types of capital are

the same as in GKR. They are motivated by the observation that in the U.S. nonresidential
structures take much longer to complete than residential structures, especially single-family

houses.


3.2       Mortgages

So far the setup is exactly the same as in GKR. What makes the current model diﬀerent is
that residential investment is subject to a ﬁnancing constraint


                                          lt = θpt xHt ,                                   (8)




                                                16
where lt is the nominal value of mortgage loans, θ ∈ [0, 1) is a loan-to-value ratio, and pt is
the aggregate price level (the price of the market-produced good in dollars). Mortgage debt
requires that the household makes regular payments throughout the life of the mortgage.
The household’s budget constraint is thus

                                                                                      lt   mt
        cM t + xM t + xHt = (1 − τr )rt kM t + (1 − τw )wt hM t + δM τr kM t +           −    + τt ,       (9)
                                                                                      pt   pt

where τr is a tax rate on income from nonresidential capital, τw is a tax rate on labor income,
mt are mortgage payments on outstanding mortgage debt, and τt is a lump-sum transfer.25
Mortgage payments are given as


                                            mt = (Rt + δDt )dt ,                                          (10)


where dt is nominal mortgage debt outstanding, Rt is an eﬀective net interest rate on the

outstanding mortgage debt, and δDt ∈ (0, 1) is an eﬀective amortization rate of the out-

standing mortgage debt. Notice that δDt ∈ (0, 1) implies that mt > Rt dt ; i.e., a part of the
outstanding debt is amortized each period. The variables dt , Rt , and δDt are state variables

evolving recursively according to these laws of motion


                               dt+1 = (1 − δDt )dt + lt ,                                                 (11)


                             δD,t+1 = (1 − νt )δDt
                                                α
                                                   + νt κ,         α, κ ∈ (0, 1),                         (12)
                                      
                                      
                                       (1 − νt )Rt + νt it          if FRM,
                              Rt+1 =                                                                      (13)
                                      
                                       it                           if ARM.

Here, νt ≡ lt /dt+1 is the share of current loans in the new stock of debt and (1 − νt ) ≡
(1 − δDt )dt /dt+1 is the share of outstanding unamortized debt in the new stock of debt. In
  25
    τr and τw are constant and, as in the rest of the home production literature, are introduced into the
model purely for calibration purposes; τt is time-varying and its role is to ensure that the economy’s resource
constraint holds.



                                                      17
addition, it is the net interest rate (either ﬁxed or adjustable) on current loans and α and
κ are parameters controlling the evolution of the amortization rate, which is described in
further detail below. Notice that the assumption α, κ ∈ (0, 1) implies that δDt ∈ (0, 1) for all
t, as assumed above. Notice also that combining equations (10) and (11) gives the evolution

of mortgage debt in a more familiar form: dt+1 = (1 + Rt )dt − mt + lt . Given that most
countries can be characterized as either FRM countries or ARM countries, the household in
the model operates only under either FRM or ARM environment.


3.2.1   An example and assessment of the mortgage

It is worth pausing here to explain in a little more detail the laws of motion (11)-(13) and
their implications for the time path of mortgage payments, given by equation (10). For
this purpose, let us suppose that the representative household has no outstanding mortgage

debt and takes a ﬁxed-rate mortgage in period t = 0 in the amount l0 > 0. Let us further

assume that the household does not take any new mortgage loans in subsequent periods (i.e.,

l1 = l2 = ... = 0). Equations (10)-(13) then yield the following path of mortgage payments:
In period t = 1, the household’s outstanding debt is d1 = l0 , the initial amortization rate
at which this debt will be reduced going into the next period is δD1 = κ, and the eﬀective

interest rate is R1 = i0 . Mortgage payments in t = 1 are thus m1 = (R1 + δD1 )d1 = (i0 + κ)l0 .

In period t = 2 the outstanding debt is d2 = (1 − κ)l0 and is reduced at a rate δD2 = κα > κ

going into the next period. The interest rate R2 is again equal to i0 . Mortgage payments in

t = 2 are thus m2 = (R2 + δD2 )d2 = (i0 + κα )(1 − κ)l0 and so on. Notice that whereas the
interest part of mortgage payments, Rt dt , declines as debt gets amortized, the amortization

part, δDt dt , may increase if, for a given κ, α is suﬃciently small. The parameter α thus
allows us to calibrate the model such that mt is approximately constant for a ‘suﬃciently
long’ period, thus approximating the constant mortgage payments during the lifetime of a
typical mortgage contract.
   Figure 5 provides a numerical example to illustrate these points further and to assess



                                              18
how well the mortgage in the model approximates a real-world contract. Here, one period
corresponds to one quarter, l0 = $250, 000, i0 = 9.28%/4 (the long-run average mortgage
rate for a U.S. 30-year conventional FRM), α = 0.9946, and κ = 0.00162. Panels A and B
plot mortgage payments, mt , and outstanding debt, dt , respectively, for 120 quarters. Panel

C then plots the shares of interest payments, Rt dt , and amortization payments, δDt dt , in
mortgage payments, mt . For comparison, the panels also plot the same variables obtained
from a Yahoo mortgage calculator for a U.S. 30-year conventional FRM in the same amount
and with the same interest rate. We see that the model captures two key features of the

conventional mortgage. First, mortgage payments based on the calculator are constant;
in the model they are approximately constant for the ﬁrst 70 or so periods (17.5 years).
Second, interest payments are front-loaded: they make up most of mortgage payments at

the beginning of the life of the mortgage and their share gradually declines; the opposite

is true for amortization payments.26 How good is this approximation? By comparing the

time paths in panel A, one may conclude that the approximation is poor, as after the 70th

period the payments in the model signiﬁcantly deviate from the payments in the real-world
contract. Such conclusion would, however, be misguided. This is because mortgage payments

far out are heavily discounted and thus matter little for decisions in period 0. A more suitable

metric is therefore to measure the deviations in present value terms (we use 1/i as the annual

discount factor), normalized by the size of the loan (i.e., $250, 000). This metric is plotted

in panel D of the ﬁgure, which shows that throughout the 120 periods the approximation
error is of the order of magnitude of 1e−4 . The sum of these present-value errors is equal to
about 1% of the size of the loan. For comparison, when all monetary transaction costs of

obtaining a real-world mortgage are counted (costs that we abstract from), they usually add
up to at least 3% of the amount borrowed.27
  26
      If α was equal to one, the share of interest payments in mt would be constant and mt would decline
linearly throughout the lifetime of the mortgage.
   27
      If we were to plot the time paths of mt and dt in the model beyond period 120, the picture would show
that both indeed converge to zero, making also the approximation error in panel D to converge to zero.




                                                    19
3.2.2     The general case

So far we have only considered once-and-for-all investment. Of course, in response to shocks,
the representative household adjusts xHt , and thus lt , every period. In this case, δDt and Rt
are the eﬀective amortization and interest rates, respectively, on the economy-wide stock of
mortgage debt. Over time the eﬀective amortization rate evolves as the weighted average of
the amortization rates on the stock and the ﬂow, with the weights being the relative sizes of
the stock and the ﬂow. Similarly, the eﬀective interest rate evolves as the weighted average
of the interest rates on the stock and the ﬂow.

    The advantage of our approximation lies in its parsimonious nature. It eﬀectively replaces
120 vintages of mortgage debt, each with a diﬀerent amortization and interest rate, with just
three state variables and two parameters. This should make it easy to introduce mortgages
into a variety of models, including those with a host of diﬀerent frictions and shocks.28


3.3     Exogenous process and closing the model

As mentioned above, the inﬂation rate πt ≡ log pt − log pt−1 and the current mortgage rate

it follow a joint VAR(n) process with market TFP: zt+1 b(L) = εt+1 , where εt+1 ∼ N (0, Σ),

zt = [log AM t , it , πt ]⊤ , b(L) = I − b1 L − ... − bn Ln (L being the lag operator), and Σ = BB ′ .
The model is closed by a government budget constraint. The government collects revenues
from capital and labor taxes and operates the mortgage market by providing mortgage loans

and collecting mortgage payments. Each period the government balances out its budget by

lump-sum transfers to the household: τt = τr rt kM t + τw wt hM t − τr δM kM t + mt /pt − lt /pt .
  28
     Even though, following Iacoviello (2005), many DSGE models include housing and housing ﬁnance, they
do not have debt contracts resembling mortgages. Instead, housing is ﬁnanced by a sequence of one-period
loans. The interest rate applied to a loan is either the current short-term interest rate (e.g., Iacoviello, 2005,
and many others), a weighted average of the current and past interest rates (Rubio, 2011), or evolving in
a sticky Calvo-style fashion (Graham and Wright, 2007). Calza et al. (forthcoming) model FRMs as two-
period contracts in which half of the principal and half of the total interest is paid each period; an ARM
contract in their model is a one-period loan.




                                                       20
4     Equilibrium eﬀects of mortgages

This section deﬁnes the equilibrium and shows how the equilibrium eﬀects of mortgages can
be conveniently summarized by a wedge in an Euler equation for housing investment. In the

following sections this wedge will help us understand the interactions between the parameters
of mortgage ﬁnance and the dynamics of residential and nonresidential investment in the
model. Due to space constraints, equilibrium conditions that are not essential for the current
discussion are relegated to Appendix B. This appendix also describes the computation of
the equilibrium.

    The equilibrium is deﬁned as follows: (i) the representative household solves its utility
maximization problem, described below, taking all prices and transfers as given; (ii) rt and wt
are equal to their marginal products; (iii) the government budget constraint is satisﬁed; and

(iv) the exogenous variables follow the VAR(n) process. The aggregate resource constraint,

cM t + xM t + xHt = yt , then holds by Walras’ Law. To characterize the equilibrium, it is

convenient to work with a recursive formulation of the household’s problem. The Bellman

equation is


      V (s1t , ..., sJ−1,t , kM t , kHt , dt , δDt , Rt ) = max{u (ct , 1 − hM t − hHt )


                                +βEt V (s1,t+1 , ..., sJ−1,t+1 , kM,t+1 , kH,t+1 , dt+1 , δD,t+1 , Rt+1 )},

subject to (2) and (4)-(13). After substituting the constraints into the Bellman equation,
the maximization is only with respect to (hM t , hHt , sJt , xHt ). Here, xHt aﬀects the period
utility function, through its eﬀect on lt in the budget constraint, and the value function,
through its eﬀect on the laws of motion for kH,t+1 , dt+1 , δD,t+1 , and Rt+1 . There is enough
separability in this problem that the variables related to mortgage ﬁnance (lt , dt , δDt , Rt , it ,
πt ) show up only in the ﬁrst-order condition for xHt , which is

                       [                                                       ]
 u1t c1t (1 − θ) − θβEt Ved,t+1 + ζDt (κ − δDt
                                            α
                                               )VδD ,t+1 + ζDt (it − Rt )VR,t+1 = βEt VkH,t+1 . (14)


                                                       21
                  (             ) (                  )2
                      1−δDt e          Dt e
Here, ζDt ≡                 d
                       1+πt t
                                 / 1−δ
                                    1+πt
                                          dt + θx Ht    , Ved,t+1 ≡ pt Vd,t+1 , det ≡ dt /pt−1 and VkH,t , Vdt ,
VδD ,t , and VRt are the derivatives of the value function with respect to the state variables
speciﬁed in the subscript.29 The variables Vd,t+1 and dt are transformed in order to ensure
their stationarity. It is convenient to rearrange the ﬁrst-order condition as


                                           u1t c1t (1 + τHt ) = βEt VkH,t+1 ,                              (15)


where
                    {                                                                              }
                       βEt Ved,t+1 β [ζDt (κ − δDt
                                                α
                                                   )Et VδD ,t+1 + ζDt (it − Rt )Et VR,t+1 ]
        τHt   = −θ 1 +            +                                                                        (16)
                        u1t c1t                             u1t c1t


is an endogenous ‘wedge’. For τHt = 0, equation (15) has a simple interpretation: it equates

marginal utility of market consumption today with discounted expected marginal lifetime
utility of housing. The wedge acts like an ad-valorem tax, making an additional unit of

housing more or less expensive in terms of current market consumption (the wedge can be

positive or negative, depending on parameter values and exogenous shocks). In GKR, there

is no mortgage ﬁnance. Indeed, if θ = 0, the wedge is equal to zero and the equilibrium is

the same as in their model. Thus, under θ = 0 the model exhibits the same dynamics as in
GKR: xHt lagging and xM t leading. The question is if for θ ∈ (0, 1), calibrated to the data,

the wedge moves in such a way as to overturn this results and reproduce the lead-lag pattern

in the data.
       The derivatives of the value function are given by Benveniste-Scheinkman conditions.
Here we focus only on VkH,t and Vedt (VδD ,t and VRt are contained in Appendix B). For VkH,t
the condition is VkH,t = u1t c2t AH G1t + β(1 − δH )Et VkH,t+1 . It states that marginal lifetime
utility of housing is given as the expected discounted sum of per-period marginal utilities of
  29
    We also adopt the convention of denoting, for example, by u2t the ﬁrst derivative of the u function with
respect to its second argument.




                                                          22
housing over its lifetime. For Vedt , the Benveniste-Scheinkman condition is

                  Rt + δDt     1 − δDt [ e                                                     ]
  Vedt = −u1t c1t          +β                            α
                                       Et Vd,t+1 + ζxt (δDt − κ)VδD ,t+1 + ζxt (Rt − it )VR,t+1 ,
                   1 + πt       1 + πt
                                                                                                (17)
                     (               )2
                          Dt e
where ζxt ≡ θxHt / 1−δ 1+πt t
                             d + θxHt . Notice that this condition simpliﬁes when either i)
new loans are the same as old loans (i.e., δtα = κ and Rt = it ) or ii) we consider again a

once-and-for-all house purchase, implying that ζDt = 0 and ζx,t+j = 0 for all j = 1, 2, .... In
these special cases equation (17) becomes

                                         (              )         (             )
                                             Rt + δDt                 1 − δDt
                       Vedt = −u1t c1t                       +β                     Et Ved,t+1 ,   (18)
                                              1 + πt                   1 + πt

which has a simple interpretation: the marginal value of mortgage debt is given as the
expected discounted sum of marginal per-period real mortgage payments, weighted by the

marginal utility of market consumption, over the lifetime of the mortgage debt. Notice that

if mortgages were modeled as a one-period loan, this condition would simplify further to a

familiar Vedt = −u1t c1t (1 + Rt )/(1 + πt ), where Rt = it−1 .
   Similarly, in the special cases (i) or (ii), the expression for the wedge (16) simpliﬁes to

                                        [                           ]
                                τHt = −θ 1 + βEt Ved,t+1 /(u1t c1t ) .                             (19)


Combining this equation with equation (18) provides a clear interpretation of the wedge: the
wedge is equal to −θ times the diﬀerence (as Ved,t+1 is negative) between the equity cost of
ﬁnancing an additional unit of housing, which is a foregone unit of market consumption today,

and the debt cost of doing so, which is the present value of foregone market consumption
in the future. Other things being equal, when the debt cost declines (i.e., Ved,t+1 declines in
absolute value), the wedge declines, leading to more residential investment.
   Of course, the household in the model chooses xHt every period in response to shocks
and new (i.e., marginal) debt has a diﬀerent amortization rate and a diﬀerent interest rate



                                                        23
(under FRM) than outstanding debt. The terms ζDt (κ − δDt
                                                       α
                                                          )VδD ,t+1 and ζDt (it − Rt )VR,t+1
                                                                  α
in the general expression for the wedge (16), and the terms ζxt (δDt − κ)VδD ,t+1 and ζxt (Rt −

it )VR,t+1 in the general Benveniste-Scheinkman condition (17), account for this fact. Without
these terms the ﬁrst-order condition for xHt would state that the marginal eﬀect on period
mortgage payments of new mortgage debt, lt , is Rt +δDt , i.e., the sum of the eﬀective interest
and amortization rates on the outstanding stock. The term ζDt (κ − δDt
                                                                    α
                                                                       )VδD ,t+1 in equation
(16), for instance, ‘corrects’ for the fact that new debt has a lower amortization rate than
                       α
outstanding debt (κ < δDt ). (Put diﬀerently, the extra terms appear in the optimality
condition because, even though the optimization is with respect to the state variables dt+1 ,
δD,t+1 , and Rt+1 , it is only the eﬀect on lifetime utility of the new loan that matters for the
optimal decision.)

    For future reference we note that the wedge depends on the following features of mortgage

ﬁnance: (i) the loan-to-value ratio θ; (ii) how fast the loan is amortized (governed by α and

κ); (iii) whether the loan is a FRM or ARM (which matters for the future paths of Rt ); and

(iv) the dynamics of [log AM t , it ,πt ], imbedded in the conditional expectation operator Et ,
which is based on the exogenous VAR(n) process.



5     Quantitative results for the U.S. economy

This section presents quantitative ﬁndings for the U.S. economy, which we take as a bench-

mark case. After describing the calibration we report the results, leaving much of the expla-
nation of how the various model features aﬀect the results for the next section.


5.1    Calibration

The parameter values are summarized in Table 3. One period in the model corresponds to
one quarter and the functional forms are as in GKR: u(., .) = ω log c+(1−ω) log(1−hM −hH );
c(., .) = cψM c1−ψ            η 1−η                  ϱ 1−ϱ
               H ; G(., .) = kH hH ; and F (., .) = kM hM . The parameter AH is normalized

to be equal to one and the value of AM t in a nonstochastic steady state is chosen so that yt

                                               24
in the nonstochastic steady state is equal to one.
       As mentioned above, we abstract from consumer durable goods. The data equivalent

to yt is thus GDP less expenditures on consumer durable goods. Nonresidential capital in
the model is mapped into the sum of nonresidential structures and equipment & software
(equipment & software is, more or less, coincident with GDP, although it is more strongly
positively correlated with GDP at lags than at leads). If only nonresidential structures
were used as the data equivalent to kM t , the share of capital income in GDP, ϱ, would be
too low, making the model’s dynamic properties diﬃcult to compare with the literature.
Because kM t includes equipment & software, we set J equal to 4 and ϕj equal to 0.25
for all j. These are the same choices as those of GKR. The parameter ϱ is set equal to
0.283, based on measurement from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA)

obtained by Gomme, Ravikumar, and Rupert (2011). We also use their NIPA-based estimate

of τw = 0.243. The depreciation rates are given as the average ratios of investment to the

corresponding capital stocks. This yields δH = 0.0115 and δM = 0.0248. These are a little

higher than the average depreciation rates from BEA Fixed Assets Accounts because the
model abstracts from long-run population and TFP growth.
       The parameter θ is set equal to 0.76, the average loan-to-value ratio for conventional single

family newly-built home mortgages (Federal Housing Finance Agency, Monthly Interest Rate

Survey, Table 10, 1963-2006). As noted in Section 2.3.1, this ratio has been fairly stable over

time. The values of the steady-state mortgage interest rate i and of the parameters α and κ
are the same as those in Section 3.2.1: i = 9.28% per annum, α = 0.9946, and κ = 0.00162.30
Given these values, the law of motion (12) implies a steady-state amortization rate of 0.0144,
which, as in the U.S. economy, is higher than the depreciation rate for residential structures.
The law of motion for debt (11) then implies a steady-state debt-to-GDP ratio of 1.64, which
is close to the average ratio (1958-2006) of home mortgages to GDP, which is 1.71 (for GDP
  30
    As in the previous section, the model is transformed so that it is expressed in terms of an inﬂation rate.
The steady-state inﬂation rate is set equal to 4.54% per annum, the average inﬂation rate for 1971-2006,
which is the period for which the mortgage rate data are available. This implies a steady-state real mortgage
rate of 4.74%.



                                                     25
less consumer durable goods).
       The discount factor β, the share of consumption in utility ω, the share of market good in

consumption ψ, the share of capital in home production η, and the tax rate on income from
nonresidential capital τr are calibrated jointly. Namely, by matching the average values of
hM , hH , kM /y, kH /y, and the after-tax real rate of return on nonresidential capital, using
the steady-state versions of the ﬁrst-order conditions for hM , hH , sJ , and xH (see Appendix
B), and the model’s after-tax real rate of return on nonresidential capital, (1 − τr )(F1 −
δM ), evaluated at the steady state. According to the American Time-Use Survey (2003),
individuals aged 16 and over spent on average 25.5% of their available time working in the
market and 24% in home production. We assume that half of home hours correspond to our
notion of hH . The average capital-to-GDP ratios are 4.88 for nonresidential capital and 4.79

for residential capital (in both cases consumer durable goods are subtracted from GDP).

The average (annual) after-tax real rate of return on nonresidential capital is measured by

(Gomme et al., 2011) to be 5.16%. These ﬁve targets yield β = 0.988, ω = 0.47, ψ = 0.69,
η = 0.30, and τr = 0.61. As is common in models with disaggregated capital, the tax rate is
higher than the statutory tax rate or a tax rate obtained from NIPA.

       The parameterization of the exogenous stochastic process is based on point estimates of

the parameters of a VAR(3) process, obtained for the relatively stable, post-reform, period

1984.Q1-2006.Q4 (see Appendix C for details). The economy’s resource constraint ct +xM t +

xHt = yt implies constant unitary rates of transformation between the three uses of output.
This makes the two types of investment extremely sensitive to the VAR shocks. To address
this issue, we adopt the intratemporal adjustment costs of Huﬀman and Wynne (1999), which
make the production possibilities frontier concave. Namely, we assume ct + xM t + qt xHt =
yt , where qt = exp(σ(xtH − xH )), with σ > 0 and xH being the steady-state residential
investment.31 Increasing xHt above xH is thus increasingly costly in terms of foregone ct or
xM t . Such costs reﬂect the costs of changing the composition of the economy’s production
  31
   Of course, xHt is then multiplied by qt through out the model. The household takes qt as given; i.e., qt
depends on the aggregate xHt .



                                                    26
and construction (Huﬀman and Wynne, 1999), as well as constraints on available residential
land in a given period, on which an increasing stock of housing can be placed (for instance,

Davis and Heathcote, 2007, document that residential land grows at a fairly constant rate).
The curvature parameter σ is then chosen by matching the ratio of the standard deviations
(for HP-ﬁltered data) of residential investment (single family structures) and GDP, which,
for the period 1984.Q1-2006.Q4, is 8.4. This yields σ = 6.4.


5.2       Cyclical behavior of the model economy

Table 4 reports the cyclical behavior of the model economy for the above calibration. It

reports the standard deviations (relative to that of yt ) of the key endogenous variables and
their cross-correlations with yt at various leads and lags. The ﬁrst thing to notice is that the

introduction of mortgage ﬁnance into the model does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the behavior
of the basic variables, yt , cM t , xt , and hM t . These variables behave pretty much like in

other business cycle models: market consumption is roughly 50% as volatile as output, total

investment is about four and a half times as volatile as output, and market hours are roughly

60% as volatile as output; in addition, all three variables are strongly positively correlated
with output contemporaneously, without any lead or lag.
       Second, unlike in other models, residential and nonresidential investment exhibit dynam-
ics similar to those in the data. As in the data, xHt is twice as volatile as xM t , it is less

contemporaneously correlated with output than xM t , and leads output. The lead in the

model is one quarter, compared with two quarters in the data. xM t , in contrast, although
not lagging, is more strongly correlated with output at lags than at leads (in the data xM t
lags by one quarter). Thus, even though the lead-lag patterns in the baseline experiment are
not as pronounced as in the data, the results present a major improvement upon the litera-
ture.32 The reason why residential investment leads output in the model can be understood
  32
    As the model, like other models in the literature, lacks an internal propagation mechanism—a hump-
shaped response of output to TFP shocks, present in the data—it will always produce a less pronounced
lead-lag pattern than that in the data.



                                                 27
from the behavior of the wedge. As discussed in the previous section, the wedge captures
the relative cost of mortgage ﬁnance. In Section 2 (Table 2) we saw that the 30-year mort-
gage rate leads output negatively and lags positively, a dynamics that we match through the
exogenous VAR process estimated on the data. This dynamics transmits into the dynamics

of the wedge, which exhibits a similar lead-lag pattern as the interest rate, but is an order of
magnitude more volatile. This induces more residential investment ahead of an increase in
GDP. While the wedge generates a lot of action outside of the steady state, our calibration
implies that in steady state its value is close to zero (τH = −0.0117), producing essentially

the same steady state as that in GKR.



6     The role of mortgages and time to build

In order to gain further understanding of the results, this section disentangles the quantitative

eﬀects of the various model features on the lead-lag patterns of the investment variables. The

results of these experiments are reported in Table 5, where, for the ease of comparison, the

ﬁrst panel repeats the results for the benchmark economy of the previous section.


6.1    Mortgages

We start by removing mortgage ﬁnance from the model (θ = 0). The exogenous VAR process,
however, stays the same. This guarantees that the underlying probability space of the current

economy is the same as that of the benchmark economy and, thus, that the two economies
diﬀer only in terms of the value of θ (even though there is no mortgage ﬁnance under θ = 0,
households care about the mortgage and inﬂation rates to the extent that these variables help
forecast future TFP). We see that for θ = 0 the lead-lag patterns disappear: both xHt and xM t
become coincident with output, with very strong contemporaneous correlations; in addition,
xHt becomes much less volatile. Even though the behavior of its components changes, the
behavior of total investment, xt , stays, more or less, the same. In fact, the dynamics of xt
stay broadly unchanged across all our experiments. This is because consumption smoothing

                                               28
constrains the response of total investment to shocks. For this reason, xHt and xM t can both
be coincident with output only if at least one of the two becomes substantially less volatile
than in the benchmark (for the same reason, xM t has to lag output in the benchmark, when
xHt leads output with high volatility).

       Next, we consider again the case of no mortgage ﬁnance, but, in addition, assume a
linear production possibilities frontier (σ = 0). This makes changes in the output mix less
costly than in the previous case and the benchmark. This economy is essentially the GKR
model (subject to small diﬀerences in calibration and the VAR process). We see that in this
case the ‘inverted’ lead-lag pattern present in most existing models re-appears. As GKR
show, this inverted lead-lag pattern would be even stronger if there was no time to build in
nonresidential capital.

       When α = κ = 1, the mortgage reduces to a one-period loan. In this case the model

behaves as if θ = 0. This is because the wedge is too smooth and too little correlated with

output to signiﬁcantly aﬀect the dynamics of the two investment components (the movements

in the wedge in this case are essentially driven by Et (1 + it )/(1 + πt+1 ); i.e., the one-period
ex-ante real interest rate implied by the VAR process).33
       Finally, we consider FRM vs ARM. Under ARM, the mortgage interest rate is reset every

period (equation (13)). Whereas FRM interest rates are closely tied to the yields on long-
term government bonds—in the case of the U.S., for instance, at a roughly constant spread

of 2%, except the early 1980s—ARM interest rates are set, after some initial period, as a
constant margin over a short-term government bond yield. We therefore equalize it with

the yield on a 3-month U.S. Treasury bill. It would, however, be incorrect to simply replace
the estimated VAR for the 30-year mortgage rate with an estimated VAR that contains the
3-month T-bill yield instead. Such a strategy would change the underlying probability space.
  33
     We have also experimented with an approximation to a 15-year FRM, which is common in France
(Calza et al., forthcoming). Similarly, we have experimented with values of θ that are suitable for countries
like France and Belgium, which have much lower mortgage debt to GDP ratio than the U.S. and the other
countries in our sample (Calza et al., forthcoming). In both cases, the volatility of xHt is signiﬁcantly
reduced. In the former case the lead-lag pattern of xHt stays essentially the same as in the benchmark,
whereas in the latter case the pattern becomes less pronounced.



                                                     29
In order to keep the probability space constant when comparing the model’s behavior under
FRM and ARM, we estimate a four-variable VAR for zt = [log AM t , iFt RM , πt , iARM
                                                                                 t   ] (point
estimates are reported in Appendix C). Under FRM, households care about iARM to the
extent that it helps forecast the other three exogenous variables; iF RM plays a similar role

under ARM.
   Table 5 contains the results for the four-variable VAR for both FRM and ARM. Under
FRM the lead-lag pattern of xHt is even more pronounced, and closer to that in the data,
than in the benchmark. This improvement comes from the fact that the four-variable VAR
captures the joint dynamics of log AM t , iFt RM , and πt better than the three-variable VAR.
Under ARM xHt is less volatile than under FRM and leads output by way too much (in
the table this shows up as positive correlations at j = −4 and j = −3, but the correlations

peak at j = −6, not shown in the table). As a result of the long lead, the contemporaneous

correlation is negative. This behavior of xHt can be again understood from the dynamics

of the wedge, in conjunction with the dynamics of the 3-month T-bill rate. As Table 2

shows the T-bill rate has similar dynamics as the 30-year mortgage rate in the sense that
it is negatively correlated with future output and positively correlated with past output.

Because the wedge in period t depends on expected future mortgage rates, expectations of

higher interest rates in the future make the wedge start to increase even when the current

T-bill rate is still relatively low. This is why the wedge in Table 5 starts to be much less
negatively correlated with output (or even positively correlated) at j ′ s at which the T-bill
rate is still negatively correlated with output. This in turn starts to reduce residential
investment even before output begins to increase. Because the dynamics of the T-bill rate is
governed by a stationary VAR process, the T-bill rate is expected to mean revert, following a
shock. Thus, although the T-bill rate is somewhat more volatile than the 30-year mortgage
rate (see Table 2), its mean reversion over the lifetime of the mortgage makes the wedge
less volatile than under FRM (which has the mortgage rate of period t applied for its entire
lifetime). This translates then into lower volatility of xHt .



                                               30
       Although the workings of the mechanism under ARM seem sensible, they generate pre-
dictions that are at odds with the data: the share of ARMs in U.S. mortgage lending for
newly-built homes, reported in Table 1, is coincident with GDP; and ARM countries, like
Australia and the U.K. do not exhibit negative contemporaneous correlations of residential

investment (or housing starts) with GDP, despite the fact that their mortgage rate dynamics
are similar to those of the U.S. T-bill rate. In concluding remarks we suggest an avenue for
how to potentially make residential investment under ARM more coincident with output.34


6.2       Residential time to build

So far we assumed no time to build in residential construction (or, more precisely, we assumed
the standard one-period time to build). When residential construction takes more than one

period, we need to distinguish between ﬁnished and unﬁnished houses, and between the prices
of ﬁnished houses and residential construction. We treat unﬁnished houses in a similar way

as unﬁnished nonresidential investment projects: the household invests in residential projects

and, upon completion, sells ﬁnished houses at a market price qt∗ . The household also buys

ﬁnished houses for its own use (think of the household as a homebuilder who likes houses
of a diﬀerent color than those it builds). Let n∗t be the number of houses the household

wants to purchase for its own use. With these changes, the budget constraint becomes:

cM t +xM t +qt xHt +qt∗ n∗t = (1−τr )rt kM t +τr δM kM t +(1−τw )wt hM t +qt∗ n1t +lt /pt −mt /pt +τt ,
                                  ∑
where lt = θpt qt∗ n∗t and xHt = N    ι=1 µι nιt , with nιt denoting residential projects ι periods

from completion and the µ’s sum up to one. The stock of houses for the household’s own
use evolves as kH,t+1 = (1 − δH )kHt + n∗t and the on-going residential projects evolve as
nι,t+1 = nι+1,t . In equilibrium, n∗t = n1t . Notice that the economy’s resource constraint is
the same as before: cM t + xM t + qt xHt = yt , except that xHt now consists of investment
expenses on houses at diﬀerent stages of completion.
       The bottom panel of Table 5 reports the results for the model with residential time to
  34
    Koijen, Van Hemert, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2007) argue that the dynamics of ARM vs FRM origina-
tion over the business cycle is driven by bond risk premia.


                                                  31
build. We use N = 4, the same number of periods as for nonresidential capital (which, as
noted earlier, corresponds in the data to the sum of nonresidential structures and equipment
& software). We treat the µ’s and ϕ’s symmetrically, setting µι = ϕι = 0.25 ∀ι. In addition
to the usual variables, xt , xHt , xM t , and τHt , the table also reports results for housing

starts n4t and completions n1,t−1 (we denote completions in the table by n0t ; that is, the
number of houses that in period t become a part of the usable housing stock). As the table
shows, xHt now reaches the highest correlation at j = 0, while starts lead by two quarters
and completions lag by two quarters, patterns similar to those in the data for the U.S.

multifamily structures (ﬁrst subperiod) or the U.K.



7    Conclusion

A well known feature of the U.S. business cycle is that residential investment leads and
nonresidential investment lags GDP. We document that in most other developed economies

both types of investment are, more or less, coincident with GDP. There is much more uni-

formity across countries, however, when residential construction activity is measured by

housing starts: almost all countries in our sample exhibit housing starts leading GDP. In
contrast, a strong internal mechanism present in most business cycle models produces res-

idential investment occurring only after an increase in GDP, once enough business capital
has been built up. Our empirical analysis points to mortgage ﬁnance as a potential rea-

son why actual economies exhibit the opposite dynamics. In order to evaluate this channel

within a quantitative-theoretical framework, we introduce mortgages into an otherwise stan-
dard business cycle model with home production. The complexity of such an extension is
greatly reduced by devising a (fairly accurate) approximation of mortgages. Feeding into
the model the observed dynamics of mortgage interest rates over the business cycle produces
dynamics of residential and nonresidential investment similar to those in U.S. data. Cheap
mortgage ﬁnance ahead of future GDP growth, summarized by a decline in a wedge in an
Euler equation for housing, induces households to invest in residential capital before GDP

                                             32
peaks. Consumption smoothing than dictates that investment in nonresidential capital has
to be delayed. Whereas in the U.S. residential construction is fairly rapid, in other countries
the process appears to be much slower. Introducing time to build in residential capital into
the model conﬁrms than longer completion times in residential construction make residential

investment more coincident with GDP.
   A broader lesson from the analysis is that interest rate dynamics, in conjunction with
long-term mortgage contracts, have a quantitatively signiﬁcant eﬀect on the economy. In
our framework this shows up only in the composition of total investment, not in other
aggregate variables. It would, therefore, be worth exploring if such eﬀects can transmit also
into aggregate output. This, of course, would require a richer framework than the one used
here. Our way of modeling mortgages, however, should make it relatively easy to introduce

mortgage ﬁnance into a variety of DSGE models more suitable for studying this issue. It

is also beyond the scope of this paper to answer the question what drives the observed

movements of mortgage rates. We have shown that their cyclical behavior is very similar to

that of government bond yields. The dynamics of government bond yields can be partly due
to monetary policy, but other sources, such as time-varying risk or risk aversion, are also a

possibility. Building a more structural model would allow the analysis of, for instance, the

eﬀects of monetary policy on the economy through the mortgage channel.
   Even though our model is consistent with the data when ﬁxed-rate mortgages are used,

it produces a way too long lead in residential investment under adjustable-rate mortgages.
One aspect of mortgage ﬁnance that may be relevant for this deviation from the data, and

which we have abstracted from, is risk. Our model is solved under certainty equivalence. But
even if it was solved ‘exactly’, risk would play little role as the preferences used here are the
standard time-additive CRRA preferences. An interesting extension would therefore be to
study the dynamics of residential investment under preferences for which risk quantitatively
matters. It is possible that under such preferences adjustable-rate mortgages may be riskier
for households than ﬁxed-rate mortgages. If that is the case, under adjustable-rate mort-



                                               33
gages, households may respond relatively less to changes in the mortgage rate and relatively
more to changes in income, making residential investment move more closely with GDP. We
leave this, as well as the questions of the role of monetary policy, for future research.




                                              34
Appendix A: Data used in Section 2
Only those data for which details were not already provided in Section 2 are listed here. These
are data on GDP, total investment, residential and nonresidential structures, and mortgage
and interest rates. Australia. Real quantities: GDP, private GFCF, private GFCF
nondwelling construction total, private GFCF dwellings total (all in chained dollars, SA,
1959.Q3-2006.Q4, Australian Bureau of Statistics, National Accounts); Mortgage rate:
standard variable housing loans lending rate, banks (1959.Q3-2006.Q4, Reserve Bank of Aus-
tralia); Interest rate: 3-month T-bill yield (1960.Q1-2006.Q4, Global Financial Data).
Belgium. Real quantities: GDP at market prices, GFCF total, GFCF in dwellings,
GFCF by enterprises, self-employed workers and non-proﬁt institutions (all in chained 2006
euros, SA, 1980.Q1-2006.Q4, BelgoStat Online, National Accounts); Mortgage rate:
ﬁxed rate on loans for house purchasing (1980.Q1-2006.Q4, Global Financial Data); In-
terest rate: 3-month T-bill yield (1980.Q1-2006.Q4, Global Financial Data). Canada.
Real quantities: GDP, residential structures, nonresidential structures, single dwellings,
multiple dwellings (all in chained 2002 dollars, SA, Statistics Canada, National Accounts,
1961.Q1-2006.Q4, except for single and multiple dwellings, which are for 1981.Q1-2006.Q4);
Mortgage rate: conventional mortgage lending rate, 5-year term (1961.Q1-2006.Q4,
Statistics Canada); Interest rate: 3-month T-bill yield (1961.Q1-2006.Q4, Global Fi-
nancial Data). France. Real quantities: GDP, total GFCF, GFCF of non ﬁnancial
enterprises—including uninc. entrep., GFCF of households—excluding uninc. entrep. (all
in chained euros, SA, 1971.Q1-2006.Q4, INSEE, National Accounts); Mortgage rate:
mortgage lending rate (1978.Q1-2006.Q4, Global Financial Data); Interest rate: money
market rate (1971.Q1-2006.Q4, International Financial Statistics and Datastream). United
Kingdom. Real quantities: GDP at market prices, GFCF total, GFCF dwellings, GFCF
other new buildings and structures (all in chained 2002 pounds, SA, 1965.Q1-2006.Q4, Oﬃce
for National Statistics, United Kingdom Economic Accounts); Mortgage rate: sterling
standard variable mortgage rate to households (1995.Q1-2006.Q4, Bank of England ); Inter-
est rate: 3-month T-bill yield (1965.Q1-2006.Q4, Oﬃce for National Statistics). United
States. Real quantities: GDP, private ﬁxed investment, private residential ﬁxed invest-
ment, private ﬁxed investment single family, private ﬁxed investment multifamily, private
ﬁxed investment structures (all in chained 2000 dollars, SA, 1958.Q1-2006.Q4, FRED and
Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Income and Product Accounts); Mortgage rate:
30-year conventional mortgage rate (1971.Q1-2006.Q4, FRED); Interest rate: 3-month
T-bill yield (1958.Q1-2006.Q4, FRED).


Appendix B: Equilibrium—details and computation
This appendix provides the full set of optimality conditions for the household’s problem of
Section 4 and describes the method used to compute the equilibrium of the model.
   The household’s optimal decisions are characterized by four ﬁrst-order conditions for hM t ,
hHt , sJt , and xHt . These are, respectively,

                                   u1t c1t (1 − τw )wt = u2t ,



                                               35
                                                 u1t c2t AH G2t = u2t ,
                                     u1t c1t ϕJ = βEt VsJ−1 ,t+1 ,
                         [                                                      ]
   u1t c1t (1 − θ) − θβEt Ved,t+1 + ζDt (κ − δ α )Vδ ,t+1 + ζDt (it − Rt )VR,t+1 = βEt VkH,t+1 .
                                                          Dt        D


Here Ved,t+1 and ζDt are deﬁned as in the main text; that is, Ved,t+1 ≡ pt Vd,t+1 and ζDt ≡
(         ) (                 )2
  1−δDt e     1−δDt e
        d
   1+πt t
           /        d
               1+πt t
                      + θx Ht    , where det ≡ dt /pt−1 . The ﬁrst-order condition for sJt is ac-
companied by Benveniste-Scheinkman conditions for sjt (j = J − 1, ..., 2), s1t , and kM t ,
respectively,

                                          Vsj t = −u1t c1t ϕj + βEt Vsj−1 ,t+1 ,              j = J − 1, ..., 2,

                                          Vs1 t = −u1t c1t ϕ1 + βEt VkM ,t+1 ,
                      VkM ,t = u1t c1t [(1 − τr )rt + τr δM ] + β(1 − δM )Et VkM ,t+1 .
The ﬁrst-order condition for xHt has four Benveniste-Scheinkman conditions, for dt , δDt , Rt ,
and kHt . These are, respectively,
                  Rt + δDt    1 − δDt [ e                                                     ]
  Vedt = −u1t c1t          +β                           α
                                      Et Vd,t+1 + ζxt (δDt − κ)VδD ,t+1 + ζxt (Rt − it )VR,t+1 ,
                   1 + πt      1 + πt

                         (            )     [                                                ](            )
                               det                           (1 − δDt )αδDt
                                                                          α−1
                                                                                                    det
     VδD ,t = −u1t c1t                    + ζxt (κ − δDt
                                                      α
                                                         ) + 1−δ                                               βEt VδD ,t+1
                             1 + πt                              Dt e                             1 + πt
                                                                    dt + θxHt
                                                                        1+πt
                  (            )                                        (            )
                        det                                                   det
              −                    βEt Ved,t+1 + ζxt (it − Rt )                          βEt VR,t+1 ,
                      1 + πt                                                1 + πt
                                             (            )             1−δDt e
                                                   det                        d
                                                                         1+πt t
                         VRt = −u1t c1t                       +     1−δDt e
                                                                                          βEt VR,t+1 ,
                                                 1 + πt                   d    + θxHt
                                                                     1+πt t

                            VkH t = u1t c2t AHt G1t + βEt VkH ,t+1 (1 − δH ),
                                                               (              )2
                                                                 1−δDt e
where ζxt is deﬁned as in the main text: ζxt ≡ θxHt / 1+πt dt + θxHt . Notice that the
terms involving Ved,t+1 , VδD ,t+1 , and VR,t+1 appear only in the ﬁrst-order condition for xHt , as
claimed in the main text. These terms drop out if θ = 0. In this case the optimal decisions
are characterized by the same conditions as in GKR, implying the same allocations and
prices.
    The equilibrium is computed by combining the linear-quadratic approximation meth-
ods of Hansen and Prescott (1995) and Benigno and Woodford (2006). Speciﬁcally, af-
ter transforming the model so that it is speciﬁed in terms of stationary variables πt and
det ≡ dt /pt−1 (instead of nonstationary variables pt and dt ), the home production func-
tion (2) and the budget constraint (9), with lt and mt substituted out from equations (8)
and (10), are substituted in the period utility function u(., .). The utility function is then
used to form a Lagrangian that has the nonlinear laws of motion (11)-(13) as constraints.

                                                               36
This Lagrangian forms the return function in the Bellman equation to be approximated
with a linear-quadratic form around a nonstochastic steady state, with the variables ex-
pressed as percentage deviations from steady state. The steps for computing equilibria of
distorted linear-quadratic economies, described by Hansen and Prescott (1995), then fol-
low; with a vector of exogenous state variables Ωt = [zt , ..., zt−n ], a vector of endogenous
state variables Φt = [s1t , ..., sJ−1,t , kM t , kHt , det , δDt , Rt ], and a vector of decision variables
Υt = [hM t , hHt , xHt , sJt , det+1 , δD,t+1 , Rt+1 , λ1t , λ2t , λ3t ], where λ1t , λ2t , λ3t are Lagrange mul-
tipliers for the non-linear constraints (11)-(13).35 The use of the Lagrangian ensures that
second-order cross-derivatives of the nonlinear laws of motion (11)-(13), evaluated at steady
state, appear in equilibrium decision rules (Benigno and Woodford, 2006). The alternative
procedure of substituting out det+1 , δD,t+1 , and Rt+1 from these laws of motion into the period
utility function is not feasible here as these three variables are interconnected in a way that
does not allow such substitution. The Lagrangian is

                 Lt = u (c(cM t , cHt ), 1 − hM t − hHt ) + λ1t [dt+1 − (1 − δDt )dt − lt ]

                 +λ2t [δD,t+1 − (1 − νt )δDt
                                          α
                                             − νt κ] + λ3t [Rt+1 − (1 − νt )Rt − νt it ] ,
with the remaining constraints of the household’s problem substituted in the consumption
aggregator c(., .), as mentioned above. For our calibrations the steady-state values of the
Lagrange multipliers (λ1t , λ2t , λ3t ) are positive, implying that the above speciﬁcation of the
Lagrangian is correct in the neighborhood of the steady state.
   The Lagrange multipliers are instrumental for computing the wedge, τHt . Notice from
equation (16) that the wedge depends on conditional expectations of the derivatives of the
value function. The multipliers, which are obtained as an outcome of the solution method,
provide a straightforward way of computing these expectations. The mapping between the
multipliers and the expectations is obtained from the ﬁrst-order conditions for dt+1 , δD,t+1 ,
and Rt+1 in the household’s problem. Forming the Bellman equation

                            V (zt , ..., zt−n , s1t , ..., sJ−1,t , kM t , kHt , dt , δDt , Rt )

   = max {Lt + βEt V (zt+1 , ..., zt−n+1 , s1,t+1 , ..., sJ−1,t+1 , kM,t+1 , kH,t+1 , dt+1 , δD,t+1 , Rt+1 )} ,
the respective ﬁrst-order conditions are
            [                             ]       [                              ]
              (1 − δDt )δDt
                         α
                            dt + pt θκxHt           (1 − δDt )dt Rt + pt θit xHt
  λ1t + λ2t                                 + λ3t                                  + βEt Vd,t+1 = 0,
                         d2t+1                                 d2t+1

                                              λ2t + βEt VδD ,t+1 = 0,
                                               λ3t + βEt VR,t+1 = 0.
When the model is transformed so that it is speciﬁed in terms of πt and det , rather than pt
  35
    In the version with residential time to build, the nιt ’s become a part of Φt and n∗t becomes a part of Υt ,
but with qt∗ being its counterpart in the aggregate counterpart to Υt .




                                                            37
and dt , the ﬁrst of these conditions changes to
              [                            ]       [                           ]
                             α e                                 et Rt θit xHt
   e1t + λ2t    (1 − δ    )δ   d    θκx              (1 − δ    )d
                                                                                 + βEt Ved,t+1 = 0,
                       Dt   Dt  t       Ht                  Dt
   λ                              +          + λ3t                    +
                           e 2
                 (1 + πt )dt+1       e2
                                     dt+1                       e 2
                                                      (1 + πt )dt+1     e 2
                                                                        dt+1

      e1t ≡ pt λ1t .
where λ


Appendix C: VAR estimates
The exogenous VAR process used in Section 5 is estimated on U.S. data for logged and
linearly detrended Solow residual, the interest rate on the conventional 30-year FRM, and
the CPI inﬂation rate. The estimation period is 1984.Q1-2006.Q4. The series for the Solow
residual is taken from data accompanying Gomme and Rupert (2007). The capital stock
used for the construction of the residual is the sum of structures and equipment & software
(current costs deﬂated with the consumption deﬂator), which is consistent with our mapping
of kM t into the data in the rest of the calibration. The number of lags in the VAR is
determined by the multivariate AIC. The point estimates (ignoring the constant term) are
                                                                       
               0.933 −0.543 −0.283                  0.118 −0.070 0.183
     zt+1 =  0.023     0.953    0.020  zt +  −0.016 −0.134 0.036  zt−1
               0.021    0.431    0.246              0.111 −0.249 0.164
                                                                          
               −0.147     0.633 0.117                 0.0049     0       0
          +  0.036 −0.011 0.043  zt−2 +  0.0002 0.0009                0    ϵt+1 ,
               −0.084 −0.197 0.187                  −0.0011 0.0009 0.0026
where zt = [log AM t , it , πt ]⊤ and ϵt+1 ∼ N (0, I). These point estimates are used to solve the
model and run the computational experiments in Sections 5 and 6.
    In Section 6, a four-variable VAR is also used. Here, zt = [log AM t , iFt RM , πt , iARM
                                                                                           t    ]⊤ ,
where iFt RM is, as before, the interest rate on the conventional 30-year FRM and iARM     t     is
the yield on a 3-month Treasury bill. Here, the AIC criterium dictates four lags. The point
estimates are
                                                                                          
           0.858 0.014 −0.157 −1.232                      0.070 −0.221      0.192    2.122
        0.044 0.849                     0.008                            0.048 −0.006 
zt+1 = 
                                0.042           zt + −0.020 −0.070                         z
        0.085 0.172            0.241    0.554          0.103 −0.023      0.162 −0.721  t−1
           0.049 0.127          0.021    1.362          −0.041 −0.107 −0.010 −0.346
                                                                                     
        −0.302 −0.168  0.036 −2.277                           0.231  1.124  0.053 0.615
       0.005   0.051  0.045 −0.036                         0.027 −0.189 −0.062 0.178 
     +
       −0.140
                                     zt−2 +                                           z
                0.097  0.204  0.406                         0.012 −0.458 −0.153 0.060  t−3
        −0.004  0.123 −0.032 −0.090                           0.032 −0.219 −0.010 0.063




                                                  38
                                   
        0.0042    0      0      0
      0.0003 0.0008     0      0   
    +
      −0.0009 0.0008 0.0025
                                     ϵt+1 ,
                                    
                                0
        0.0001 0.0003 0.0001 0.0006
where ϵt+1 ∼ N (0, I).




                                      39
References
Atkeson, A., Kehoe, P. J., 2008. On the need for a new approach to analyzing monetary
  policy. NBER Working Paper No. 14260.
Ball, M., 2003. Markets and the structure of the housebuilding industry: An international
  perspective. Urban Studies 40, 897–916.
Benhabib, J., Rogerson, R., Wright, R., 1991. Homework in macroeconomics: Household
  production and aggregate ﬂuctuations. Journal of Political Economy 99, 1166–87.
Benigno, P., Woodford, M., 2006. Optimal taxation in an RBC model: A linear-quadratic
  approach. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 30, 1445–89.
Bernanke, B. S., 2007. Housing, housing ﬁnance, and monetary policy. Spech at the Federal
  Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Bernanke, B. S., Gertler, M., 1995. Inside the black box: The credit channel of monetary
  transmission. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27–48.
Bradley, D. S., Nothaft, F. E., Freund, J. L., 1998. Financing multifamily properties: A play
  with new actors and new lines. Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research
  4, 5–17.
Calza, A., Monacelli, T., Stracca, L., forthcoming. Housing ﬁnance and monetary policy.
  Journal of the European Economic Association.
Campbell, J. Y., Cocco, J. F., 2003. Household risk management and optimal mortgage
  choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1449–94.
Canzoneri, M., Cumby, R. E., Diba, B. T., 2007. Euler equations and money market interest
  rates: A challenge for monetary policy models. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1863–
  81.
Chambers, M., Garriga, C., Schlagenhauf, D., 2009. Accounting for changes in the home-
  ownership rate. International Economic Review 50, 677–726.
Chatterjee, S., Eyigungor, B., 2011. A quantitative analysis of the US housing and mort-
  gage markets and the foreclosure crisis. Working Paper 11-26, Federal Reserve Bank of
  Philadelphia.
Christiano, L. J., Fitzgerald, T. J., 2003. The band pass ﬁlter. International Economic Review
  44, 435–65.
Colton, K. W., Collignon, K., 2001. Multifamily rental housing in the 21st century. Working
  Paper W01-1, Joint Center for Housing Studies, Harvard University.
Corbae, D., Quintin, E., 2011. Mortgage innovation and the foreclosure boom. Mimeo.
Davis, M. A., Heathcote, J., 2005. Housing and the business cycle. International Economic
  Review 46, 751–84.

                                             40
Davis, M. A., Heathcote, J., 2007. The price and quantity of residential land in the United
  States. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2595–620.

Dressler, S. J., Li, V. E., 2009. Inside money, credit, and investment. Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control 33, 970–84.

Edge, R. M., 2000. The eﬀect of monetary policy on residential and structures investment un-
  der diﬀerenctial project planning and completion times. International Finance Discussion
  Paper 671, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Fisher, J., 2007. Why does household investment lead business investment over the business
  cycle? Journal of Political Economy 115, 141–68.

Gervais, M., 2002. Housing taxation and capital accumulation. Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics 49, 1461–89.

Gomme, P., Kydland, F., Rupert, P., 2001. Home production meets time to build. Journal
 of Political Economy 109, 1115–1131.

Gomme, P., Ravikumar, B., Rupert, P., 2011. The return to capital and the business cycle.
 Review of Economic Dynamics 14, 262–78.

Gomme, P., Rupert, P., 2007. Theory, measurement and calibration of macroeconomic mod-
 els. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 460–97.

Graham, L., Wright, S., 2007. Nominal debt dynamics, credit constraints and monetary
  policy. The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 7, Article 9.

Green, R. K., Wachter, S. M., 2005. The American mortgage in historical and international
  context. Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, 93–114.

Greenwood, J., Hercowitz, Z., 1991. The allocation of capital and time over the business
  cycle. Journal of Political Economy 99, 1188–1214.

Greenwood, J., Rogerson, R., Wright, R., 1995. Household production in real business cycle
  theory. In: Cooley, T. F. (Ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton University
  Press.

Hansen, G. D., Prescott, E. C., 1995. Recursive methods for computing equilibria of business
  cycle models. In: Cooley, T. F. (Ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton
  University Press.

Hardle, W., Horowitz, J., Kreiss, J.-P., 2001. Bootstrap methods for time series. Mimeo,
  Humboldt Universitat.

Huﬀman, G. W., Wynne, M. A., 1999. The role of intratemporal adjustment costs in a
 multisector economy. Journal of Monetary Economics 43, 317–50.

Iacoviello, M., 2005. House prices, borrowing constraints, and monetary policy in the business
  cycle. American Economic Review 95, 739–64.

                                             41
Iacoviello, M., Pavan, M., 2011. Housing and debt over the life cycle and over the business
  cycle. Mimeo.

Koijen, R. S. J., Van Hemert, O., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2007. Mortgage timing. NBER
 Working Paper 13361.

Leamer, E. E., 2007. Housing is the business cycle. Working Paper 13428, NBER.

Lessard, D. R., 1975. Roll-over mortgages in Canada. In: New Mortgage Designes for an
  Inﬂationary Environment. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Li, V. E., Chang, C. Y., 2004. The cyclial behavior of household and business investment in
  a cash-in-advance economy. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 28, 691–706.

McGrattan, E., Rogerson, R., Wright, R., 1997. An equilibrium model of the business cycle
 with household production and ﬁscal policy. International Economic Review 38, 267–90.

Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 1995. What do we know about capital structure? Some evidence
 from international data. Journal of Finance 50, 1421–60.

Rios-Rull, J. V., Sanchez-Marcos, V., 2008. An aggregate economy with diﬀerent size houses.
  Journal of the European Economic Association 6, 705–14.

Rubio, M., 2011. Fixed- and variable-rate mortgages, business cycles, and monetary policy.
 Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 43, 657–88.

Scanlon, K., Whitehead, C., 2004. International trends in housing tenure and mortgage
  ﬁnance. Special report for the Council of Mortgage Lenders, London School of Economics.

Sustek, R., 2011. Monetary business cycle accounting. Review of Economic Dynamics 14,
  592–612.




                                            42
                          AUS                                             BEL
      1                                               1

     0.8                                             0.8

     0.6                                             0.6

     0.4                                             0.4

     0.2                                             0.2

      0                                               0

    −0.2                                         −0.2

    −0.4                                         −0.4

    −0.6                                         −0.6

    −0.8                                         −0.8

     −1                                              −1
      −4   −3   −2   −1   0     1   2   3   4         −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4

                          CAN                                             FRA
      1                                               1

     0.8                                             0.8

     0.6                                             0.6

     0.4                                             0.4

     0.2                                             0.2

      0                                               0

    −0.2                                         −0.2

    −0.4                                         −0.4

    −0.6                                         −0.6

    −0.8                                         −0.8

     −1                                              −1
      −4   −3   −2   −1   0     1   2   3   4         −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4

                          UK                                              US
      1                                               1

     0.8                                             0.8

     0.6                                             0.6

     0.4                                             0.4

     0.2                                             0.2

      0                                               0

    −0.2                                         −0.2

    −0.4                                         −0.4

    −0.6                                         −0.6

    −0.8                                         −0.8

     −1                                              −1
      −4   −3   −2   −1   0     1   2   3   4         −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4


Figure 1: Cyclical dynamics of total ﬁxed investment (gross ﬁxed capital formation).
The plots are correlations of real investment in t + j with real GDP in t; the data
are logged and ﬁltered with Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter. The volatility of total ﬁxed
investment (measured by its standard deviation relative to that of real GDP) is:
AUS = 3.98, BEL = 3.93, CAN = 3.32, FRA = 2.65, UK = 2.55, US = 3.23.




                                                43
                          AUS                                                      BEL
      1                                                        1

     0.8                                                      0.8

     0.6                                                      0.6

     0.4                                                      0.4

     0.2                                                      0.2

      0                                                        0

    −0.2                                                  −0.2

    −0.4                                                  −0.4

    −0.6                                                  −0.6
                                    Residential                                              Residential
    −0.8                            Nonresidential        −0.8                               Nonresidential

     −1                                                       −1
      −4   −3   −2   −1   0     1    2       3       4         −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1     2       3       4

                          CAN                                                      FRA
      1                                                        1

     0.8                                                      0.8

     0.6                                                      0.6

     0.4                                                      0.4

     0.2                                                      0.2

      0                                                        0

    −0.2                                                  −0.2

    −0.4                                                  −0.4

    −0.6                                                  −0.6
                                    Residential                                               Residential
    −0.8                            Nonresidential        −0.8                                Nonresidential

     −1                                                       −1
      −4   −3   −2   −1   0     1    2       3       4         −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1     2       3       4

                          UK                                                       US
      1                                                        1

     0.8                                                      0.8

     0.6                                                      0.6

     0.4                                                      0.4

     0.2                                                      0.2

      0                                                        0

    −0.2                                                  −0.2

    −0.4                                                  −0.4

    −0.6                                                  −0.6
                                    Residential                                              Residential
    −0.8                            Nonresidential        −0.8                               Nonresidential

     −1                                                       −1
      −4   −3   −2   −1   0     1    2       3       4         −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1     2       3       4


Figure 2: Cyclical dynamics of residential and nonresidential structures. The plots
are correlations of real investment in t+j with real GDP in t; the data are logged and
ﬁltered with Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter (in the case of BEL and FRA nonresidential is
the sum of structures and equipment). The volatility of residential (nonresidential),
relative to that of real GDP, is: AUS = 5.95 (6.96), BEL = 7.97 (4.36), CAN = 4.39
(3.97), FRA = 3.05 (3.24), UK = 5.02 (3.24), US = 6.42 (3.40).




                                                         44
                                                                    Residential
                            AUS                                               BEL                                               CAN
1                                                     1                                                 1

0.9                                               0.9                                               0.9

0.8                                               0.8                                               0.8

0.7                                               0.7                                               0.7

0.6                                               0.6                                               0.6

0.5                                               0.5                                               0.5

0.4                                               0.4                                               0.4

0.3                                               0.3                                               0.3

0.2                                               0.2                                               0.2

0.1                                               0.1                                               0.1

0                                                 0                                                 0
        −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4           −4   −3   −2   −1   0    1    2   3   4           −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4
                             j                                                 j                                                  j


                        FRA                                                   UK                                                US
    1                                                 1                                                 1

0.9                                               0.9                                               0.9

0.8                                               0.8                                               0.8

0.7                                               0.7                                               0.7

0.6                                               0.6                                               0.6

0.5                                               0.5                                               0.5

0.4                                               0.4                                               0.4

0.3                                               0.3                                               0.3

0.2                                               0.2                                               0.2

0.1                                               0.1                                               0.1

0                                                 0                                                 0
        −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4           −4   −3   −2   −1   0    1    2   3   4           −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4
                              j                                                j                                                  j




                                                               Nonresidential
                        AUS                                               BEL                                               CAN
    1                                                 1                                                 1

0.9                                               0.9                                               0.9

0.8                                               0.8                                               0.8

0.7                                               0.7                                               0.7

0.6                                               0.6                                               0.6

0.5                                               0.5                                               0.5

0.4                                               0.4                                               0.4

0.3                                               0.3                                               0.3

0.2                                               0.2                                               0.2

0.1                                               0.1                                               0.1

0                                                 0                                                 0
        −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4           −4   −3   −2   −1   0    1    2   3   4           −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4
                              j                                                j                                                  j


                       FRA                                                    UK                                                US
    1                                                 1                                                 1

0.9                                               0.9                                               0.9

0.8                                               0.8                                               0.8

0.7                                               0.7                                               0.7

0.6                                               0.6                                               0.6

0.5                                               0.5                                               0.5

0.4                                               0.4                                               0.4

0.3                                               0.3                                               0.3

0.2                                               0.2                                               0.2

0.1                                               0.1                                               0.1

0                                                 0                                                 0
        −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4           −4   −3   −2   −1   0    1    2   3   4           −4   −3   −2   −1    0    1   2   3   4
                              j                                                j                                                  j


    Figure 3: Statistical signiﬁcance of leads and lags in structures dynamics. His-
    tograms show the frequency with which a given j has the highest correlation co-
    eﬃcient in a sample of 10,000 cross-correlograms based on bootstrapped data (in
    each case a series is block-bootstrapped and then logged and HP ﬁltered; a cross-
    correlogram is then computed for the HP-ﬁltered series).

                                                                                       45
                                   AUS                                                                  BEL                                                                  CAN
     1                                                                    1                                                                    1

 0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                  0.8

 0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                  0.6

 0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                  0.4

 0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                  0.2

     0                                                                    0                                                                    0

−0.2                                                                 −0.2                                                                 −0.2

−0.4                                                                 −0.4                                                                 −0.4

−0.6                                                                 −0.6                                                                 −0.6

−0.8                                                                 −0.8                                                                 −0.8

 −1                                                                   −1                                                                   −1
  −4      −3        −2        −1    0        1       2       3   4     −4      −3        −2        −1    0        1       2       3   4     −4      −3        −2        −1    0        1       2       3   4


                                   FRA                                                                  UK                                                                   US
     1                                                                    1                                                                    1

 0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                  0.8

 0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                  0.6

 0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                  0.4

 0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                  0.2

     0                                                                    0                                                                    0

−0.2                                                                 −0.2                                                                 −0.2

−0.4                                                                 −0.4                                                                 −0.4

−0.6                                                                 −0.6                                                                 −0.6

−0.8                                                                 −0.8                                                                 −0.8

 −1                                                                   −1                                                                   −1
  −4      −3        −2        −1    0        1       2       3   4     −4      −3        −2        −1    0        1       2       3   4     −4      −3        −2        −1    0        1       2       3   4




                                   AUS                                                                  BEL                                                                  CAN
     1                                                                    1                                                                    1

0.9                                                                  0.9                                                                  0.9

0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                  0.8

0.7                                                                  0.7                                                                  0.7

0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                  0.6

0.5                                                                  0.5                                                                  0.5

0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                  0.4

0.3                                                                  0.3                                                                  0.3

0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                  0.2

0.1                                                                  0.1                                                                  0.1

 0                                                                    0                                                                    0
         −4    −3        −2   −1    0    1       2       3   4                −4    −3        −2   −1    0    1       2       3   4                −4    −3        −2   −1    0    1       2       3   4
                                     j                                                                    j                                                                    j


                               FRA                                                                      UK                                                                   US
     1                                                                    1                                                                    1

0.9                                                                  0.9                                                                  0.9

0.8                                                                  0.8                                                                  0.8

0.7                                                                  0.7                                                                  0.7

0.6                                                                  0.6                                                                  0.6

0.5                                                                  0.5                                                                  0.5

0.4                                                                  0.4                                                                  0.4

0.3                                                                  0.3                                                                  0.3

0.2                                                                  0.2                                                                  0.2

0.1                                                                  0.1                                                                  0.1

 0                                                                    0                                                                    0
         −4    −3        −2   −1    0    1       2       3   4                −4    −3        −2   −1    0    1       2       3   4                −4    −3        −2   −1    0    1       2       3   4
                                     j                                                                    j                                                                    j


  Figure 4: Housing starts. The top six charts plot cross-correlations in the historical
  data (logged and HP-ﬁltered); the bottom six charts show the statistical signiﬁcance
  of leads and lags in housing starts dynamics; i.e., the frequency with which a given j
  has the highest correlation coeﬃcient in a sample of 10,000 cross-correlograms based
  on bootstrapped data. The volatility of housing starts in the actual data, relative to
  that of real GDP, is: AUS = 8.80, BEL = 11.67, CAN = 9.95, FRA = 6.24, UK =
  7.86, US = 9.72. Note: due to a relatively short length of starts data for the U.K.,
  residential building permits are used instead as a proxy (the two series co-move very
  closely during the period for which both are available).
                                               46
                              Table 1: Residential investment—further detailsa


                        Relative               Correlations of real GDP in t with a variable in t + j:
                        std. dev.b    j = -4    -3       -2      -1      0        1       2        3            4
United States: 59.Q1–83.Q4
 Residential structures
  Single family         8.84   0.58             0.65     0.73    0.72     0.62      0.39    0.14    -0.11    -0.30
  Multifamily          11.40   0.13             0.25     0.38    0.48     0.51      0.46    0.34     0.21     0.07
 Starts
  1 unit                8.85   0.61             0.68     0.70    0.61     0.39      0.12    -0.12   -0.33    -0.42
  5+ units             14.16   0.39             0.52     0.61    0.60     0.50      0.30     0.10   -0.08    -0.22
 Completionsc
  1 unit                7.33   0.66             0.74     0.80    0.81     0.78      0.60    0.37     0.16    -0.05
  5+ units              9.56  -0.02             0.12     0.27    0.42     0.58      0.75    0.77     0.73     0.65
 Mortgagesd
  Single family         14.22  0.45             0.56     0.69    0.63     0.49      0.30    0.15    -0.10    -0.23
  Multifamily           17.41  0.43             0.42     0.46    0.45     0.39      0.31    0.16     0.03    -0.11
United States: 84.Q1–06.Q4
 Residential structures
  Single family         8.40   0.51             0.57     0.60    0.57     0.48      0.28    0.05    -0.13    -0.25
  Multifamily          10.42  -0.02            -0.01     0.07    0.14     0.22      0.27    0.31     0.32     0.30
 Starts
  1 unit                9.32   0.42             0.47     0.44    0.35     0.23     -0.01    -0.17   -0.29    -0.37
  5+ units             16.43   0.05             0.16     0.27    0.40     0.44      0.40     0.33    0.21     0.13
 Completions
  1 unit                6.51   0.36             0.43     0.52    0.50     0.45      0.33    0.15    -0.02    -0.16
  5+ units             13.71   0.06             0.04     0.06    0.14     0.23      0.31    0.40     0.43     0.39
 Mortgages d

  Single family         18.55  0.16             0.21     0.14    0.11     0.10      0.04     0.09    0.11     0.05
    Excl. MEWe          20.83  0.18             0.21     0.11    0.06     0.03     -0.01     0.04    0.08     0.04
  Multifamily           68.83  0.25             0.24     0.13    0.09     0.03      0.02    -0.03   -0.03    -0.01
  Share of ARMsf        12.98  0.20             0.25     0.32    0.39     0.41      0.37     0.23    0.07    -0.06
Canada
 Residential structuresg
  Single family          7.21          0.33     0.44     0.48    0.44     0.27      0.01    -0.29   -0.44    -0.42
  Multifamily            6.60         -0.08    -0.13    -0.16   -0.10    -0.08     -0.05     0.03    0.10     0.05
United Kingdomh
 Starts                    8.35        0.28     0.28     0.26    0.18     0.10     -0.08    -0.22   -0.38    -0.41
 Completions               5.14        0.22     0.31     0.41    0.44     0.48      0.36     0.28    0.13    -0.01
a
   The series are logged (except for shares and multifamily mortgages) and ﬁltered with Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter; mul-
tifamily mortgages are expressed as a ratio to their mean due to negative values in the data.
b
  Standard deviations are expressed relative to that of a country’s real GDP.
c
  1968.Q1-1983.Q4.
d
   Net change in home and multifamily mortgages, deﬂated with GDP deﬂator (home = 1-4 family properties, mul-
tifamily = 5+ family properties). The fraction of new construction accounted for by 2-4 family structures is small,
home mortgages are therefore a good proxy for single family housing mortgages, for which data are not available.
e
  MEW = mortgage equity withdrawal (home equity loans).
f
   1985.Q1-2006.Q4.
g
  1981.Q1-2006.Q4.                                         47
h
   1990.Q1-2006.Q4.
                             Table 2: Cyclical dynamics of mortgage ratesa


                       Relative           Correlations of real GDP in t with a variable in t + j:
                       std. dev.b   j = -4    -3       -2      -1      0       1      2      3        4
Mortgage ratesc
AUS ARM                  0.59       -0.29    -0.22   -0.16    -0.03    0.12    0.25   0.39   0.48   0.50
BEL FRM 10 yrs           0.89       -0.17     0.01    0.19     0.38    0.56    0.63   0.60   0.53   0.41
CAN FRM 5 yrs            0.77       -0.52    -0.41   -0.24    -0.04    0.19    0.38   0.45   0.45   0.43
FRA FRM 15 yrs           0.87       -0.10    -0.02    0.10     0.20    0.30    0.36   0.35   0.31   0.27
UKd ARM                  1.29       -0.68    -0.52   -0.31    -0.06    0.17    0.36   0.49   0.55   0.56
US   FRM 30 yrs          0.55       -0.59    -0.55   -0.46    -0.29   -0.07    0.09   0.16   0.21   0.23
Government bond yieldse
AUS 3-m           1.07              -0.19    -0.06    0.10     0.24    0.34    0.44   0.52   0.45   0.34
BEL 10-yr         0.75              -0.01     0.20    0.33     0.49    0.53    0.50   0.43   0.31   0.19
CAN 3-5-yr        0.73              -0.42    -0.25   -0.06     0.17    0.39    0.52   0.54   0.50   0.41
FRA 10-yr         0.86              -0.12    -0.02    0.10     0.21    0.29    0.31   0.28   0.25   0.24
US   10-yr        0.53              -0.45    -0.39   -0.29    -0.11    0.04    0.09   0.10   0.12   0.09
     3-m          0.88              -0.45    -0.30   -0.10     0.17    0.39    0.48   0.51   0.49   0.46
 Inflation ratesf
 AUS                       1.96       -0.19   -0.09 -0.02      0.12     0.15 0.21 0.31 0.28 0.17
 BEL                       1.80         0.15    0.19   0.13    0.15     0.15 0.17 0.17 0.16 0.15
 CAN                       1.44        -0.16   -0.03   0.05    0.16     0.26 0.35 0.32 0.35 0.35
 FRA                       1.72       -0.23   -0.13 -0.03      0.11     0.20 0.27 0.30 0.32 0.31
 UK                        2.80       -0.28   -0.22 -0.12 -0.01         0.03 0.18 0.23 0.29 0.27
 US                        1.28       -0.27   -0.13 -0.01      0.18     0.37 0.45 0.47 0.50 0.49
a GDP is in logs; all series are ﬁltered with Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter; time periods diﬀer across countries

due to diﬀerent availability of mortgage rate data: AUS (59.Q3-06.Q4), BEL (80.Q1-06.Q4), CAN
(61.Q1-06.Q4), FRA (78.Q1-06.Q4), UK (65.Q1-06.Q4), US (71.Q2-06.Q4).
b Standard deviations are expressed relative to that of a country’s real GDP.
c Based on a typical mortgage for each country, as reported by Calza et al. (forthcoming) and

Scanlon and Whitehead (2004). ARM = adjustable rate mortgage (interest rate can be reset within
one year), FRM = ﬁxed rate mortgage (interest rate can be at the earliest reset only after 5 years).
The number of years accompanying FRMs in the table refers to the number of years for which the
mortgage rate is typically ﬁxed.
d U.K. mortgage rate data are available only from 1995.Q1. 3-m T-bill rate is used as a proxy for the

adjustable mortgage rate for the period 1965.Q1-1994.Q4; the correlation between the two interest
rates for the period 1995.Q1-2006.Q4 is 0.97. As the 3-m T-bill rate is used for this purpose, it is
omitted from the next panel of the table.
e Constant maturity rates.
f Consumer price indexes, q-on-q percentage change at annual rate.




                                                     48
                        A. Quarterly payments                                                              B. Balance
             10000                                                                      250


               8000                                                                     200
Thousand $




                                                                           Thousand $
               6000                                                                     150


               4000                                                                     100


               2000                                                                      50


                 0                                                                        0
                  0      20         40      60       80        100   120                   0          20    40   60     80   100   120



                      C. Composition of payments                                                D. Approximation error
                                                                                                 −4
                                                                                              x 10
               100                                                                       4
                                Share of interest payments
                                                                                         2
                80

                                                                                         0
                60
     Percent




                                                                                        −2
                40
                                                                                        −4

                20
                                                                                        −6
                              Share of amortization payments
                 0                                                                      −8
                  0      20        40       60       80        100   120                  0           20    40   60     80   100   120

               Figure 5: Mortgage: model vs real-world calculator. Solid line=model, dashed
               line=mortgage calculator. Here, l0 = $250, 000, 4×i = 9.28%, α = 0.9946, and
               κ = 0.00162. The approximation error is expressed as the present value (using
               1/i) of the diﬀerence between payments in the model and in the mortgage
               calculator (panel A), divided by the size of the loan.




                                                                                 49
                        Table 3: Calibration


Symbol                         Value     Deﬁnition
Preferences
β                              0.988     Discount factor
ω                              0.472     Consumption share in utility
ψ                              0.692     Share of market good
                                          in consumption
Home technology
δH                             0.0115    Depreciation rate
η                              0.305     Capital share in production
Nonresidential time to build
J                              4         Number of periods
ϕj                             0.25      Fraction completed at stage j
Market technology
δM                             0.0248    Depreciation rate
ϱ                              0.283     Capital share in production
σ                              6.4       PPF curvature parameter
Tax rates
τw                             0.243     Tax rate on labor income
τr                             0.612     Tax rate on capital income
Mortgages
θ                              0.76      Loan-to-value ratio
κ                              0.00162   Initial amortization rate
α                              0.9946    Adjustment factor
Other
i                              0.0232    Steady-state mortgage rate
π                              0.0113    Steady-state inﬂation rate

Note: The parameters of the exogenous stochastic process are contained
in Appendix D.




                                  50
                  Table 4: Cyclical behavior of the model economya


       Rel.           Correlations of y in period t with variable υ in period t + j:
υt+j   st.dev.b    j = -4    -3     -2      -1      0       1       2       3       4
Model—main aggregates and hours
y    1.01     -0.03    0.19 0.48           0.75    1.00    0.75    0.48   0.19    -0.03
hM   0.56      0.10    0.31 0.57           0.76    0.89    0.68    0.41   0.07    -0.21
cM   0.48     -0.21 -0.09 0.13             0.38    0.70    0.52    0.38   0.29     0.28
x    4.42      0.07    0.29 0.56           0.78    0.93    0.71    0.43   0.10    -0.18
Model—investment components        and wedge
xH   8.45      0.19  0.34           0.50 0.55      0.51    0.31    0.11   -0.13   -0.32
xM   4.33     -0.12  0.03           0.25 0.50      0.78    0.70    0.52    0.31    0.12
τH   3.26     -0.21 -0.33          -0.43 -0.43    -0.32   -0.17   -0.02    0.18    0.34
 Data—investment componentsc
 xH     8.40       0.51     0.57 0.60 0.57 0.48 0.28 0.05 -0.13 -0.25
 xM     4.53       0.22     0.38 0.56 0.72 0.84 0.88 0.84 0.74                 0.58
a Calibration is as in Table 3. The entries are averages for 200 runs of the length

of 92 periods each, the same as the number of periods for 1984.Q1-2006.Q4. All
variables are in percentage deviations from steady state, except the wedge, which is
in percentage point deviations from steady state. Before computing the statistics for
each run, the artiﬁcial series were ﬁltered with the HP ﬁlter.
b Standard deviations are measured relative to that of y; the standard deviation of y

is in absolute terms.
c Data: 1984.Q1-2006.Q4, y=GDP, x =single-family structures, x =structures plus
                                       H                          M
equipment & software; all logged and HP-ﬁltered.




                                           51
       Table 5: Impact of various model features on investment dynamics


        Rel.         Correlations of y in period t with variable υ in period t + j:
υt+j    st.dev.   j = -4    -3      -2     -1      0        1      2       3       4
Benchmarka (FRM, 30        years, θ = 0.76)
x     4.42     0.07          0.29 0.56 0.78         0.93    0.71    0.43    0.10   -0.18
xH    8.45     0.19          0.34 0.50 0.55         0.51    0.31    0.11   -0.13   -0.32
xM    4.33    -0.12          0.03 0.25 0.50         0.78    0.70    0.52    0.31    0.12
τH    3.26    -0.21         -0.33 -0.43 -0.43      -0.32   -0.17   -0.02    0.18    0.34
No mortgage ﬁnance (θ      = 0)
x     4.21     0.08         0.27   0.52    0.76    0.98    0.75    0.46    0.15    -0.10
xH    0.78    -0.07         0.06   0.30    0.55    0.84    0.55    0.37    0.28     0.34
xM    5.79     0.09         0.28   0.52    0.76    0.97    0.74    0.46    0.14    -0.14
τH    –         –            –      –       –       –       –       –       –        –
No mortgage ﬁnance and linear      PPF (θ = 0, σ = 0)
x     4.77     0.14   0.29         0.50 0.72 0.99          0.69     0.43    0.19    0.04
xH   14.66    -0.19 -0.08          0.02 0.20 0.54          0.51     0.52    0.48    0.50
xM    6.32     0.36   0.41         0.54 0.59 0.52          0.22    -0.07   -0.29   -0.48
τH    –         –       –           –     –       –         –        –       –       –
1-period loan (α = 1, κ = 1)
x      4.30      0.07    0.27       0.52    0.76    0.98    0.75    0.47    0.17   -0.11
xH     0.83     -0.08    0.10       0.35    0.63    0.86    0.66    0.45    0.43    0.17
xM     5.85      0.08    0.28       0.52    0.76    0.97    0.74    0.46    0.14   -0.13
τH     0.21     -0.01 -0.04        -0.08   -0.13   -0.04   -0.15   -0.09   -0.22    0.23
FRM     (4-variable VAR)
x        4.95       0.18    0.33    0.56    0.77    0.95    0.74    0.48    0.20    0.01
xH       8.46       0.35    0.49    0.56    0.55    0.48    0.31    0.16   -0.04   -0.23
xM       5.55      -0.08   -0.01    0.23    0.50    0.80    0.69    0.50    0.31    0.23
τH       2.87      -0.34   -0.49   -0.51   -0.47   -0.34   -0.22   -0.10    0.08    0.26
ARM     (4-variable VAR)
x        4.68       0.17    0.27   0.50     0.73    0.97    0.74    0.46    0.18    0.02
xH       2.59       0.32    0.22   0.05    -0.17   -0.43   -0.54   -0.60   -0.60   -0.54
xM       7.56       0.09    0.20   0.44     0.69    0.96    0.77    0.53    0.29    0.13
τH       1.01      -0.26   -0.20   0.02     0.27    0.61    0.58    0.59    0.56    0.58
Residential time to build
x      4.32       0.08    0.28 0.54 0.77 0.95 0.69 0.40 0.08 -0.17
xH     6.51       0.18    0.32 0.47 0.57 0.60 0.42 0.14 -0.16 -0.40
n4     8.89       0.33    0.40 0.50 0.48 0.38 -0.10 -0.33 -0.40 -0.34
n0     8.88      -0.05 -0.02 0.06 0.18 0.33 0.40 0.50 0.48 0.38
xM     4.11      -0.13    0.05 0.31 0.60 0.90 0.80 0.62 0.38 0.14
τH     3.17      -0.22 -0.34 -0.43 -0.42 -0.29 -0.16 -0.02 0.18 0.34
a Calibration as in Table 3.
Note: n4 = housing starts (houses that in period t are four periods away from
completion), n0 = housing completions (houses that in period t − 1 were one period
away from completion and that in period t become a part of the housing stock).

                                           52
