NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DIGESTING ANOMALIES:
AN INVESTMENT APPROACH
Kewei Hou
Chen Xue
Lu Zhang
Working Paper 18435
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18435
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012

For helpful comments, we thank René Stulz, MikeWeisbach, IngridWerner, and other seminar participants
at The Ohio State University. This paper is a new incarnation of the defunct work previously circulated
under the titles “Neoclassical Factors,” “An equilibrium three-factor model,” “Production-based factors,”
“A better three-factor model that explains more anomalies,” and “An alternative three-factor model.”
We are extremely grateful to Robert Novy-Marx for identifying a timing error in the empirical analysis
of the defunct work. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Kewei Hou, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Digesting Anomalies: An Investment Approach
Kewei Hou, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 18435
October 2012, Revised November 2012
JEL No. G12,G14
ABSTRACT
Motivated from investment-based asset pricing, we propose a new factor model consisting of the market
factor, a size factor, an investment factor, and a return on equity factor. The new factor model outperforms
the Carhart four-factor model in pricing portfolios formed on earnings surprise, idiosyncratic volatility,
financial distress, net stock issues, composite issuance, as well as on investment and return on equity.
The new model performs similarly as the Carhart model in pricing portfolios formed on size and momentum,
abnormal corporate investment, as well as on size and book-to-market, but underperforms in pricing
the total accrual deciles. The new model’s performance, combined with its clear economic intuition,
suggests that it can be used as a new workhorse model for academic research and investment management
practice.
Kewei Hou
College of Business
Ohio State University
820 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
hou.28@osu.edu
Chen Xue
Lindner College of Business
University of Cincinnati
405 Lindner Hall
Cincinnati, OH 45221
xuecx@ucmail.uc.edu

Lu Zhang
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
zhanglu@fisher.osu.edu

1

Introduction

In an extremely inﬂuential article, Fama and French (1996) show that their three-factor model,
which includes the market excess return, a factor based on market equity (SM B), and a factor
based on book-to-market (HM L), summarizes the state-of-the-art understanding of the crosssection of returns as of the mid-1990s. Over the past 15 years, however, it has become clear that
even the Fama-French model fails to explain a wide range of cross-sectional anomalies. Prominent
examples include momentum, post-earnings-announcement drift, as well as the negative relations
of average returns with idiosyncratic volatility, ﬁnancial distress, and net stock issues.1
We propose a new multifactor model motivated from investment-based asset pricing, which
is in turn based on the q-theory of investment. In the new model (which we call the q-factor
model), the expected return of a testing asset in excess of the riskless rate, denoted E[r i ] − r f , is
described by the sensitivity of its return to four factors: (i) the market excess return (M KT ), (ii)
the diﬀerence between the return on a portfolio of small-market equity stocks and the return on a
portfolio of big-market equity stocks (rM E ), (iii) the diﬀerence between the return on a portfolio
of low-investment stocks and the return on a portfolio of high-investment stocks (rA/A ), and (iv)
the diﬀerence between the return on a portfolio of high return on equity (ROE) stocks and the
return on a portfolio of low return on equity stocks (rROE ). More formally,
E[r i ] − r f = β iM KT E[M KT ] + β iM E E[rM E ] + β iA/A E[rA/A ] + β iROE E[rROE ],

(1)

in which E[M KT ], E[rM E ], E[rA/A ], and E[rROE ] are expected factor premiums, and the loadings, β iM KT , β iM E , β iA/A , and β iROE , are time series slopes from regressing the excess returns of
testing asset i on M KT , rM E , rA/A , and rROE , respectively. Over the 1972–2011 period, E[rM E ] is
0.31% per month (t = 2.09), E[rA/A ] 0.44% per month (t = 4.73), and E[rROE ] 0.60% (t = 4.85).
Through extensive factor regressions, we show that the q-factor model goes a long way toward
explaining many anomalies that the Fama-French model cannot. First, the q-factor model outperforms the Fama-French model and the Carhart (1997) four-factor model in explaining anomalies
related to earnings surprise, idiosyncratic volatility, ﬁnancial distress, net stock issues, composite
1

See, for example, Ritter (1991), Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), Ikenberry, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995),
Loughran and Ritter (1995), Spiess and Aﬄeck-Graves (1995), Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996), Dichev
(1998), Griﬃn and Lemmon (2002), Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006), Daniel and Titman (2006), and Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008). Many argue that their evidence is due to mispricing that arises from investors’ overor underreaction to news. For instance, Campbell et al. suggest that their evidence “is a challenge to standard models
of rational asset pricing in which the structure of the economy is stable and well understood by investors (p. 2934).”

1

issuance, as well as investment and ROE. For example, the average magnitude of the Fama-French
alphas across deciles formed on earnings surprise is 0.17% per month, and the high-minus-low decile
has a Fama-French alpha of 0.54% (t = 4.26). The Carhart model reduces the average magnitude
of alphas to 0.11% and the high-minus-low alpha to 0.32% (t = 2.43). The q-factor model reduces the average magnitude of the alphas further to 0.06% and the high-minus-low alpha to 0.14%
(t = 0.92). Across the idiosyncratic volatility deciles, the average magnitude of the alphas is 0.19%
in the Fama-French model, 0.15% in the Carhart model, and 0.10% in the q-factor model. The highminus-low alphas for the three factor models are −0.91% (t = −4.48), −0.58% (t = −2.59), and
−0.04% (t = −0.19), respectively. Finally, across the Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) ﬁnancial distress deciles, the average magnitude of the alphas is 0.25% in the Fama-French model, 0.12%
in the Carhart model, and 0.15% in the q-factor model. The high-minus-low alphas for the three
factor models are −1.43% (t = −5.21), −0.55% (t = −2.51), and 0.02% (t = 0.07), respectively.
Second, the q-factor model performs similarly as the Carhart model in pricing the 25 size and
momentum portfolios. Across the 25 portfolios, the average magnitude of the alphas in the q-factor
model is 0.11% per month, which is identical to that from the Carhart model, and is one half of
that in the Fama-French model. Two out of 25 individual portfolios have signiﬁcant alphas at the
5% level in the q-factor model, compared with six in the Carhart model and 15 in the Fama-French
model. Only one out of ﬁve winner-minus-loser alphas is signiﬁcant, in contrast to three in the
Carhart model and ﬁve in the Fama-French model. The average magnitude of the winner-minusloser alphas is 0.19% in the q-factor model, which is less than one quarter of that in the Fama-French
model, 0.90%, and is lower than 0.25% in the Carhart model.
The q-factor model also performs similarly as the Carhart model in pricing the 25 size and bookto-market portfolios. The average magnitude of the alphas across the 25 portfolios is 0.12% in the qfactor model, which is largely in line with 0.10% in the Fama-French model and 0.11% in the Carhart
model. Four individual portfolios have signiﬁcant alphas in the q-factor model, compared with four
in the Fama-French model and ﬁve in the Carhart model. Only one value-minus-growth quintile has
a signiﬁcant alpha in the q-factor model, compared with three in the Fama-French model and two
in the Carhart model. The average magnitude of the value-minus-growth alphas is 0.24% in the qfactor model, which is lower than 0.32% in the Fama-French model and 0.29% in the Carhart model.
However, the q-factor model has trouble in explaining the Sloan (1996) total accrual eﬀect.
Across the accrual deciles, the average magnitude of the alphas is 0.13% per month in the Fama2

French model, 0.11% in the Carhart model, and is 0.14% in the q-factor model. The high-minus-low
alphas are −0.29% (t = −1.96) and −0.29% (t = −1.69) in the Fama-French model and the Carhart
model, respectively, but is −0.39% (t = −2.48) in the q-factor model. Augmenting the market factor with the investment factor alone reduces the high-minus-low alpha to an insigniﬁcant −0.05%.
While the investment factor loading goes in the right direction, the ROE factor loading goes in the
wrong direction in explaining the accrual eﬀect. Intuitively, high accrual ﬁrms invest more, but are
also more proﬁtable (and load more on the ROE factor) than low accrual ﬁrms.
As noted, we motivate the q-factor model from investment-based asset pricing. Intuitively, investment predicts returns because given expected cash ﬂows, high costs of capital mean low net
present values of new capital and low investment, whereas low costs of capital mean high net
present values of new capital and high investment. ROE predicts returns because high expected
ROE relative to low investment means high discount rates. The high discount rates are necessary
to counteract the high expected ROE to induce low net present values of net capital and subsequently low investment. If the discount rates are not high enough to oﬀset the high expected ROE,
ﬁrms would instead observe high net present values of new capital and invest more. Similarly, low
expected ROE relative to high investment (such as small-growth ﬁrms in the late 1990s) means
low discount rates. If the discount rates are not low enough to counteract the low expected ROE,
the ﬁrms would instead observe low net present values of new capital and invest less. Finally, we
include the size factor primarily to reduce the average magnitude of the alphas across size-related
portfolios. As such, the size factor plays only a secondary role in the q-factor model, whereas the
investment and the ROE factors are more prominent.
Our central contribution is to provide a new workhorse factor model for estimating expected
returns. In particular, we create a new incarnation of Fama and French (1996) by showing that the
q-factor model summarizes what we know about the cross-section of returns as of the early 2010s.
In so doing, we also elaborate a uniﬁed conceptual framework in which almost all of the anomalies can be interpreted in an internally consistent and economically meaningful way. The q-factor
model’s performance, combined with its clear economic intuition, suggests that the model can be
used in practical applications such as evaluating mutual fund performance, measuring abnormal
returns in event studies, estimating costs of capital for capital budgeting and stock valuation, and
obtaining expected return estimates for optimal portfolio choice.
The traditional approach in empirical ﬁnance and capital markets research in accounting is to
3

look for common factors from the consumption side of the economy (e.g., Breeden, Gibbons, and
Litzenberger (1989)). We instead exploit a direct link between stock returns and ﬁrm characteristics from the production side. Cochrane (1991) ﬁrst uses q-theory to study asset prices. Berk,
Green, and Naik (1999) and Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004) construct real option models
to explain anomalies. Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009) estimate the characteristics-expected return
relations derived from q-theory via structural estimation. We diﬀer by using the portfolio approach
to produce a workhorse factor model. A factor model is more ﬂexible in practice because of its
powerful simplicity and the availability of high frequency returns data. Finally, it should be noted
that the investment eﬀect and the earnings eﬀect are not new to our work.2 However, recognizing
their fundamental importance in investment-based asset pricing, we build a new workhorse factor
model on these two eﬀects to summarize the cross-section of average stock returns.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 constructs the new factors. Section 3
tests the q-factor model via factor regressions. Section 4 reports speciﬁcation tests by dropping the
size factor from the q-factor model. Section 5 interprets the results. While the results are consistent
with investment-based asset pricing, we also consider alternative interpretations based on common
risk factors and mispricing. Finally, Section 6 concludes. Appendix A contains detailed variable
deﬁnition, and Appendixes B to E report supplementary results.

2

The Explanatory Factors

Monthly returns, dividends, and prices are from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP)
and accounting information from the Compustat Annual and Quarterly Fundamental Files. The
sample is from January 1972 to December 2011. The starting date is restricted by the availability
of quarterly earnings announcement dates as well as quarterly earnings and assets data. We also
exclude ﬁnancial ﬁrms and ﬁrms with negative book equity.
We measure investment-to-assets (A/A) as the annual change in total assets (Compustat annual item AT) divided by lagged total assets. The change in total assets is in the most comprehensive
measure of investment. We measure ROE as income before extraordinary items (Compustat quar2
Fairﬁeld, Whisenant, and Yohn (2003), Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004), Anderson and Garcia-Feijóo (2006),
Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008), Xing (2008), and Polk and Sapienza (2009) show that investment and average returns are negatively correlated. Ball and Brown (1968), Bernard and Thomas (1989, 1990), Ball, Kothari, and Watts
(1993), Chan, Jagadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996), Haugen and Baker (1996), Abarbanell and Bushee (1998), Frankel
and Lee (1998), Dechow, Hutton, and Sloan (1999), Piotroski (2000), Fama and French (2006), and Novy-Marx
(2012) show that ﬁrms with higher earnings surprises and more proﬁtable ﬁrms earn higher average returns..

4

terly item IBQ) divided by one-quarter-lagged book equity. Book equity is shareholders’ equity,
plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (item TXDITCQ) if available, minus the
book value of preferred stock. Depending on availability, we use stockholders’ equity (item SEQQ),
or common equity (item CEQQ) plus the carrying value of preferred stock (item PSTKQ), or total
assets (item ATQ) minus total liabilities (item LTQ) in that order as shareholders’ equity. We use redemption value (item PSTKRQ) if available, or carrying value for the book value of preferred stock.3
We construct the size factor, rM E , the investment factor, rA/A , and the ROE factor, rROE ,
from a triple two-by-three-by-three sort on size, A/A, and ROE. Bernard and Thomas (1990)
show that the earnings eﬀect in returns seems stronger in small ﬁrms than in big ﬁrms. Also, Fama
and French (2008) show that the investment eﬀect is strong in microcaps and small stocks, but is
largely absent in big stocks. As such, we control for size when constructing the investment and the
ROE factors. Controlling for size in this way seems a standard practice in constructing the Fama
and French (1993) value factor, HM L, and the Carhart (1997) momentum factor, W M L. Finally,
sorting on A/A and ROE independently helps orthogonalize the two new factors.
In June of each year t, we use the median NYSE market equity (stock price times shares outstanding from CRSP) at the end of June to split NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into two
groups, small and big. Independently, in June of year t, we also break NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ
stocks into three A/A groups using the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%, middle 40%, and
high 30% of the ranked values of A/A for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Also independently, at the beginning of each month, we sort all stocks into three groups based on the NYSE
breakpoints for the low 30%, middle 40%, and the high 30% of the ranked values of ROE. Earnings
and other accounting variables in Compustat quarterly ﬁles are used in the monthly sorts in the
months immediately after the most recent public earnings announcement dates (Compustat quarterly item RDQ). For example, if the earnings for the fourth ﬁscal quarter of year t − 1 are publicly
announced on March 5 (or March 25) of year t, we use the announced earnings (divided by the book
equity from the third quarter of year t − 1) to form portfolios at the beginning of April of year t.
Taking the intersections of the two size, the three A/A, and the three ROE groups, we
form 18 portfolios. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated for the current month,
3

Our measure of the book equity is the quarterly version of the annual book equity measure in Davis, Fama,
and French (2000). Fama and French (2006) measure shareholders’ equity as total assets minus total liabilities. We
follow Davis et al. because Compustat quarterly items SEQQ (stockholders’ equity) and CEQQ (common equity)
have a broader coverage than items ATQ (total assets) and LTQ (total liabilities) before 1980.

5

and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly. (The ROE portfolios are reconstructed monthly at the
beginning of each month, but the size and the A/A portfolios are resorted annually in each June.)
The size factor, rM E , is the diﬀerence (small-minus-big), each month, between the simple average of the returns on the nine small portfolios and the simple average of the returns on the nine big
portfolios. Designed to mimic the common variation in returns related to A/A, the investment
factor, rA/A , is the diﬀerence (low-minus-high), each month, between the simple average of the
returns on the six low-A/A portfolios and the simple average of the returns on the six high-A/A
portfolios. Finally, designed to mimic the common variation in returns related to ROE, the ROE
factor is the diﬀerence (high-minus-low), each month, between the simple average of the returns on
the six high-ROE portfolios and the simple average of the returns on the six low-ROE portfolios.4
From Panel A of Table 1, the size factor earns an average return of 0.31% per month from
January 1972 to December 2011 (t = 2.09). The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) explains this
average return, leaving an alpha of 0.24% (t = 1.64). Regressing our size factor on the Fama-French
three factors produces an SM B loading of 0.99. Also, Panel B shows that our size factor and SM B
have an almost perfect correlation of 0.95. As such, the two size factors are eﬀectively the same.
The investment factor, rA/A , earns an average return of 0.44% per month (t = 4.73).
Regressing rA/A on the market factor produces an alpha of 0.51% and a beta of −0.15, both of
which are signiﬁcant (Panel A). Regressing the investment factor on the Fama-French factors shows
a large and signiﬁcantly positive HM L loading of 0.40. From Panel B, rA/A and HM L have a high
correlation of 0.69, suggesting that rA/A would play a similar role as HM L in factor regressions.
The ROE factor, rROE , earns an average return of 0.60% per month, which is more than 4.5
standard errors from zero (Panel A). Regressing rROE on the Fama-French factors produces a low
4

Let pijk , with i = 1, 2 and j, k = 1, 2, 3, be the value-weighted portfolio that contains all the ﬁrms in the ith
group sorted by size, in the jth group sorted by A/A, and in the kth group sorted by ROE. For example, p132 is
the portfolio containing all the ﬁrms that reside simultaneously in the small-size portfolio, the high-A/A portfolio,
and the median-ROE portfolio. Formally, the size, the investment, and the ROE factors are deﬁned as, respectively,

 3 3
3 
3


(2)
p1jk −
p2jk /9,
rM E ≡

rA/A

≡


rROE

≡

j=1 k=1

j=1 k=1

3
2 


3
2 


pi1k −

i=1 k=1

i=1 k=1

3
2 


3
2 


pij3 −

i=1 j=1

i=1 j=1

6


pi3k

/6,

(3)

/6.

(4)


pij1

R2 of only 19%, meaning that rROE represents an important source of common variation missing
from the Fama-French model. Interestingly, even though it is constructed from a triple sort with
size controlled, rROE still has a (relatively) large correlation of −0.30 with rM E (Panel B). A ﬁner
sort on size can help reduce the magnitude of the correlation, but it would likely only reinforce the
explanatory power of the new factors. Also, Panel B shows that rROE has a high correlation of 0.50
with the momentum factor, W M L, meaning that rROE would play a similar role as W M L in factor
regressions. Finally, the investment and the ROE factors have a low and insigniﬁcant correlation
of 0.05. As such, the triple sort seems successful in orthogonalizing the two new factors.5

3

Factor Regressions

We use the standard time-series factor regressions to test the q-factor model:
rti − rtf = αiq + β iM KT M KTt + β iM E rM E,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + i .

(5)

If the model’s performance is adequate, αiq should be economically small and statistically insignificant from zero. As a convention, we use the NYSE breakpoints in constructing testing portfolios.
Doing so is consistent with our construction of the q-factors, which is in turn comparable with the
construction of SM B, HM L, and W M L. A good economic reason for using the NYSE breakpoints is to alleviate the impact of microcaps and small stocks. Due to transaction costs and lack
of liquidity, the portion of anomalies in microcaps and small stocks might not be exploitable in
practice. For completeness, however, we also report in Appendix B the detailed results from using
the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints in constructing a given set of anomaly portfolios if the
original paper that documents the anomaly uses such breakpoints.
5

When constructing the factors, we construct the A/A portfolios with annual sorts but the ROE portfolios with
monthly sorts. There are two reasons for this practice. First, as shown in Section 3, the ROE factor is most relevant
for explaining momentum, post-earnings-announcement drift, the idiosyncratic volatility eﬀect, and the distress
eﬀect. Because these testing portfolios are all constructed monthly, we use a similar approach to construct the ROE
factor. In Appendix E, we report detailed results that the aforementioned anomalies do not exist in annually sorted
portfolios. Speciﬁcally, none of the high-minus-low portfolios produce mean excess returns or CAPM alphas that are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. Because the targeted anomalies only exist in monthly sorts, it seems natural to also
construct the explanatory ROE factor with monthly sorts. Second, as shown in Section 5.1, ROE forecasts future
returns to the extent that it forecasts future ROE. Because the most recent ROE contains up-to-date information
about future ROE, constructing the ROE factor with monthly sorts makes economic sense.

7

3.1

One-way Sorted Testing Portfolios

Post-earnings-announcement Drift
The q-factor model largely explains the post-earnings announcement drift. Following Foster, Olsen,
and Shevlin (1984), we measure earnings surprise as Standardized Unexpected Earnings (SU E).
We calculate SU E as the change in the most recently announced quarterly earnings per share from
its value announced four quarters ago divided by the standard deviation of this change in quarterly
earnings over the prior eight quarters. (We require a minimum of six quarters in calculating SU E.)
We use the NYSE breakpoints to rank all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks at the beginning of
each month based on their most recent past SU E. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are
calculated for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced at the beginning of next month.
Table 2 shows that consistent with Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996), high SU E stocks
earn higher average returns than low SU E stocks. The high-minus-low decile earns an average
return of 0.43% per month (t = 3.39), a CAPM alpha of 0.49% (t = 4.03), a Fama-French alpha
of 0.54% (t = 4.26), and a Carhart alpha of 0.32% (t = 2.43). The mean absolute error (m.a.e.,
calculated as the average absolute value of the alphas) across the deciles are 0.16%, 0.17%, and
0.11% for the CAPM, the Fama-French model, and the Carhart model, respectively. Among the
ten deciles, six have signiﬁcant alphas in the CAPM, ﬁve in the Fama-French model, and three
in the Carhart model. All three models are strongly rejected by the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken
(1989, GRS) test on the null that the alphas across the ten deciles are jointly zero.
The q-factor model reduces the high-minus-low alpha to insigniﬁcance: 0.14% per month, which
is within one standard error of zero. The q-factor model derives its explanatory power mostly from
the ROE factor. The high-minus-low decile has an ROE factor loading of 0.49, which is more than
5.5 standard errors from zero, whereas all the other factor loadings are economically small and
mostly insigniﬁcant. Intuitively, ﬁrms that have recently experienced positive earnings surprises
are more proﬁtable than ﬁrms that have recently experienced negative earnings surprises. The
q-factor model also produces a small m.a.e. of 0.06%, which is smaller than 0.11% from the Carhart
model. Across the ten deciles, only one out of ten has a signiﬁcant alpha in the q-factor model,
relative to three in the Carhart model. While the traditional models are all rejected by the GRS
test, the q-factor model cannot be rejected at the 5% signiﬁcance level (p-value = 0.41).

8

Idiosyncratic Volatility
Following Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006), we measure a stock’s idiosyncratic volatility
(IV OL) as the standard deviation of the residuals from regressing the stock’s returns on the FamaFrench three factors. Each month we form value-weighted deciles by using the NYSE breakpoints
to sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks on the IV OL estimated using daily returns over the
previous month. (We require a minimum of 15 daily stock returns.) We hold the value-weighted
deciles for the current month, and rebalance the portfolios at the beginning of next month.
Consistent with Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006), high IV OL stocks earn lower average
returns than low IV OL stocks. From Table 3, the high-minus-low decile earns an average return of
−0.54% per month, which is, however, only about 1.5 standard errors from zero. More important,
traditional factor loadings often go in the wrong direction in explaining the IV OL eﬀect. In the
CAPM, for example, the market beta of the high-minus-low decile is 0.91, giving rise to a large
CAPM alpha of −0.95%, which is about 3.5 standard errors from zero. In the Fama-French model
and the Carhart model, the market and the SM B betas are large and positive, going in the wrong
direction, but the HM L and W M L loadings are large and negative, going in the right direction.
The two alphas for the high-minus-low decile are −0.91% and −0.58%, both of which are signiﬁcant. The m.a.e.’s are 0.20%, 0.19%, and 0.15% for the CAPM, the Fama-French model, and the
Carhart model, respectively. All three models are strongly rejected by the GRS test.
The q-factor model reduces the high-minus-low alpha to a tiny −0.04% per month (t = −0.19).
The m.a.e. drops to 0.10% from 0.15% in the Carhart model. Notably, none of the ten IV OL deciles
have signiﬁcant alphas in the q-factor model. In contrast, four out of ten deciles have signiﬁcant
alphas in all three traditional factor models. Although the market and the size factor loadings go in
the wrong direction, the investment and the ROE factor loadings both go in the right direction in
explaining the IV OL eﬀect. The high-minus-low decile has negative loadings of −0.98 and −0.96 on
the investment factor and the ROE factor, respectively, both of which are more than ﬁve standard
errors from zero. As such, high IV OL stocks, which are relatively small, tend to invest more, but are
less proﬁtable than low IV OL stocks. Controlling for investment and ROE is suﬃcient to explain
the IV OL eﬀect. However, the q-factor model is still rejected by the GRS test (p-value = 0.02).

9

Financial Distress
At the beginning of each month, we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort all NYSE, Amex, and
NASDAQ stocks into deciles on Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi’s (2008) failure probability (see
Appendix A for the detailed deﬁnition). Earnings and other accounting data for a ﬁscal quarter are
used in portfolio sorts in the months immediately after the quarter’s public earnings announcement
dates (Compustat quarterly item RDQ). The starting point of the sample for the failure probability
deciles is January 1976, which is restricted by the availability of the quarterly data items required in
calculating failure probability. (Campbell et al. start their sample in 1981.) Monthly value-weighted
portfolio returns are calculated for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly.
From Table 4, more ﬁnancially distressed ﬁrms earn lower average returns than less ﬁnancially
distressed ﬁrms. The high-minus-low distress decile earns an average return of −0.57% per month,
which is, however, within 1.5 standard errors from zero. More important, controlling for traditional
risk measures exacerbates the distress anomaly because more distressed ﬁrms appear riskier. In
particular, the high-minus-low decile has a CAPM beta of 0.84, giving rise to a CAPM alpha of
−1.04%, which is more than three standard errors from zero. In the Fama-French model, all three
factor loadings go in the wrong direction in explaining the distress eﬀect. The high-minus-low decile
has a market beta of 0.76, an SM B loading of 0.97, and an HM L loading of 0.46. These large and
positive risk measures produce a huge Fama-French alpha of −1.43%, which is more than ﬁve standard errors from zero. The Carhart model shrinks the high-minus-low alpha to −0.55% because of a
negative W M L loading of −1.02. Intuitively, most distressed ﬁrms tend to be losers, and least distressed ﬁrms tend to be winners. The m.a.e. across the deciles is 0.17% in the CAPM, 0.25% in the
Fama-French model, and 0.12% in the Carhart model. The CAPM and the Fama-French model are
strongly rejected by the GRS test, but the test of the Carhart model is only marginally signiﬁcant.
The q-factor model helps explain the distress eﬀect. The high-minus-low decile has a tiny alpha
of 0.02% per month (t = 0.07). Going in the right direction in explaining the average returns, more
distressed ﬁrms have lower ROE factor loadings than less distressed ﬁrms. The loading spread
across the extreme deciles is −1.79, which is more than 7.5 standard errors from zero. Intuitively,
more distressed ﬁrms are less proﬁtable (and load less on the ROE factor) than less distressed
ﬁrms. In particular, proﬁtability enters the failure probability measure with a large and negative
coeﬃcient (see Appendix A). The ROE factor loading of the high-minus-low decile alone is enough
to overcome the large and positive loadings on the market and the size factors that go in the wrong
10

direction in explaining the distress eﬀect. The investment factor loading of the high-minus-low decile
is only 0.11. However, the q-factor model produces an m.a.e. of 0.15%, which is slightly higher than
0.12% in the Carhart model. And the model is rejected by the GRS test (p-value = 0.01).
Net Stock Issues
Fama and French (2008) and Pontiﬀ and Woodgate (2008) show that ﬁrms with high net stock issues
underperform ﬁrms with low net stock issues. Following Fama and French, we measure net stock
issues as the natural log of the ratio of the split-adjusted shares outstanding at the ﬁscal yearend in
t−1 to the split-adjusted shares outstanding at the ﬁscal yearend in t−2. The split-adjusted shares
outstanding is shares outstanding (Compustat annual item CSHO) times the adjustment factor
(item AJEX). In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort all NYSE, Amex, and
NASDAQ stocks into deciles based on net stock issues for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year
t − 1. Because a disproportionately large number of ﬁrms have zero net stock issues, we group all
the ﬁrms with negative net issues into deciles one and two (equal-numbered), and all the ﬁrms with
zero net issues into decile three. We then sort the ﬁrms with positive net issues into the remaining
seven (equal-numbered) deciles. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July
of year t to June of year t + 1, and the deciles are rebalanced in June of t + 1.
From Table 5, ﬁrms with high net issues earn lower average returns than ﬁrms with low net issues, 0.20% versus 0.88% per month. The high-minus-low decile earns an average return of −0.68%,
a CAPM alpha of −0.77%, a Fama-French alpha of −0.62%, and a Carhart alpha of −0.57%, all of
which are more than 3.5 standard errors from zero. Across the ten deciles, six CAPM alphas, six
Fama-French alphas, and ﬁve Carhart alphas are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. The m.a.e.’s are
0.21%, 0.20%, and 0.17% in the CAPM, the Fama-French model and the Carhart model, respectively. All three factor models are again strongly rejected by the GRS test.
The q-factor model reduces the high-minus-low alpha to −0.32% per month, which is still signiﬁcant (t = −2.10). This alpha represents 44% reduction in magnitude from the Carhart alpha of
−0.57%. The m.a.e. also drops from 0.17% in the Carhart model to 0.12% in the q-factor model.
However, the q-factor model is still rejected by the GRS test. Both the investment and the ROE
factors contribute to the q-factor model’s explanatory power. The high-minus-low decile has an
investment factor loading of −0.66 (t = −6.33), going in the right direction in explaining the net
issues eﬀect. Intuitively, high net issues ﬁrms invest more than low net issues ﬁrms. The ROE

11

factor loading also moves in the right direction. The high-minus-low decile has an ROE factor
loading of −0.23 (t = −3.43). The evidence suggests that high net issues ﬁrms are somewhat less
proﬁtable than low net issues ﬁrms at the portfolio formation.6
Composite Issuance
Following Daniel and Titman (2006), we measure composite issuance as the growth rate in the
market equity not attributable to the stock return, log (M Et /M Et−5 ) − r(t − 5, t). For June of year
t, r(t − 5, t) is the cumulative log return on the stock from the last trading day of June in year t − 5
to the last trading day of June in year t, and M Et is the total market equity on the last trading day
of June in year t from CRSP. Equity issuance such as seasoned equity issues, employee stock option
plans, and share-based acquisitions increase the composite issuance, whereas repurchase activities
such as share repurchases and cash dividends reduce the composite issuance. In June of each year t,
we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on composite
issuance. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of year t to June of
year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June.
Table 6 shows that high composite issuance ﬁrms earn lower average returns than low composite
issuance ﬁrms. The average return spread is −0.58% per month, which is almost three standard
errors from zero. The CAPM beta of the high-minus-low decile is 0.46, which goes in the wrong
direction in explaining the average return. As a result, the CAPM alpha is −0.79%, which is more
than 4.5 standard errors from zero. In the Fama-French model and the Carhart model, the HM L
betas are −0.67 and −0.70, which help reduce the high-minus-low alphas in magnitude to −0.50%
and −0.40%, (t = −3.61 and −2.91), respectively.
The q-factor model reduces the high-minus-low alpha further to −0.21% per month, which is
within 1.5 standard errors of zero. The m.a.e. is 0.12%, which is lower than 0.15% for the Carhart
model. However, similar to the traditional factor models, the q-factor model is still rejected by the
GRS test. The main source of the explanatory power is the investment factor. The high-minus-low
decile has an investment factor loading of −1.11, which is more than 14 standard errors from zero.
Although also going in the right direction, the ROE factor loading for the high-minus-low decile,
−0.11, is economically small and statistically insigniﬁcant.
6

Loughran and Ritter (1995) show that new equity issuers are more proﬁtable than nonissuers. Because net stock
issues are new issues net of share repurchases, our evidence is consistent with Lie (2005), who shows that share
repurchasing ﬁrms exhibit superior operating performance relative to industry peers.

12

Abnormal Corporate Investment
Titman, Wei, and Xie (2004) show that ﬁrms which increase capital investments earn negative subsequent benchmark-adjusted returns.

Following Titman et al., we measure ab-

normal corporate investment that applies for the portfolio formation year t, as ACIt−1 ≡
CEt−1 /[(CEt−2 + CEt−3 + CEt−4 )/3] − 1, in which CEt−1 is capital expenditure (Compustat annual item CAPX) scaled by its sales (item SALE) in year t−1. The last three-year average capital
expenditure aims to project the benchmark investment at the portfolio formation year. Using sales
as the deﬂator implicitly assumes that the benchmark investment grows proportionately with sales.
As in Titman et al., we exclude ﬁrms with sales less than ten million dollars.
In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
into deciles based on ACI for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Monthly value-weighted
decile returns are computed from July of year t to June of t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in
June. Table 7 shows that the ACI eﬀect is weak. High ACI stocks underperform low ACI stocks
only by 0.26% per month (t = 1.57). The high-minus-low alphas are insigniﬁcant in all the factor
models. The high-minus-low alpha is −0.11% in the q-factor model, and is somewhat lower in
magnitude than −0.16% in the Carhart model. However, the m.a.e. is higher in the q-factor model
than in the Carhart model, 0.15% versus 0.12%. Both models are still rejected by the GRS test.
Total Accruals
Table 8 documents a weakness of the q-factor model. Sloan (1996) shows that ﬁrms with high total
accruals earn lower average returns than ﬁrms with low total accruals. Following Sloan, we measure
total accruals as changes in noncash working capital minus depreciation expense scaled by total
assets averaged over the prior two years. The noncash working capital is the change in noncash
current assets minus the change in current liabilities less short-term debt and taxes payable.7 In
June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into
deciles on total accruals scaled by average total assets (Compustat annual item AT) as of the ﬁscal
year ending in calendar year t − 1. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from
July of year t to June of year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June.
7

Speciﬁcally, total accruals ≡ (CA − CASH) − (CL − ST D − T P ) − DP , in which CA is the change in
current assets (Compustat annual item ACT), CASH is the change in cash or cash equivalents (item CHE), CL
is the change in current liabilities (item LCT), ST D is the change in debt included in current liabilities (item DLC),
T P is the change in income taxes payable (item TXP), and DP is depreciation and amortization expense (item DP).

13

From Table 8, high accrual stocks underperform low accrual stocks by 0.30% per month
(t = 1.94). The CAPM and the Fama-French model both fail to explain this average return,
with signiﬁcant alphas of −0.35% and −0.29%, respectively. The Carhart alpha is −0.29%, but
is within 1.7 standard errors of zero. The m.a.e. is 0.13% in the CAPM and in the Fama-French
model, and is 0.11% in the Carhart model. All three models are rejected by the GRS test.
The q-factor model underperforms the Fama-French model and the Carhart model. The highminus-low alpha is −0.39% per month, which is about 2.5 standard errors from zero. In contrast,
the Carhart alpha is only −0.29% (t = −1.69). The m.a.e. is 0.14% in the q-factor model, and is
higher than 0.11% in the Carhart model. The investment factor loading goes in the right direction as the average returns. The high-minus-low decile has an investment factor loading of −0.56,
which is more than ﬁve standard errors from zero.8 The trouble of the q-factor model is caused by
the ROE factor loading, which goes in the wrong direction in explaining the accrual eﬀect. The
ROE factor loading for the high-minus-low decile is 0.34, which is more than four standard errors
from zero. Intuitively, high accrual stocks are more proﬁtable (and load more on the ROE factor)
than low accrual stocks. The high-minus-low decile has a size factor loading of 0.42, also going in
the wrong direction. As noted, the ROE factor is critical for the q-factor model to explain crosssectional predictability related to earnings surprise, idiosyncratic volatility, and ﬁnancial distress.
As such, the diﬃculty of the q-factor model with the accrual eﬀect appears unavoidable in our
eﬀort to produce a new workhorse model for the broad cross-section of average returns.
Industries
Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken (2010) argue that asset pricing tests are often misleading because
apparently strong explanatory power (such as high R2 ) provides only weak support for a model.
Our tests are (relatively) immune to this critique because we focus on high-minus-low alphas and
mean absolute errors from factor regressions as the yardsticks for evaluating factor models. Following Lewellen et al.’s prescription, we also confront the q-factor model with a wide array of testing
portfolios. We explore the q-factor model further with ten industry portfolios.
In June of each year t, we assign each NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stock to an industry portfolio based on its four-digit SIC code at that time. (We use Compustat SIC codes for the ﬁscal
8

Consistent with Wu, Zhang, and Zhang (2010), augmenting the CAPM with the investment factor reduces the
high-minus-low alpha to −0.05% (t = −0.32) and the m.a.e. to 0.09%. Augmenting the Fama-French model with
the investment factor reduces the high-minus-low alpha to −0.14% (t = −0.93) and the m.a.e. to 0.10%.

14

year ending in calendar year t − 1. If Compustat SIC codes are unavailable, we use CRSP SIC
codes for June of year t.) The ten-industry classiﬁcation is from Kenneth French’s Web site. We
exclude ﬁnancial ﬁrms from the last industry portfolio (“Other”). Monthly value-weighted returns
are computed from July of year t to June of year t + 1.
From Table 9, the CAPM provides an m.a.e. of 0.19% per month across the ten industry
portfolios. Two out of ten industries have signiﬁcant alphas in the CAPM. The Fama-French model
produces a similar m.a.e. of 0.21%, and the Carhart model reduces it slightly to 0.18%. The m.a.e.
from the q-factor model is somewhat higher, 0.22%. Three out of ten industries have signiﬁcant
alphas in all three multifactor models, but all four factor models are rejected by the GRS test.

3.2

Two-way Sorted Testing Portfolios

We present factor regressions of two-way portfolios formed on size and momentum, size and bookto-market, as well as investment and ROE. Momentum and the value premium are stronger in small
ﬁrms than in big ﬁrms, a stylized fact that poses a challenge to all the factor models. The investment
and ROE portfolios are important because these are constructed directly on the characteristics underlying the q-factor model. To paint a more complete picture, we also present in Appendix C factor
regressions of one-way deciles formed on momentum, book-to-market, investment, and ROE. For
the most part, the results from two-way portfolios are similar to those from one-way deciles.
Size and Momentum
At the beginning of each month t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort all NYSE, Amex, and
NASDAQ stocks into quintiles on their prior six-month returns from month t−2 to t−7, skipping
month t−1. Independently, in June of each year t, we also use NYSE breakpoints to sort stocks into
quintiles on the market equity at the end of June. We form 25 portfolios each month from taking the
intersections of the size and the momentum quintiles, and compute value-weighted portfolio returns
for the subsequent six months from month t to t+5. The six-month holding period means that for
a given portfolio there exist six sub-portfolios for each month. As such, we take the simple average
of value-weighted returns on the six sub-portfolios as the monthly return of the given portfolio.
Table 10 reports large momentum proﬁts. From Panel A, the average winner-minus-loser return
varies from 0.51% (t = 2.31) to 1.02% per month (t = 5.46). The CAPM alphas of the winner-minusloser quintiles are all signiﬁcantly positive across the size quintiles. In particular, the small-stock

15

winner-minus-loser quintile earns an alpha of 1.04%, which is more than six standard errors from
zreo. Consistent with Fama and French (1996), their three-factor model exacerbates momentum.
The small-stock winner-minus-loser quintile earns a Fama-French alpha of 1.22% (t = 7.20). The
m.a.e. across the 25 testing portfolios is 0.26% in the CAPM and 0.22% in the Fama-French model,
and the average magnitude of the winner-minus-loser alphas is 0.74% in the CAPM and 0.90% in
the Fama-French model. Both models are strongly rejected by the GRS test.
Including W M L into the Fama-French model as in Carhart (1997) improves the performance
substantially. The m.a.e. across the 25 portfolios drops from 0.22% per month in the Fama-French
model to only 0.11% in the Carhart model, and the average magnitude of the winner-minus-loser
alphas drops from 0.90% to only 0.25%. However, three out of ﬁve winner-minus-loser quintiles still
have signiﬁcant alphas in the Carhart model. In particular, the small-stock winner-minus-loser has
a Carhart alpha of 0.55%, which is more than 4.5 standard errors from zero. In addition, six out
of 25 portfolios have signiﬁcant Carhart alphas. And the model is again rejected by the GRS test.
Table 11 reports the q-factor regressions. The m.a.e. across the 25 size and momentum portfolios is 0.11% per month, which is identical to that in the Carhart model. However, the average
magnitude of the winner-minus-loser alphas is 0.19% in the q-factor model, which is lower than
0.25% in the Carhart model. Only one out of ﬁve winner-minus-loser alphas is signiﬁcant, compared
with three in the Carhart model. And two out of 25 individual portfolios have signiﬁcant alphas in
the q-factor model, relative to six in the Carhart model. Overall, the performance of the q-factor
model seems largely comparable with that of the Carhart model.
The rest of Table 11 shows that the explanatory power of the q-factor model derives exclusively
from the ROE factor. The loadings of the winner-minus-loser quintiles on the market, size, and
investment factors are all economically small and statistically insigniﬁcant from zero. In contrast,
losers have large and signiﬁcantly negative loadings, and winners have large and signiﬁcantly positive loadings on rROE . Across the winner-minus-loser quintiles, the ROE factor loadings vary from
0.72 to 0.92, which are all at least 4.5 standard errors from zero. Given the average ROE factor
return of 0.60%, these loadings capture momentum proﬁts that range from 0.43% to 0.55%.
Size and Book-to-Market
In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
into quintiles on the market equity at the end of June of t. Independently, in June of each year t, we
16

use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into quintiles on book-tomarket equity. Book-to-market equity for June of year t is the book equity for the ﬁscal year ending
in calendar year t−1 divided by the market equity at the end of December of t−1.9 Taking intersections, we form 25 size and book-to-market portfolios. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are
calculated from July of year t to June of t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced at the end of June.
Table 12 reports factor regressions of 25 size and book-to-market portfolios. Value stocks earn
higher average returns than growth stocks. The average value-minus-growth return is 1.01% per
month (t = 4.48) in the smallest size quintile and 0.19% (t = 0.89) in the biggest size quintile. The
small-stock value-minus-growth quintile has a CAPM alpha of 1.17% (t = 5.40), a Fama-French
alpha of 0.69% (t = 5.44), and a Carhart alpha of 0.69 (t = 5.50). In particular, the small-growth
portfolio has a Fama-French alpha of −0.54%, which is more than 4.5 standard errors from zero,
as well as a Carhart alpha of −0.48%, which is almost four standard errors from zero.10 Also, 14
out of 25 individual portfolios and four out of ﬁve value-minus-growth quintiles have signiﬁcant
alphas in the CAPM. Four out of 25 portfolios and three out of ﬁve value-minus-growth quintiles
have signiﬁcant alphas in the Fama-French model. And ﬁve out of 25 portfolios and two out of ﬁve
value-minus-growth quintiles have signiﬁcant alphas in the Carhart model. The m.a.e. is lowest in
the Fama-French model (0.10%), slightly higher in the Carhart model (0.11%), and highest in the
CAPM (0.29%). However, all three models are still strongly rejected by the GRS test.
Table 13 shows that the q-factor model’s performance seems comparable with that of the Carhart
model. The value-minus-growth alpha in the smallest size quintile is 0.58% per month (t = 2.89),
which has a somewhat smaller magnitude than the Fama-French alpha and the Carhart alpha. The
q-factor model does a good job in explaining the small-growth eﬀect. In contrast to the high FamaFrench alpha of −0.57%, the q-factor alpha is only −0.25% (t = −1.46). However, the small-value
portfolio has an alpha of 0.33% (t = 2.84) in the q-factor model, in contrast to the Fama-French
alpha of only 0.15% (t = 1.74). The m.a.e. in the q-factor model is 0.12%, which is comparable with
those in the Fama-French model (0.10%) and the Carhart model (0.11%). Four out of 25 individual
9

Following Davis, Fama, and French (2000), we measure book equity as stockholders’ book equity, plus balance
sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit (Compustat annual item TXDITC) if available, minus the book value of
preferred stock. Stockholders’ equity is the value reported by Compustat (item SEQ), if it is available. If not, we measure stockholders’ equity as the book value of common equity (item CEQ) plus the par value of preferred stock (item
PSTK), or the book value of assets (item AT) minus total liabilities (item LT). Depending on availability, we use redemption (item PSTKRV), liquidating (item PSTKL), or par value (item PSTK) for the book value of preferred stock.
10
The small-growth anomaly is notoriously diﬃcult to explain. Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004) show that the
small-growth portfolio is particularly risky in their two-beta model, carrying both higher cash ﬂow betas and higher
discount rate betas than the small-value portfolio. Their two-beta model fails to explain the small-growth anomaly.

17

portfolios have signiﬁcant alphas in the q-factor model, similar to the performance of the FamaFrench model. However, only one out of ﬁve value-minus-growth quintiles has a signiﬁcant alpha in
the q-factor model, in contrast to three in the Fama-French model and two in the Carhart model.
The rest of Table 13 shows that the q-factor model’s explanatory power derives mostly from the
investment factor. Value stocks have signiﬁcantly higher investment factor loadings than growth
stocks. The loading spreads, ranging from 1.18 to 1.57, are all more than eight standard errors
from zero. Intuitively, growth ﬁrms with high valuation ratios have more growth opportunities
and invest more than value ﬁrms with low valuation ratios (e.g., Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009)).
As such, growth ﬁrms have large and negative loadings, and value ﬁrms have large and positive
loadings on the (low-minus-high) investment factor. In contrast, the value-minus-growth loadings
on the market, the size, and the ROE factors are mostly small and insigniﬁcant.11
A/A and ROE
We have shown that the q-factor model performs roughly as well as the Carhart model in pricing the
size and momentum portfolios and the size and book-to-market portfolios. Both sets of portfolios
are constructed directly on characteristics underlying the Carhart model. We also examine how the
Carhart model performs, in comparison with the q-factor model, in explaining the 25 A/A and
ROE portfolios, which are constructed directly on characteristics underlying the q-factor model.
In June of each year t, we split NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into quintiles using the
NYSE breakpoints on A/A for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Independently, we
sort all stocks, each month, into ﬁve ROE quintiles based on the NYSE breakpoints of the ranked
values of ROE. Earnings and other accounting variables in Compustat quarterly ﬁles are used in
the sorts in the months immediately after the most recent public earnings announcement dates
(Compustat quarterly item RDQ). Taking intersections of the A/A quintiles and the ROE quintiles, we obtain the 25 portfolios. We calculate value-weighted portfolio returns for the current
month, and rebalance the portfolios monthly.
Table 14 shows that the double sort on A/A and ROE produces large average return spreads.
In particular, the high-minus-low ROE quintile in the highest A/A quintile earns an average
return of 0.94% per month, which is more than four standard errors from zero. The low-minus-high
11
The evidence suggests that the q-factor model performs about as well as the Carhart model in explaining the 25
size and book-to-market portfolios. In Appendix D, we extend this basic ﬁnding to additional portfolios formed on
valuation ratios, including market leverage, long-term prior returns, and earnings-to-price.

18

A/A quintile in the lowest ROE quintile earns an average return of 0.74%, which is more than
3.5 standard errors from zero. Taking the largest spread across the 25 portfolios (between the
high-ROE-low-A/A portfolio and the low-ROE-high-A/A portfolio) yields 1.22% (t = 4.69).
The traditional factor models largely fail to explain these average returns. In the CAPM, 11 out
of 25 portfolios, three high-minus-low ROE quintiles, and three low-minus-high A/A quintiles
have signiﬁcant alphas. In the Fama-French model, 13 individual portfolios, ﬁve high-minus-low
ROE quintiles, and three low-minus-high A/A quintiles have signiﬁcant alphas. In the Carhart
model, seven individual portfolios, three high-minus-low ROE quintiles, and three low-minus-high
A/A quintiles have signiﬁcant alphas. The m.a.e.’s are 0.25%, 0.26%, and 0.18% per month,
respectively, across the three models, which are all strongly rejected by the GRS test.
Table 15 shows that the q-factor model does a good job in explaining the 25 A/A and ROE
portfolios. Only one out of 25 individual portfolios, one high-minus-low ROE quintile, and one
low-minus-high A/A quintile have signiﬁcant alphas. The m.a.e. is only 0.09% per month, and
the model is not rejected by the GRS test (p-value = 0.26). In particular, the high-ROE-low-A/A
minus low-ROE-high-A/A portfolio has a tiny alpha of −0.07%, which is within 0.5 standard
errors from zero. In contrast, this alpha is 1.37% (t = 5.54) in the CAPM, 1.31% (t = 5.66) in the
Fama-French model, and 0.93% (t = 4.09) in the Carhart model.
The rest of the table shows that, naturally, the ROE factor loadings explain the average returns
for the high-minus-low ROE quintiles. The loadings vary from 0.96 to 1.27, which are all more than
ten standard errors from zero. Also, the investment factor loadings explain the average returns for
the low-minus-high A/A quintiles. The loadings vary from 1.10 to 1.45, which are all more than
seven standard errors from zero. And both factor loadings contribute to the large average return
for the high-ROE-low-A/A minus low-ROE-high-A/A portfolio.

4

Specification Tests

As noted, the size factor plays only a secondary role in the q-factor model. In this section, we
conduct speciﬁcation tests to quantify the role of the size factor by estimating:
rti − rtf = aiq + biM KT M KTt + biA/A rA/A,t + biROE rROE,t + eit .

(6)

Table 16 shows why we opt to include the size factor in the q-factor model. This table reports
19

the results for the size deciles. In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the
NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on the market equity at the end of June. Monthly
value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of year t to June of t+1, and the portfolios
are rebalanced in June. The table shows no average return spread between the small and the big
deciles in the 1972–2011 sample. None of the small-minus-big alphas from the traditional factor
models are signiﬁcant. The m.a.e.’s in the CAPM, the Fama-French model, the Carhart model,
and the q-factor model are largely comparable. The GRS test fails to reject the CAPM, but do
reject the three multifactor models. Because of the high goodness-of-ﬁt in the multifactor models,
even small deviations between predict returns and realized returns are signiﬁcant.
The last eight rows in Table 16 show that without the size factor, the q-factor model produces
a small-minus-big alpha of 0.68% per month (t = 2.17). This alpha is higher in magnitude than
−0.19% in the Fama-French model and −0.17% in the Carhart model. The m.a.e. is 0.34% without the size factor, and is higher than 0.05% in both the Fama-French model and the Carhart
model. Including the size factor as in the benchmark q-factor model ﬁxes these shortcomings. The
small-minus-growth alpha drops to 0.04% and the m.a.e. to 0.08%.
In general, the size factor helps reduce the m.a.e. for the q-factor model, especially when size
is involved in forming testing portfolios. Panel A of Table 17 uses the 25 size and momentum
portfolios as an example. Without the size factor, the m.a.e. increases from 0.11% per month in
the benchmark model to 0.31%. Also, the average R2 across the 25 portfolios drops from 90% with
the size factor to 81% without the size factor. Panel B paints a similar picture using the 25 size
and book-to-market portfolios. Without the size factor, the m.a.e. increases from 0.12% per month
to 0.31%, and the average R2 decreases from 87% to 78%. The value-minus-growth alphas are not
aﬀected. The small-stock value-minus-growth alpha even goes down slightly from 0.58% to 0.52%
once we drop the size factor, and is still the only signiﬁcant value-minus-growth alpha.
Panel C of Table 17 reports the results for the 25 A/A and ROE portfolios. Because size is not
used in forming these portfolios, the q-factor model’s performance is largely unaﬀected by dropping
the size factor. The m.a.e. goes up slightly from 0.09% per month to 0.12%, and the average R2
drops slightly from 80% to 79%. Among zero-cost strategies, only the low-minus-high A/A alpha
in the high-ROE quintile is signiﬁcant, −0.40%. However, its magnitude falls relative to −0.50% in
the benchmark q-factor model. The high-minus-low ROE alpha in the high-A/A quintile is 0.43%
(t = 2.65) in the benchmark model, but becomes 0.29% (t = 1.62) once we drop the size factor.
20

Table 18 reports similar results for the one-way deciles. Because size is not used explicitly in
forming these portfolios, the q-factor model’s performance is again largely unchanged by dropping
the size factor. Without going through the details, we can report that the m.a.e.’s and the average
R2 s are, for the most part, unaﬀected by dropping the size factor. The high-minus-low alphas
across diﬀerent sets of deciles are also largely unchanged. In a few cases, dropping the size factor
in eﬀect helps the q-factor model. For instance, Panel G shows that without the size factor, the
q-factor model produces a high-minus-low alpha of −0.19% per month and an m.a.e. of 0.11%
across the accrual deciles. Both are comparable with those from the Carhart model. In contrast,
the high-minus-low alpha is −0.39% and the m.a.e. is 0.14% in the benchmark q-factor model.

5

Interpreting the Results

We interpret the q-factor model as a parsimonious summary of the cross-section of average returns,
a new workhorse that can be used to estimate expected returns in practice. We ﬁrst show that
our empirical results are consistent with investment-based asset pricing (Section 5.1), but we also
entertain alternative interpretations based on common risk factors and mispricing (Section 5.2).

5.1

Interpretation from Investment-based Asset Pricing

Our results are consistent with insights from investment-based asset pricing (e.g., Cochrane (1991),
Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), Zhang (2005), and Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009)).
An Economic Model
We outline a simple two-period model to illustrate the basic intuition. While more complex models provide richer and more subtle predictions, the basic insights from the simple model hold in
virtually all of the investment-based theoretical models that we are aware of.
There are two periods, 0 and 1, and heterogeneous ﬁrms, indexed by i. Firm i’s operating
proﬁts are given by Πi0 Ai0 in date 0 and Πi1 Ai1 in date 1, in which Ai0 and Ai1 are the ﬁrm’s scale
of productive assets, and Πi0 and Πi1 are the ﬁrm’s ROE in dates 0 and 1, respectively. Firm i
starts with assets Ai0 , invests in date 0, produces in both dates, and exits at the end of date 1 with
a liquidation value of (1 − δ)Ai1 , in which δ is the rate of depreciation. Assets evolve according to
Ai1 = Ii0 + (1 − δ)Ai0 , in which Ii0 is investment. Investment entails quadratic adjustment costs
given by (a/2)(Ii0 /Ai0 )2 Ai0 , in which a > 0 is a constant parameter.

21

Firm i has a gross discount rate of ri , which varies across ﬁrms. The ﬁrm chooses Ai1 to
maximize the market value at the beginning of date 0:

2
a Ai1
1
− (1 − δ) Ai0 + [Πi1 Ai1 + (1 − δ)Ai1 ] .
max Πi0 Ai0 − [Ai1 − (1 − δ)Ai0 ] −
2 Ai0
ri
{Ai1 }

(7)

The market value is date 0’s free cash ﬂow, Πi0 Ai0 − Ii0 − (a/2)(Ii0 /Ai0 )2 Ai0 , plus the discounted
value of date 1’s free cash ﬂow, [Πi1 Ai1 + (1 − δ)Ai1 ] /ri . With only two dates the ﬁrm does not invest in date 1, so date 1’s free cash ﬂow equals the sum of operating proﬁts and the liquidation value.
The tradeoﬀ of ﬁrm i is between forgoing date 0’s free cash ﬂow and obtaining higher free cash
ﬂow in date 1. Setting the ﬁrst-order derivative of equation (2) with respect to Ai1 to zero yields:
ri =

Πi1 + 1 − δ
.
1 + a(Ii0 /Ai0 )

(8)

This optimality condition is intuitive. The numerator in the right-hand side is the marginal beneﬁt
of investment, including the marginal product of capital (ROE), Πi1 , and the marginal liquidation
value of capital, 1 − δ. The denominator is the marginal cost of investment, including the marginal
purchasing cost of investment (unity) and the marginal adjustment cost, a(Ii0 /Ai0 ). Because the
marginal beneﬁt of investment is in date 1’s dollar terms and the marginal cost of investment
is in date 0’s dollar terms, the ﬁrst-order condition says that the marginal beneﬁt of investment
discounted to date 0 should equal the marginal cost of investment. Equivalently, the investment
return, deﬁned as the ratio of the marginal beneﬁt of investment in date 1 divided by the marginal
cost of investment in date 0, should equal the discount rate, as in Cochrane (1991).
The Investment Factor
We use the ﬁrst-order condition (8) to interpret the role of the investment factor and the ROE factor
in the cross-section of returns. On the investment factor, the equation says that given the expected
ROE, the expected return decreases with investment-to-assets. We argue that this investment
mechanism is consistent with a wide range of cross-sectional predictability patterns including the
negative relations of average returns with net stock issues, composite issuance, accruals, valuation
ratios, and long-term prior returns (reversal). Figure 1 illustrates the investment mechanism.
The negative relation between expected returns and investment is intuitive. Firms invest more
when their marginal q (the net present value of future cash ﬂows generated from one additional unit
of capital) is high. Given expected ROE or cash ﬂows, low discount rates give rise to high marginal
22

q and high investment, and high discount rates give rise to low marginal q and low investment. This
discount rate intuition is probably most transparent in the capital budgeting language of Brealey,
Myers, and Allen (2006). In our setting capital is homogeneous, meaning that there is no diﬀerence
between project-level costs of capital and ﬁrm-level costs of capital. Given expected cash ﬂows,
high costs of capital imply low net present values of new projects and in turn low investment, and
low costs of capital imply high net present values of new projects and in turn high investment.12

Figure 1. The Investment Mechanism
6

Y -axis: The discount rate

High composite issuance ﬁrms
High accrual ﬁrms
Firms with high long-term prior returns
Low market leverage ﬁrms
Growth ﬁrms with low book-to-market
High net stock issues ﬁrms
SEO ﬁrms, IPO ﬁrms, convertible bond issuers
High investment-to-assets ﬁrms



Low investment-to-assets ﬁrms
Matching nonissuers
Low net stock issues ﬁrms
Value ﬁrms with high book-to-market
High market leverage ﬁrms
Firms with low long-term prior returns

0

-

X-axis: Investment-to-assets

Low accrual ﬁrms
Low composite issuance ﬁrms

The negative investment-expected return relation is conditional on expected ROE. Investment
is not disconnected with ROE because more proﬁtable ﬁrms tend to invest more than less profitable ﬁrms. This conditional relation provides a natural portfolio interpretation of the investment
mechanism. Sorting on net stock issues, composite issuance, book-to-market, and other valuation
ratios is closer to sorting on investment than sorting on expected ROE. Equivalently, these sorts
12

The negative investment-discount rate relation has a long tradition in economics. In a world without uncertainty,
Fisher (1930) and Fama and Miller (1972, Figure 2.4) show that the interest rate and investment are negatively
correlated. Intuitively, the investment demand curve is downward sloping. Extending this insight into a world with
uncertainty, Cochrane (1991) and Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009) demonstrate the negative investment-expected
return relation in a dynamic setting with constant returns to scale. Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004)
also predict the negative investment-expected return relation. In their real options model expansion options are
riskier than assets in place. Investment converts riskier expansion options into less risky assets in place. As such,
high-investment ﬁrms are less risky and earn lower expected returns than low-investment ﬁrms.

23

produce wider spreads in investment than in expected ROE. As such, we can interpret the average
return spreads generated from these diverse sorts using their common implied sort on investment.
In particular, the negative relation of average returns with equity issues is consistent with the
negative investment-expected return relation. The balance-sheet constraint of ﬁrms implies that a
ﬁrm’s uses of funds must equal the ﬁrm’s sources of funds, meaning that, all else equal, issuers must
invest more (and earn lower average returns) than nonissuers.13 Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008)
document that asset growth predicts future returns with a negative slope and interpret the evidence
as investor underreaction to overinvestment. However, asset growth is the most comprehensive measure of investment-to-assets, in which investment is deﬁned as the change in total assets. As such,
the asset growth eﬀect seems to be the premiere manifestation of the investment mechanism.
The value premium is also consistent with the negative investment-expected return relation.
Investment-to-assets is an increasing function of marginal q (the denominator of equation (8)), and
the marginal q equals the average q under constant returns to scale. The average q and market-tobook equity are highly correlated, and are identical without debt ﬁnancing. As such, value ﬁrms
with high book-to-market should invest less, and earn higher average returns than growth ﬁrms with
low book-to-market. In general, ﬁrms with high valuation ratios have more growth opportunities,
invest more, and earn lower expected returns than ﬁrms with low valuation ratios.
We also include market leverage in this category. Fama and French (1992) measure market
leverage as the ratio of total assets to the market equity. Empirically, the q-factor model does a
good job in explaining the market leverage-expected return relation (see Appendix D). Intuitively,
because the market equity is in the denominator, high leverage signals fewer growth opportunities,
low investment, and high expected returns, whereas low leverage signals more growth opportunities,
high investment, and low expected returns. This investment mechanism diﬀers from the standard
leverage eﬀect in corporate ﬁnance texts. According to the textbook argument, high leverage means
a high proportion of asset risk shared by equity holders, inducing high expected equity returns.
This argument implicitly assumes that investment policy is ﬁxed and that asset risk does not vary
with investment. In contrast, the investment mechanism allows investment and leverage to be
jointly determined. As such, market leverage and investment are negatively correlated, giving rise
to a positive relation between market leverage and expected returns.
13

Lyandres, Sun, and Zhang (2008) show that adding an investment factor to the CAPM and the Fama-French
model reduces the magnitude of the underperformance following initial public oﬀerings, seasoned equity oﬀerings,
and convertible debt oﬀerings. Lyandres et al. also report the part of Figure 1 that is related to the new issues puzzle.

24

High valuation ratios often result from a stream of positive shocks on fundamentals, and low
valuation ratios from a stream of negative shocks on fundamentals. High valuation ratios of growth
ﬁrms can manifest as high long-term prior returns, and low valuation ratios of value ﬁrms as low
long-term prior returns. As such, ﬁrms with high long-term prior returns should invest more and
earn lower average returns than ﬁrms with low long-term prior returns. In all, the investment
mechanism also helps explain DeBondt and Thaler’s (1985) reversal eﬀect.
The ROE Factor
Equation (8) implies that working in parallel with the investment mechanism is the ROE mechanism. Given investment-to-assets, ﬁrms with high expected ROE should earn higher expected
returns than ﬁrms with low expected ROE. Because expected ROE is not observable, we use the
current ROE as the proxy for expected ROE. The ROE-expected return relation is consistent
with momentum, post-earnings-announcement drift, and the ﬁnancial distress eﬀect.
Why should high expected ROE ﬁrms earn higher expected returns than low expected ROE
ﬁrms? We explain the intuition in two ways, discounting and capital budgeting. First, the marginal
cost of investment in the denominator of the right-hand side of equation (8) equals marginal q, which
in turn equals average q or market-to-book. As such, equation (8) says that the expected return
is the expected ROE divided by market-to-book. Equivalently, the expected return equals the
expected cash ﬂow divided by the market equity. This relation is analogous to the Gordon Growth
Model. In a two-period world price equals the expected cash ﬂow divided by the discount rate.
High expected cash ﬂows relative to low market equity (or high expected ROEs relative to low
market-to-book) mean high discount rates. And low expected cash ﬂows relative to high market
equity (or low expected ROEs relative to high market-to-book) mean low discount rates.14
From the capital budgeting perspective, equation (8) says that the expected return equals the
expected ROE divided by an increasing function of investment-to-assets. High expected ROE
relative to low investment must mean high discount rates. The high discount rates are necessary
to oﬀset the high expected ROE to induce low net present values of new capital and thus low investment. If the discount rates were not high enough to counteract the high expected ROE, ﬁrms
14

This discounting intuition from valuation theory is also noted by Fama and French (2006). Using the residual
income model, Fama and French argue that expected stock returns are related to three variables (book-to-market
equity, expected proﬁtability, and expected investment). Controlling for book-to-market and expected investment,
more proﬁtable ﬁrms earn higher expected returns. However, Fama and French do not motivate the ROE eﬀect from
economic theory or connect the ROE-expected return relation to the momentum, earnings, and distress anomalies.

25

would instead observe high net present values of new capital and thus invest more. Similarly, low
expected ROE relative to high investments (such as small-growth ﬁrms in the 1990s) must mean
low discount rates. If the discount rates were not low enough to counteract the low expected ROE,
these ﬁrms would instead observe low net present values of new capital and thus invest less.
The ROE-expected return relation has important implications. For any sorts that produce
wider spreads in expected ROE than in investment, the average return patterns across the sorted
portfolios can be interpreted using the common implied sort on expected ROE. Examples include sorts on momentum, ﬁnancial distress, and earning surprises. First, momentum sorts should
generate an expected ROE spread. Intuitively, shocks to earnings are positively correlated with
contemporaneous stock returns. Firms with positive earnings surprises are likely to experience immediate stock price increases, whereas ﬁrms with negative earnings surprises are likely to experience
immediate stock price decreases. As such, winners with high short-term prior returns should have
higher expected ROE and earn higher average returns than losers with low short-term prior returns.
Second, less ﬁnancially distressed ﬁrms are more proﬁtable (with higher expected ROE) and,
all else equal, should earn higher average returns than more ﬁnancially distressed ﬁrms. As such,
the distress eﬀect is consistent with the positive ROE-expected return relation. Finally, sorting on
earnings surprise should generate an expected ROE spread between extreme portfolios. Intuitively,
ﬁrms that have experienced large positive earnings surprises should be more proﬁtable than ﬁrms
that have experienced large negative earnings surprises.
A Few Loose Ends
In Section 2, we sort stocks jointly on A/A and ROE to construct the investment and the ROE
factors. The practice is consistent with equation (8), which shows that the investment and the
ROE eﬀects are both conditional in nature. Firms will invest a lot when either the ROE of their
investment is high, or the cost of capital is low, or both. As such, the negative relation between
investment and the cost of capital is conditional on a given level of ROE. Similarly, the positive
relation between ROE and the cost of capital is conditional on a given level of investment. Sorting
jointly on A/A and ROE controls for this conditional relation.
Also, the size factor is primarily used to reduce the m.a.e. of the q-factor model across size-sorted
portfolios. When size is not involved with constructing the testing portfolios, the performance of
the q-factor model is largely unaﬀected by dropping the size factor (see Section 4). As such, the size
26

factor plays only a secondary role, whereas the investment and the ROE factors are more important.
Finally, equation (8), which is derived from the investment ﬁrst-order condition, is a nonlinear
characteristics-based model. Strictly speaking, the equation does not give rise to a factor model.
Nevertheless, we opt to use a linear factor approximation to the nonlinear characteristics model.
Stock returns data are available at high frequencies, and are less subject to measurement errors
than accounting variables. As such, factor mimicking portfolios often deliver better empirical performance than the underlying economic model itself (e.g., Breeden, Gibbons, and Litzenberger
(1989)). Also, estimating the economic model directly involves speciﬁcation errors in the production and the capital adjustment technologies, and requires a high level of aggregation over the
underlying characteristics (e.g., Liu, Whited, and Zhang (2009)). For all these reasons, the q-factor
model is more ﬂexible in practice, and can be used to estimate the cost of capital at the ﬁrm level.

5.2

Alternative Interpretations

We discuss two alternative interpretations to our empirical results, the common risk factors interpretation as in Fama and French (1993, 1996) and the mispricing interpretation as in, for example,
Daniel and Titman (1997). We argue that both alternative interpretations are reasonable, despite
representing two polar extremes on the risk-mispricing spectrum. The investment-based interpretation in Section 5.1 seems to provide a healthy balance between the two extremes.
Common Risk Factors
Although we consider the investment, the ROE, and the size factors as common factors, we stop
short of claiming common risk factors. Fama and French (1993, 1996) argue for the risk-based
interpretation of their SM B and HM L. Fama and French (1993, p. 4-5) write: “[I]f assets are priced
rationally, variables that are related to average returns, such as size and book-to-market equity,
must proxy for sensitivity to common (shared and thus undiversiﬁable) risk factors in returns. The
time-series regressions give direct evidence on this issue. In particular, the slopes and R2 values show
whether mimicking portfolios for risk factors related to size and [book-to-market] capture shared
variation in stock and bond returns not explained by other factors.” Fama and French (1996, p. 57)
further claim: “[T]he empirical successes of [the three-factor model] suggest that it is an equilibrium
pricing model, a three-factor version of Merton’s (1973) intertemporal CAPM (ICAPM) or Ross’s
(1976) arbitrage pricing theory (APT). In this view, SM B and HM L mimic combinations of two
underlying risk factors or state variables of special hedging concern to investors.”
27

Consistent with Fama and French (1993, 1996), our time-series regressions provide direct evidence that the investment and the ROE factor loadings capture shared variation in average returns
across a wide array of anomaly portfolios. To the extent that the q-factors, constructed on all stocks,
represent common sources of variation in stock returns, their loadings proxy for covariances between
an individual asset’s returns with the factor returns. And covariances are standard measures of risk.
However, we do not pursue the risk factors interpretation for the following reasons. First, Brock
(1982) derives the ICAPM and the APT within a general equilibrium production economy. Brock
shows that for a common factor to be a risk factor, it must be a source of aggregate shock that
aﬀects all ﬁrms in the economy, e.g., shocks to total factor productivity, government policy (expenditure and taxation) shocks, and aggregate demand shocks driven by changes of preferences. As
such, characteristics-based factors are not the ICAPM or APT risk factors. Firm-speciﬁc characteristics, on which the q-factors are based, have no immediate linkages with aggregate shocks that
aﬀect the fundamentals of all ﬁrms simultaneously. It is well know that ICAPM and APT are silent
about the identities of the underlying shocks (state variables). In fact, what shocks drive economic
ﬂuctuations is one of the hardest questions in economics (e.g., Cochrane (1994)).
Second, although the investment-based model (see Section 5.1) from which we motivate the
investment and the ROE factors is consistent with a risk model, the investment-based model is
again silent about what the aggregate shocks are. Lin and Zhang (2012) make this argument in
depth. Brieﬂy, the discount rate equation (8), ri = (Πi1 + 1 − δ)/(1 + aIi0 /Ai0 ), is derived from the
investment ﬁrst-order condition. An equivalent form, 1 + aIi0 /Ai0 = (Πi1 + 1 − δ)/ri , says that the
marginal cost of investment today equals the marginal beneﬁt of investment tomorrow discounted
with the discount rate. As such, the net present value of the marginal investment is zero, formalizing
the weighted average cost of capital approach to capital budgeting. Diﬀerent from the consumption
(risk) approach that connects the expected return to consumption betas, the investment approach
connects the expected return to ﬁrm characteristics, such as investment and ROE.
Lin and Zhang (2012) show that in a general equilibrium production economy, the investment ﬁrst-order condition, ri = (Πi1 + 1 − δ)/(1 + aIi0 /Ai0 ), and the consumption ﬁrst-order
condition, E0 [M1 ri ] = 1, in which M1 is a stochastic discount factor, both hold. As such, the
(characteristics-based) investment approach and the (covariances-based) consumption approach are
not mutually exclusive. Representing two sides of the same coin, the two approaches are internally
consistent. However, the crux is that the q-factor model, which is a linear factor representation of
28

ri = (Πi1 +1−δ)/(1+aIi0 /Ai0 ), is not a risk model of M1 on economic ground. Neither is the FamaFrench model, contrary to their popular (but contentious) interpretation in the existing literature.
Finally, the evidence is mechanical that the investment and the ROE factor loadings vary in the
same direction as the average returns across the anomaly portfolios. The only economic substance is
that investment and ROE characteristics forecast returns, as predicted by the investment ﬁrst-order
condition. The common variations in average returns that these factors capture are not automatically sources of risk. Despite some diﬀerences in statistical properties, on economic ground, time
series and cross-sectional regressions are largely equivalent ways of summarizing correlations in the
data (e.g., Lin and Zhang (2012)). If a characteristic shows up signiﬁcant in cross-sectional regressions, its factor mimicking portfolio is likely to show “explanatory” power in time series regressions.
If a factor loading shows up signiﬁcant in time series regressions, its underlying characteristic is
likely signiﬁcant in cross-sectional regressions. Factor loadings are no more primitive than characteristics, and characteristics are no more primitive than loadings in “explaining” expected returns.
Mispricing
Anomalies are often interpreted as mispricing. Jegadeesh and Titman (1993, p. 90) write: “The
market underreacts to information about the short-term prospects of ﬁrms but overreacts to information about their long-term prospects,” and that “investor expectations are systematically
biased.” Bernard and Thomas (1990, p. 305) interpret the post-earnings-announcement drift as
“consistent with a failure of stock prices to reﬂect fully the implications of current earnings for
future earnings.” Ritter (1991, p. 3) interprets the long-run performance of initial public oﬀerings
as “consistent with an IPO market in which (1) investors are periodically overoptimistic about the
earnings potential of young growth companies, and (2) ﬁrms take advantage of these ‘window of
opportunity’.” Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008) argue that bias in the capitalization of new investments can lead to investment policy distortions, and interpret the investment eﬀect as saying “such
potential distortions are present and economically meaningful (p. 1648).” Our empirical results do
not rule out any of these mispricing stories. And we accept the possibility of mispricing in the data.
However, we view our investment-based work as weakening the mispricing interpretation to the
anomalies. Our results suggest that ﬁrms’ investment decisions are aligned correctly with the discount rate. Firms invest more when their discount rates are low, and invest less when their discount
rates are high, all else equal. More proﬁtable ﬁrms must have higher discount rates if these ﬁrms do

29

not invest more than less proﬁtable ﬁrms. To the extent that this alignment between the discount
rate and investment policies manifests itself as many empirical relations between ﬁrm characteristics and average returns, the relations per se say nothing about investor rationality or irrationality.
A low discount rate could result from the sentiment of irrationally optimistic investors or the low
market prices of risk demanded by rational investors. The investment ﬁrst-order condition then
connects correctly the low discount rate with high investment and low proﬁtability.
It is often argued that the anomalies are “anomalies” precisely because they cannot be explained
by standard risk models. However, it should be noted that the anomalies are “anomalies” in a more
fundamental sense that ﬁrm characteristics such as investment and earnings are not even present in
the standard consumption-based model. The investment approach ﬁlls this gaping hole with a single
equation (the investment ﬁrst-order condition). Also, the failure of standard risk models can be due
to speciﬁcation errors in the stochastic discount factor and measurement errors in the risk proxies
(see, e.g., the simulation results in Lin and Zhang (2012)). Mispricing is not the only possibility.

6

Conclusion

In his presidential address, Cochrane (2011, p. 1060–1061, original emphasis) writes: “We are going
to have to repeat Fama and French’s anomaly digestion, but with many more dimensions. We have a
lot of questions to answer: First, which characteristics really provide independent information about
average returns? Which are subsumed by others? Second, does each new anomaly variable also correspond to a new factor formed on those same anomalies?” “Third, how many of these new factors
are really important? Can we again account for N independent dimensions of expected returns with
K < N factor exposures?” “[T]he world would be much simpler if betas on only a few factors, important in the covariance matrix of returns, accounted for a larger number of mean characteristics.”
We agree that the Fama and French (1996) anomaly digestion is obsolete, and we oﬀer an update that is long overdue. Our empirical results provide answers to the important questions raised
by Cochrane (2011). First, investment and ROE provide independent information about average
returns. Investment largely subsumes book-to-market, net stock issues, accruals, market leverage,
long-term prior returns, earnings-to-price, and composite issuance in forecasting returns. ROE
largely subsumes short-term prior returns, earnings surprise, and ﬁnancial distress. And investment and ROE both contribute to the idiosyncratic volatility eﬀect. While the q-factor model is
by no means perfect, especially when pricing the total accrual deciles, the new model seems to do
30

a good job in summarizing the current understanding of the cross-section of returns.
Second, our extensive factor regressions show that each anomaly variable also corresponds to
a new factor formed on the same variable. In particular, the high-minus-low portfolios often earn
signiﬁcant average returns and alphas from the traditional factor models. However, the evidence is
weaker when we form the testing portfolios with the NYSE breakpoints and value-weighted returns
than with the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints and equal-weighted returns. Third, we have considered an exhaustive list of about 15 anomaly variables. Among their corresponding factors, we
show that the investment and the ROE factors are important. The size factor is also useful, especially when pricing size-related portfolios. As such, the 15 anomalies are not all independent. With
four factors, the q-factor model does a good job in summarizing their average return variations.
Our work has important implications for academic research in ﬁnance and accounting. The qfactor model can be used as a new workhorse model of expected returns. Any new anomaly variable
should be benchmarked against the q-factor model to see if the variable provides any incremental
information above and beyond investment and ROE. More important, the vast anomalies literature in empirical ﬁnance and capital markets research in accounting should be reevaluated with the
new expected-return benchmark provided by the q-factor model. Much work remains to be done.
For example, Agrawal, Jaﬀe, and Mandelker (1992) document negative abnormal returns for
acquiring ﬁrms for up to ﬁve years following merger announcements. To the extent that acquisition
represents an alternative form of capital investment, the investment factor is likely to play a
nontrivial role in explaining Agrawal et al.’s evidence. As another example, Michaely, Thaler, and
Womack (1995) document that ﬁrms that initiate dividends have positive abnormal stock returns for
three years after the event, and ﬁrms that omit dividends have negative abnormal returns. To the
extent that dividend initiation signals strong expected ROE and dividend omission weak expected
ROE, the ROE factor is likely to play an important role in explaining Michaely et al.’s evidence.
We emphasize that the q-factor model diﬀers from the Fama-French model (and its extension
the Carhart model) in a fundamental way. Our reading of the empirical literature suggests that the
Fama-French model, a time series model ﬁrst proposed in Fama and French (1993), is largely motivated by the empirical success of size and book-to-market in cross-sectional regressions in Fama and
French (1992). The Carhart model, which augments the Fama-French model with the momentum
factor in Carhart (1997), is a response to the failure of the Fama-French model in explaining momentum, as shown in Fama and French (1996). While Carhart does not oﬀer any economic interpreta31

tion for W M L, Fama and French (1993, 1996) suggest that HM L is a relative distress factor. However, this story has largely been discredited by the literature on the distress eﬀect, which says that
more distressed ﬁrms earn lower average returns than less distress ﬁrms, not higher average returns
as speculated by Fama and French (e.g., Dichev (1998) and Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008)).
The q-factor model is less subject to the data mining critique than the Fama-French model.
Building oﬀ a rich theoretical literature on investment-based asset pricing (e.g., Cochrane (1991),
Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), and Zhang (2005)), we had arrived at the theoretical proposition that
investment and ROE are two key predictors of cross-sectional returns (e.g., Liu, Whited, and Zhang
(2009)) before we conducted any factor regressions. The theory oﬀers clear economic intuition why
the investment and the ROE factors should work (see Section 5.1). All in all, while the Fama-French
model is largely an ad hoc, data mined model, the q-factor model is a product of close interaction
between theoretical and empirical research in asset pricing. The clear economic intuition increases
the likelihood that the good performance of the q-factor model can persist in the future.
The q-factor model can potentially change the practice of investment management industry. The
model can be used to provide expected return estimates for asset allocation, to calculate discount
rates for capital budgeting and stock valuation, and to oﬀer empirical benchmarks for evaluating mutual fund performance. Investment companies can also adjust the list of ﬁnancial products oﬀered to
their clients, going beyond traditional styles such as size and book-to-market. The stakes are high.

32

References
Abarbanell, Jeﬀrey S., and Brian J. Bushee, 1998, Abnormal returns to a fundamental analysis
strategy, The Accounting Review 73, 19-45.
Agrawal, Anup, Jeﬀrey F. Jaﬀe, and Gershon N. Mandelker, 1992, The post-merger performance
of acquiring ﬁrms: A re-examination of an anomaly, Journal of Finance 47, 1605–1621.
Anderson, Christopher W., and Luis Garcia-Feijóo, 2006, Empirical evidence on capital
investment, growth options, and security, Journal of Finance 61, 171-194.
Ang, Andrew, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of
volatility and expected returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259–299.
Ball, Ray, and Philip Brown, 1968, An empirical evaluation of accounting income numbers, Journal
of Accounting Research 6, 159-178.
Ball, Ray, S. P. Kothari, and Ross L. Watts, 1993, Economic determinants of the relation between
earnings changes and stock returns, The Accounting Review 68, 622-638.
Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth options,
and security returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1153–1607.
Bernard, Victor L., and Jacob K. Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed price
response or risk premium? Journal of Accounting Research Supplement 27, 1-48.
Bernard, Victor L., and Jacob K. Thomas, 1990, Evidence that stock prices do not fully reﬂect the
implications of current earnings for future earnings, Journal of Accounting and Economics
13, 305–340.
Brealey, Richard A., Stewart C. Myers, and Franklin Allen, 2006, Principles of corporate ﬁnance,
8th edition, Irwin McGraw-Hill.
Breeden, Douglas T., Michael R. Gibbons, and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1989, Empirical tests of
the consumption-oriented CAPM, Journal of Finance 44, 231–262.
Brock, William A., 1982, Asset prices in a production economy, in: John L. McCall, ed., Economics
of Information and Uncertainty, University of Chicago Press, Chicago Illinois.
Campbell, John Y. and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2004, Bad beta, good beta, American Economic
Review 94 (5), 1249–1275.
Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi, 2008, In search of distress risk, Journal of
Finance 63, 2899–2939.
Carhart, Mark M. 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52 (1),
57–82.
Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2004, Corporate investment and asset price
dynamics: Implications for the cross section of returns, Journal of Finance 59, 2577–2603.
Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Lakonishok, 1996, Momentum strategies,
Journal of Finance 51, 1681–1713.
33

Cochrane, John H., 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and
economic ﬂuctuations, Journal of Finance 46, 209–237.
Cochrane, John H., 1994, Shocks, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 41,
295–364.
Cochrane, John H., 2011, Presidential address: Discount rates, Journal of Finance 66, 1047–1108.
Cooper, Michael J., Huseyin Gulen, and Michael J. Schill, 2008, Asset growth and the cross-section
of stock returns, Journal of Finance 63, 1609–1652.
Daniel, Kent D., and Sheridan Titman, 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross-sectional
variation in stock returns, Journal of Finance 52, 1–33.
Daniel, Kent D. and Sheridan Titman, 2006, Market reactions to tangible and intangible
information, Journal of Finance 61, 1605–1643.
Davis, James L., Eugene F. Fama, and Kenneth R. French, 2000, Characteristics, covariances,
and average returns: 1929 to 1997, Journal of Finance 55, 389–406.
DeBondt, Werner F. M., and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact? Journal of
Finance 40, 793–805.
Dechow, Patricia M., Amy P. Hutton, and Richard G. Sloan, 1999, An empirical assessment of
the residual income valuation model, Journal of Accounting and Economics 26, 1-34.
Dichev, Ilia, 1998, Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk? Journal of Finance 53, 1141–1148.
Fairﬁeld, Patricia M., Scott Whisenant, and Terry Lombardi Yohn, 2003, Accrued earnings and
growth: Implications for future proﬁtability and market mispricing, The Accounting Review
78, 353-371.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
Journal of Finance 47, 427–465.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanation of asset pricing anomalies,
Journal of Finance 51, 55–84.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2006, Proﬁtability, investment, and average returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 82, 491–518.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2008, Dissecting anomalies, Journal of Finance 63,
1653–1678.
Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.
Fama, Eugene F. and Merton H. Miller, 1972, The Theory of Finance, Holt, Rinehart, and
Winston.

34

Fisher, Irving, 1930, The Theory of Interest: As Determined by Impatience to Spend Income and
Opportunity to Invest It, 1st ed., New York: The Macmillan Co.
Foster, George, Chris Olsen, and Terry Shevlin, 1984, Earnings releases, anomalies, and the
behavior of security returns, The Accounting Review 59, 574–603.
Frankel, Richard, and Charles M. C. Lee, 1998, Accounting valuation, market expectation, and
cross-sectional stock returns, Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, 283-319.
Gibbons, Michael R., Stephen A. Ross, and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the eﬃciency of a given
portfolio, Econometrica 57, 1121–1152.
Haugen, Robert A., and Nardin L. Baker, 1996, Commonality in the determinants of expected
stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 401-439.
Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreaction to open
market share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181–208.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
Implications for stock market eﬃciency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
Lewellen, Jonathan, Stefan Nagel, and Jay Shanken, 2010, A skeptical appraisal of asset-pricing
tests, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 175–194.
Li, Erica X. N., Dmitry Livdan, and Lu Zhang, 2009, Anomalies, Review of Financial Studies 22,
4301–4334.
Lie, Erik, 2005, Operating performance following open market share repurchase announcements,
Journal of Accounting and Economics 39, 411–436.
Lin, Xiaoji, and Lu Zhang, 2012, The investment manifesto, working paper, The Ohio State
University.
Liu, Laura Xiaolei, Toni M. Whited, and Lu Zhang, 2009, Investment-based expected stock
returns, Journal of Political Economy 117, 1105–1139.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The new issues puzzle, Journal of Finance 50, 23–51.
Lyandres, Evgeny, Le Sun, and Lu Zhang, 2008, The new issues puzzle: Testing the investmentbased explanation, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2825–2855.
Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica 41, 867–887.
Michaely, Roni, Richard H. Thaler, and Kent L. Womack, 1995, Price reactions to dividend
initiations and omissions: Overreaction or drift? Journal of Finance 50, 573–608.
Novy-Marx, Robert, 2012, The other side of value: The gross proﬁtability premium, forthcoming,
Journal of Financial Economics.
Piotroski, Joseph D., 2000, Value investing: The use of historical ﬁnancial statement information
to separate winners from losers, Journal of Accounting Research 38, Supplement: Studies on
accounting information and the economics of the ﬁrm, 1-41.

35

Polk, Christopher, and Paola Sapienza, 2009, The stock market and corporate investment: A test
of catering theory, Review of Financial Studies 22, 187–217.
Pontiﬀ, Jeﬀrey, and Artemiza Woodgate, 2008, Share issuance and cross-sectional returns, Journal
of Finance 63, 921–945.
Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The long-run performance of initial public oﬀerings, Journal of Finance 46,
3–27.
Ross, Stephen A., 1976, The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, Journal of Economic Theory
13, 341–360.
Sloan, Richard G., 1996, Do stock prices fully reﬂect information in accruals and cash ﬂows about
future earnings? The Accounting Review 71, 289–315.
Spiess, Katherine D. and John Aﬄeck-Graves, 1995, Underperformance in long-run stock returns
following seasoned equity oﬀerings, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 243–267.
Titman, Sheridan, K. C. John Wei, and Feixue Xie, 2004, Capital investments and stock returns,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 677–700.
Wu, Jin G., X. Frank Zhang, and Lu Zhang, 2010, The q-theory approach to understanding the
accrual anomaly, Journal of Accounting Research 48, 177–223.
Xing, Yuhang, 2008, Interpreting the value eﬀect through the Q-theory:
investigation, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1767–1795.
Zhang, Lu, 2005, The value premium, Journal of Finance 60, 67–103.

36

An empirical

37

0.31
(2.09)

0.44
(4.73)

0.60
(4.85)

rME

rA/A

rROE

Mean

0.65
(5.65)
0.78
(6.98)
0.52
(4.80)

0.51
(5.62)
0.32
(4.56)
0.26
(3.64)

0.24
(1.64)
0.03
(0.92)
0.00
(0.06)

α

−0.11
(−2.34)
−0.09
(−2.08)
−0.03
(−1.03)

−0.15
(−5.46)
−0.06
(−3.43)
−0.05
(−3.01)

0.17
(4.24)
0.02
(1.61)
0.02
(2.34)

β MKT

−0.32
(−5.76)
−0.32
(−4.42)

−0.02
(−0.78)
−0.02
(−0.83)

0.99
(61.46)
0.99
(63.30)

β SMB

−0.20
(−2.41)
−0.10
(−1.50)

0.40
(11.80)
0.41
(11.84)

0.18
(7.43)
0.19
(7.67)

β HML

Panel A: Descriptive statistics

0.28
(6.47)

0.05
(2.07)

0.03
(1.93)

β W ML

0.40

0.19

0.03

0.52

0.50

0.13

0.94

0.93

0.06

R

2

HM L

SM B

M KT

rROE

rA/A

rME

−0.11
(0.02)

rA/A

−0.30
(0.00)
0.05
(0.23)

rROE

0.25
(0.00)
−0.36
(0.00)
−0.19
(0.00)

M KT

0.28
(0.00)

0.95
(0.00)
−0.22
(0.00)
−0.37
(0.00)

SM B

−0.32
(0.00)
−0.23
(0.00)

−0.07
(0.14)
0.69
(0.00)
−0.09
(0.05)

HM L

Panel B: Correlation matrix (p-values)

−0.14
(0.00)
0.00
(0.92)
−0.16
(0.00)

0.01
(0.87)
0.04
(0.38)
0.50
(0.00)

WML

Size (market equity, M E) is stock price per share times shares outstanding from CRSP. Investment-to-assets (A/A) is annual change in total
assets (Compustat annual item AT) divided by lagged total assets. ROE is income before extraordinary items (Compustat quarterly item IBQ)
divided by one-quarter-lagged book equity. Book equity is the shareholders’ equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit
(item TXDITCQ) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock. Depending on availability, we use the stockholders’ equity (item SEQQ),
or common equity (item CEQQ) plus the carrying value of preferred stock (item PSTKQ), or total assets (item ATQ) minus liabilities (item LTQ)
in that order as the shareholders’ equity. We use redemption value (item PSTKRQ) if available, or carrying value for the book value of preferred
stock. In June of each year t, we use the median NYSE size at the end of June to split NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into two groups,
small and big. Independently, in June of each year t, we also break NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into three A/A groups using the NYSE
breakpoints for the low 30%, middle 40%, and high 30% of the ranked A/A for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Also independently,
each month, we sort all stocks into three groups based on the NYSE breakpoints for the low 30%, middle 40%, and the high 30% of the ranked
ROE. Earnings and other accounting variables in Compustat quarterly ﬁles are used in the sorts in the months immediately after the most recent
public earnings announcement dates (item RDQ). Taking intersections of the two size groups, the three A/A groups, and the three ROE groups,
we form 18 size-A/A-ROE portfolios. Monthly value-weighted returns on the 18 portfolios are calculated for the current month, and the portfolios
are rebalanced monthly. (The ROE portfolios are rebalanced monthly at the beginning of each month, but the size and the A/A portfolios are
rebalanced annually in each June.) The size factor, rME , is the diﬀerence (small-minus-big), each month, between the average returns on the nine
small-M E portfolios and the average returns on the nine big-M E portfolios. The investment factor, rA/A , is the diﬀerence (low-minus-high),
each month, between the average returns on the six low-A/A portfolios and the average returns on the six high-A/A portfolios. And the ROE
factor, rROE , is the diﬀerence (high-minus-low), each month, between the average returns on the six high-ROE portfolios and the average returns
on the six low-ROE portfolios. The data for the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web site. In Panel A, the t-statistics (in parentheses)
are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. In Panel B, the p-values (in parentheses) test that a given correlation is zero.

Table 1 : Descriptive Statistics of the Size Factor, the Investment Factor, and the ROE Factor (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)

Table 2 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin’s (1984) Standardized Unexpected Earnings (SU E)
(1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
SU E is the change in the most recently announced quarterly earnings per share from its value announced
four quarters ago divided by the standard deviation of the change in quarterly earnings over the prior eight
quarters (at least six quarters). We rank all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles at the beginning
of each month by their most recent past SU E with the NYSE breakpoints. Monthly value-weighted returns
on the SU E portfolios are calculated for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly. We
report mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the
Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the
q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across the testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses) beneath
the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the alphas
across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the
deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. The data on the one-month
Treasury bill rate (rf ), the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High

0.35
1.39

0.30
1.23

0.34
1.30

0.27
1.13

0.41
1.81

0.42
1.80

0.61
2.80

0.64
3.00

0.61
2.79

0.78
3.72

α
β
tα

−0.12 −0.17 −0.14 −0.18 −0.03 −0.02
1.03
1.04
1.06
1.00
0.97
0.96
−1.26 −2.09 −1.76 −2.13 −0.41 −0.21

0.18
0.95
2.33

0.20
0.97
2.80

0.19
0.95
2.50

0.37
0.49 0.16 0.87
0.90 −0.12 (0.00)
4.97
4.03

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

−0.11 −0.16 −0.14 −0.16 −0.03 −0.01
0.19
0.26
0.20
0.43
0.54 0.17 0.87
1.05
1.02
1.03
0.96
0.96
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.95
0.91 −0.13 (0.00)
−0.10
0.06
0.10
0.12
0.04 −0.04 −0.09 −0.10 −0.06 −0.14 −0.04
0.01 −0.04 −0.02 −0.06 −0.02 −0.01
0.01 −0.10 −0.02 −0.08 −0.09
−1.15 −1.84 −1.71 −2.02 −0.33 −0.08
2.47
3.65
2.73
5.65
4.26

Mean
tMean

0.02 −0.07 −0.06 −0.08
αCARH
b
1.02
1.00
1.02
0.95
s
−0.10
0.06
0.10
0.12
h
−0.04 −0.07 −0.05 −0.09
w
−0.13 −0.09 −0.09 −0.09
tαCARH
0.15 −0.82 −0.63 −0.96
αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

0.06
1.03
−0.16
−0.01
−0.22
0.55
32.82
−3.58
−0.06
−3.21

−0.01
1.00
0.03
−0.17
−0.12
−0.14
38.00
0.74
−2.47
−2.53

0.06
1.02
0.01
−0.12
−0.21
0.57
41.13
0.31
−2.01
−4.07

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.43
3.39

−0.01
0.04
0.21
0.16
0.12
0.34
0.32 0.11 0.88
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.99
0.97
0.93 −0.09 (0.02)
0.04 −0.04 −0.09 −0.10 −0.06 −0.14 −0.04
−0.02 −0.03
0.00 −0.06
0.01 −0.05 −0.01
−0.02 −0.04 −0.03
0.11
0.08
0.09
0.22
−0.12
0.44
2.58
2.20
1.60
4.37
2.43

0.08
0.00 −0.03
0.11
0.02
0.94
0.97
0.97
0.97
1.01
0.02
0.01 −0.05 −0.05 −0.04
−0.27
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.09
−0.19 −0.07
0.00
0.10
0.23
0.81
0.01 −0.29
1.38
0.21
34.20 43.91 43.76 45.82 53.24
0.48
0.24 −0.95 −1.39 −1.45
−3.57
0.49
0.53
0.68
1.53
−3.46 −1.71
0.13
1.91
5.92

38

0.04
0.20
0.14 0.06 0.88
0.97
0.94 −0.09 (0.41)
0.00 −0.05
0.11
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.19
0.27
0.49
0.49
2.43
0.92
43.09 36.48 −1.92
0.00 −1.32
2.04
0.72
0.37
0.23
4.02
7.27
5.78

Table 3 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on Ang,
Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang’s (2006) Idiosyncratic Volatility (IV OL) (1/1972–12/2011, 480
Months)
IV OL is the standard deviation of the residuals from the Fama-French three-factor regression. We form
value-weighted deciles each month by using the NYSE breakpoints to sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ
stocks on their IV OL computed with daily returns over the previous month (with a minimum of 15 daily
observations). We hold the IV OL deciles for one month, and rebalance the portfolios monthly. The data on
the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ), the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth
French’s Web site. We report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti −rtf = αi +
β i M KTt +it ), the Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti −rtf = αiF F +bi M KTt +si SM Bt +hi HM Lt +it ),
the Carhart four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it )
and the q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ).
m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in
parentheses) beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the
null that the alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average
goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations.
See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Mean
tMean

0.44
2.52

0.63
3.23

0.62
3.00

0.66
2.88

0.55
2.19

0.54
2.02

0.64
2.23

0.55
1.73

α
β
tα

0.14
0.67
1.44

0.26
0.81
3.36

0.21
0.90
2.72

0.21
0.99
3.00

0.07
1.06
0.68

0.03
1.13
0.30

0.09 −0.04 −0.09 −0.82 −0.95 0.20 0.83
1.22
1.31
1.44
1.58
0.91 (0.00)
0.98 −0.36 −0.59 −3.90 −3.44

0.08
0.25
0.21
0.20
0.75
0.87
0.93
1.03
−0.24 −0.23 −0.13 −0.16
0.17
0.07
0.04
0.06
1.04
3.48
2.72
2.54

0.04
1.06
0.02
0.05
0.45

0.00
0.11 −0.05 −0.07 −0.83 −0.91 0.19 0.87
1.11
1.17
1.22
1.28
1.34
0.59 (0.00)
0.11
0.16
0.38
0.62
1.00
1.24
0.03 −0.09 −0.06 −0.19 −0.21 −0.38
0.01
1.24 −0.53 −0.57 −5.30 −4.48

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

9

High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.56 −0.10 −0.54
1.50 −0.23 −1.51

0.03
0.20
0.15
0.16
0.07
0.02
0.21
0.03
0.07 −0.55 −0.58 0.15 0.87
αCARH
b
0.76
0.88
0.95
1.04
1.06
1.11
1.15
1.20
1.25
1.28
0.52 (0.00)
s
−0.24 −0.23 −0.13 −0.16
0.02
0.11
0.16
0.38
0.62
1.00
1.24
h
0.19
0.09
0.06
0.08
0.04
0.02 −0.12 −0.09 −0.24 −0.31 −0.49
w
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.04 −0.03 −0.02 −0.10 −0.09 −0.14 −0.29 −0.35
tαCARH
0.33
2.60
1.75
2.13
0.75
0.21
2.25
0.32
0.52 −3.11 −2.59
αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

−0.15
0.05
0.02
0.05 −0.03 −0.02
0.23
0.77
0.89
0.95
1.04
1.07
1.11
1.15
−0.15 −0.15 −0.06 −0.10
0.02
0.10
0.13
0.38
0.23
0.16
0.15
0.08 −0.01 −0.26
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.17
0.07
0.04 −0.05
−1.60
0.58
0.18
0.59 −0.30 −0.18
1.92
38.54 47.02 48.02 45.12 45.90 43.02 39.37
−4.10 −5.29 −1.95 −1.95
0.40
1.65
2.36
4.20
3.06
2.05
1.92
1.10 −0.11 −2.62
3.21
4.14
3.49
3.73
1.54
0.88 −0.83

39

0.08
1.21
0.32
−0.19
−0.15
0.75
46.01
5.48
−2.35
−2.70

0.21
1.26
0.51
−0.45
−0.29
1.50
39.20
9.58
−5.25
−3.79

−0.19
1.29
0.73
−0.60
−0.76
−1.17
27.83
10.93
−4.90
−6.49

−0.04 0.10 0.88
0.52 (0.02)
0.88
−0.98
−0.96
−0.19
9.01
9.94
−5.46
−6.13

Table 4 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi’s (2008) Failure Probability (1/1976–12/2011, 432 Months)
We use the NYSE breakpoints to sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks at the beginning of each month
into deciles on the most recent failure probability (see Appendix A for detailed variable deﬁnition). Earnings
and other accounting variables for a ﬁscal quarter are used in portfolio sorts in the months immediately after
the quarter’s public earnings announcement dates (Compustat quarterly item RDQ). Monthly value-weighted
returns on the portfolios are calculated for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly. The
data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web site.
We report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ),
the Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the qfactor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the
alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt
across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption
of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mean
tMean

0.69
3.00

0.58
2.71

0.58
2.65

0.62
2.76

0.56
2.45

0.69
2.95

0.62
2.22

0.65
2.10

0.53
1.43

α
β
tα

0.20
0.89
1.79

0.09
0.88
1.13

0.07
0.91
0.99

0.09
0.96
1.07

0.02
0.97
0.24

0.12
1.02
1.46

0.01 −0.03
1.09
1.23
0.09 −0.23

−0.25 −0.84 −1.04 0.17 0.82
1.41
1.72
0.84 (0.02)
−1.58 −3.03 −3.13

0.05 −0.05 −0.18
1.04
1.10
1.22
0.04
0.08
0.28
0.13
0.10
0.20
0.61 −0.47 −1.26

−0.40 −1.14 −1.43 0.25 0.84
1.35
1.60
0.76 (0.00)
0.50
0.96
0.97
0.11
0.25
0.46
−2.92 −5.18 −5.21

0.08
0.03
0.01
0.08
0.08
0.14
0.16
0.14
αCARH
b
0.89
0.91
0.95
0.98
0.98
1.03
1.06
1.16
s
−0.04 −0.17 −0.15 −0.12 −0.06
0.05
0.11
0.33
h
−0.13 −0.05
0.03 −0.02 −0.02
0.10
0.03
0.09
w
0.25
0.16
0.10
0.05 −0.06 −0.10 −0.24 −0.36
tαCARH
0.78
0.37
0.10
1.01
1.09
1.60
1.58
1.06

−0.03 −0.47 −0.55 0.12 0.88
1.28
1.48
0.59 (0.05)
0.55
1.05
1.09
−0.02
0.02
0.15
−0.42 −0.77 −1.02
−0.24 −2.53 −2.51

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

0.29
0.17
0.10
0.13
0.03
0.85
0.88
0.93
0.97
0.98
−0.01 −0.15 −0.14 −0.12 −0.06
−0.21 −0.10
0.00 −0.03 −0.01
2.84
2.17
1.33
1.50
0.45

−0.01
0.89
0.11
−0.22
0.41
−0.09
29.47
1.72
−1.62
5.19

−0.13
0.93
−0.05
0.09
0.29
−1.49
47.24
−1.32
1.11
5.64

−0.14
0.97
−0.07
0.14
0.23
−1.78
59.12
−2.05
2.17
6.62

−0.04
1.00
−0.08
0.14
0.13
−0.49
52.22
−2.51
2.47
2.78

0.11
0.16
0.24
0.33
0.28
0.98
1.03
1.06
1.14
1.26
−0.09
0.00 −0.02
0.11
0.26
−0.01
0.14
0.04 −0.04 −0.14
−0.09 −0.16 −0.36 −0.54 −0.78
1.45
1.68
2.16
1.91
2.14
46.77 42.97 34.77 28.11
33.32
−2.88
0.01 −0.44
1.85
3.33
−0.17
2.12
0.51 −0.31 −1.13
−2.34 −3.28 −5.60 −6.59 −10.21

40

High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.11 −0.57
0.22 −1.42

0.01
0.02 0.15 0.87
1.46
0.57 (0.01)
0.54
0.43
−0.12
0.11
−1.38 −1.79
0.04
0.07
21.45
6.55
3.09
1.86
−0.46
0.29
−7.52 −7.73

Table 5 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on Net
Stock Issues (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
We measure net stock issues as the natural log of the ratio of the split-adjusted shares outstanding at the
ﬁscal yearend in t−1 divided by the split-adjusted shares outstanding at the ﬁscal yearend in t−2. The splitadjusted shares outstanding is the Compustat shares outstanding (Compustat annual item CSHO) times
the Compustat adjustment factor (item ADJEX C). In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints
to sort NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on the net stock issues for the ﬁscal year ending
in calendar year t − 1. Because a disproportionately large number of ﬁrms have zero net stock issues, we
group all the ﬁrms with negative net issues into deciles one and two (equal-numbered), and the ﬁrms with
zero net issues into decile three. We then sort the ﬁrms with positive net stock issues into the remaining
seven deciles (equal-numbered). Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of year
t to June of year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. The data on the one-month Treasury
bill rate (rf ), the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. We
report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the
Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the
q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the
alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt
across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption
of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mean
tMean

0.88
4.07

0.58
2.85

0.66
3.14

0.55
2.50

0.47
2.15

0.51
2.15

0.70
2.88

0.58
2.11

0.20
0.73

α
β
tα

0.47
0.91
4.41

0.18
0.88
2.43

0.30
0.80
2.56

0.14
0.89
1.56

0.05
0.94
0.57

0.05
1.01
0.61

0.24
1.02
2.71

0.06 −0.31 −0.29 −0.77 0.21 0.83
1.15
1.12
1.09
0.19 (0.00)
0.64 −2.66 −3.09 −4.74

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.34
0.18
0.95
0.92
0.06 −0.16
0.26
0.05
3.45
2.48

0.17
0.14
0.04
0.11
0.29
0.20 −0.22 −0.29 −0.62 0.20 0.85
0.85
0.94
0.95
1.00
0.98
1.07
1.06
1.02
0.08 (0.00)
0.01 −0.19 −0.02 −0.05
0.09
0.05
0.09
0.28
0.22
0.26
0.06
0.02 −0.11 −0.12 −0.30 −0.19 −0.08 −0.34
1.34
1.55
0.48
1.39
3.36
2.33 −2.20 −3.03 −4.06

αCARH
b
s
h
w
tαCARH

0.30
0.19
0.96
0.91
0.06 −0.16
0.28
0.04
0.04 −0.01
3.05
2.59

0.16
0.10
0.03
0.08
0.25
0.20 −0.13 −0.27
0.85
0.95
0.95
1.00
0.99
1.08
1.04
1.02
0.01 −0.19 −0.02 −0.05
0.09
0.05
0.09
0.28
0.27
0.07
0.02 −0.11 −0.10 −0.30 −0.23 −0.08
0.01
0.03
0.00
0.03
0.04
0.00 −0.10 −0.02
1.16
1.19
0.40
1.02
2.87
2.12 −1.25 −2.73

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

0.21
0.95
0.10
0.35
0.10
2.04
34.19
1.80
4.54
1.59

High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.20 −0.68
0.75 −4.11

−0.57 0.17 0.85
0.06 (0.00)
0.22
−0.36
−0.05
−3.68

−0.01 0.05 −0.02 −0.07
0.09
0.26
0.33
0.09 −0.11 −0.32 0.12 0.85
0.95 0.86
0.95
0.96
1.00
0.99
1.08
1.02
0.99
0.04 (0.00)
−0.11 0.04 −0.13
0.01 −0.04
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.24
0.14
0.25 0.40
0.16
0.08 −0.17 −0.11 −0.45 −0.47 −0.31 −0.66
0.14 0.06
0.18
0.10
0.08
0.02 −0.05 −0.24 −0.13 −0.23
−0.12 0.36 −0.27 −0.75
1.03
2.56
3.13
0.87 −1.14 −2.10
46.63 26.74 41.88 33.68 47.62 46.40 36.06 36.29 38.99
1.14
−3.22 0.56 −3.34
0.28 −1.38
2.56 −0.12 −0.10
6.17
1.79
5.85 3.36
2.60
1.27 −2.69 −1.50 −6.34 −6.63 −6.09 −6.33
3.65 1.01
4.96
2.43
2.06
0.47 −0.84 −4.69 −4.33 −3.43

41

Table 6 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Composite Issuance (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
Composite issuance is the growth rate in the market equity not attributable to the stock return,
log (M Et /M Et−5 )−r(t−5, t). For June of year t, r(t−5, t) is the cumulative log return on the stock from the
last trading day of June in year t−5 to the last trading day of June in year t, and M Et is the market equity on
the last trading day of June in year t from CRSP. In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort
NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on composite issuance. Monthly value-weighted portfolio
returns are calculated from July of year t to June of year t+1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. The
data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web site.
We report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ),
the Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ), and the qfactor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the
alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt
across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption
of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High

Mean
tMean

0.69
3.64

0.73
3.77

0.68
3.69

0.39
1.87

0.54
2.46

0.40
1.62

0.51
2.05

0.58
2.10

0.40
1.41

0.11
0.38

α
β
tα

0.36
0.73
3.18

0.35
0.83
3.85

0.32
0.00
0.79
0.88
3.43 −0.05

0.13 −0.06
0.89
1.03
1.69 −0.67

0.02
1.09
0.17

0.06 −0.13 −0.43
1.14
1.18
1.19
0.69 −1.36 −4.32

−0.79 0.19 0.82
0.46 (0.00)
−4.68

0.19
0.28
0.26 −0.06
0.13
0.03
0.15
0.12 −0.04 −0.31
0.83
0.90
0.86
0.95
0.93
1.00
1.02
1.10
1.12
1.10
−0.12 −0.16 −0.21 −0.21 −0.14 −0.02
0.06
0.07
0.11
0.19
0.38
0.18
0.17
0.16
0.03 −0.20 −0.29 −0.14 −0.21 −0.28
1.81
3.15
3.06 −0.74
1.80
0.39
1.60
1.34 −0.46 −3.49

−0.50 0.16 0.85
0.27 (0.00)
0.31
−0.67
−3.61

0.13
0.27
0.26 −0.09
0.15
0.07
0.14
0.13
0.01 −0.27
αCARH
b
0.84
0.90
0.86
0.96
0.92
0.99
1.02
1.10
1.11
1.09
s
−0.12 −0.16 −0.21 −0.21 −0.14 −0.02
0.06
0.07
0.11
0.19
h
0.40
0.18
0.17
0.17
0.03 −0.21 −0.29 −0.14 −0.23 −0.30
w
0.06
0.02
0.01
0.03 −0.01 −0.03
0.01
0.00 −0.05 −0.04
tαCARH
1.23
2.91
2.71 −1.01
1.90
0.75
1.44
1.35
0.08 −2.95

−0.40 0.15 0.85
0.24 (0.00)
0.31
−0.70
−0.10
−2.91

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

0.02
0.17
0.02
0.84
0.91
0.89
−0.08 −0.15 −0.13
0.63
0.36
0.43
0.07
0.04
0.18
0.17
1.77
0.21
30.02 35.89 37.47
−1.80 −3.36 −2.75
9.92
5.89
5.60
1.10
0.87
3.32

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

−0.58
−2.92

−0.27
0.03
0.19
0.19
0.14
0.02 −0.19 −0.21 0.12 0.86
0.96
0.94
0.98
1.03
1.09
1.11
1.09
0.25 (0.01)
−0.11 −0.10 −0.06
0.04
0.09
0.10
0.16
0.24
0.26
0.11 −0.38 −0.44 −0.28 −0.36 −0.49 −1.11
0.24
0.11 −0.07
0.07
0.07
0.02 −0.05 −0.11
−3.10
0.34
2.01
1.55
1.46
0.17 −1.87 −1.35
35.31 42.91 39.44 35.88 42.55 46.51 42.78
6.76
−2.87 −2.73 −1.46
0.79
2.18
2.58
4.19
3.52
3.56
1.72 −5.78 −5.58 −5.07 −7.65 −9.28 −14.10
4.25
2.07 −1.44
1.47
1.66
0.59 −0.91 −1.38

42

Table 7 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Abnormal Corporate Investment (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
We measure abnormal corporate investment (ACI) that applies for the portfolio formation year t, as
ACIt−1 ≡ 3CEt−1 /(CEt−2 + CEt−3 + CEt−4 ) − 1, in which CEt−1 is capital expenditure (Compustat
annual item CAPX) scaled by its sales (item SALE) in year t − 1. In June of each year t, we use the
NYSE breakpoints to sort NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on ACI for the ﬁscal year ending
in calendar year t − 1. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of year t to
June of year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. The data on the one-month Treasury bill
rate (rf ), the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. We
report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the
Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ), and the
q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the
alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt
across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption
of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
Low

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mean
tMean

0.63
2.23

0.69
2.77

0.61
2.62

0.48
2.28

0.60
2.95

0.37
1.75

0.37
1.71

0.42
1.84

0.60
2.56

α
β
tα

0.12
1.14
0.94

0.22
1.03
2.38

0.14
1.03
1.72

0.07
0.91
0.95

0.20 −0.03 −0.05 −0.02
0.88
0.89
0.92
0.96
2.46 −0.43 −0.58 −0.21

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

0.38 −0.26
1.33 −1.57

0.14 −0.13 −0.24 0.11 0.85
1.03
1.12 −0.03 (0.05)
1.63 −1.17 −1.43

0.15
0.30
0.22
0.13
0.20 −0.05
0.00 −0.02
0.18 −0.13 −0.28 0.14 0.87
1.03
0.98
1.00
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.95
0.99
1.00
1.08
0.05 (0.00)
0.42
0.09 −0.02 −0.11 −0.16 −0.11 −0.22 −0.12
0.01
0.17 −0.25
−0.17 −0.18 −0.16 −0.09
0.04
0.07 −0.04
0.03 −0.10 −0.04
0.13
1.44
3.24
2.81
1.68
2.65 −0.64 −0.02 −0.21
2.20 −1.15 −1.64

0.10
0.31
0.24
0.05
0.21 −0.04
0.04
0.01
0.13 −0.06 −0.16 0.12 0.87
αCARH
b
1.04
0.98
1.00
0.93
0.92
0.93
0.95
0.99
1.02
1.06
0.02 (0.00)
s
0.41
0.09 −0.02 −0.11 −0.16 −0.11 −0.22 −0.12
0.01
0.17 −0.25
h
−0.15 −0.18 −0.17 −0.06
0.04
0.06 −0.05
0.02 −0.08 −0.06
0.09
w
0.06 −0.01 −0.02
0.08 −0.01 −0.01 −0.04 −0.03
0.06 −0.07 −0.13
tαCARH
0.91
3.11
2.81
0.69
2.64 −0.53
0.43
0.13
1.57 −0.51 −0.91
αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

0.13
1.05
0.39
−0.23
0.02
0.90
31.22
9.96
−2.10
0.36

0.37
0.98
0.06
−0.29
−0.02
2.79
35.74
1.49
−2.77
−0.34

0.32
1.00
−0.06
−0.28
−0.04
3.27
43.65
−1.57
−3.31
−0.81

0.02
0.15 −0.16 −0.07
0.93
0.92
0.94
0.98
−0.08 −0.16 −0.06 −0.23
−0.03
0.10
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.05
0.13
0.02
0.23
1.96 −1.83 −0.71
43.60 37.81 35.12 41.97
−2.15 −4.47 −1.27 −5.77
−0.50
2.16
1.91
1.95
4.02
1.28
2.56
0.46

43

−0.13
0.17
0.02 −0.11 0.15 0.87
1.00
1.00
1.06
0.02 (0.00)
−0.07
0.04
0.10 −0.29
0.09 −0.18 −0.11
0.12
0.12
0.08 −0.18 −0.20
−1.49
1.84
0.22 −0.56
41.61 48.16 35.06
0.35
−2.02
0.92
2.23 −4.52
1.06 −2.56 −1.61
0.80
2.21
1.63 −2.94 −2.16

Table 8 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on Total
Accruals (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
Following Sloan (1996), we measure total accruals (T AC) as changes in noncash working capital minus
depreciation expense scaled by average total assets (Compustat annual item AT) in the prior two years. The
noncash working capital is the change in noncash current assets minus the change in current liabilities less
short-term debt and taxes payable. Speciﬁcally, T AC ≡ (CA−CASH)−(CL−ST D−T P )−DP ,
in which CA is the change in current assets (item ACT), CASH is the change in cash or cash equivalents
(item CHE), CL is the change in current liabilities (item LCT), ST D is the change in debt included
in current liabilities (item DLC), T P is the change in income taxes payable (item TXP), and DP is
depreciation and amortization expense (item DP). In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to
sort NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on total accruals scaled by average total assets for the
ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t− 1. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of
year t to June of year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. The data on the one-month Treasury
bill rate (rf ), the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. We
report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the
Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ), and the
q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the
alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt
across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption
of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mean
tMean

0.53
1.83

0.53
2.19

0.59
2.82

0.57
2.75

0.54
2.44

0.51
2.53

0.54
2.48

0.39
1.71

0.33
1.30

α
β
tα

0.00
1.16
0.04

0.07
1.00
0.67

0.17
0.92
2.35

0.15
0.92
1.96

0.13
0.90
1.72

0.12
0.86
1.61

0.12 −0.04 −0.17
0.93
0.95
1.09
1.74 −0.44 −1.93

−0.34 −0.35 0.13 0.85
1.27
0.11 (0.01)
−2.93 −2.27

0.09
0.17
0.19
0.14
0.11
0.10
0.19 −0.01 −0.08
1.10
0.97
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.89
0.92
0.94
1.05
0.06 −0.04 −0.09 −0.03 −0.11 −0.10 −0.10
0.02
0.03
−0.19 −0.19 −0.01
0.04
0.08
0.07 −0.11 −0.06 −0.18
0.78
1.76
2.64
1.66
1.38
1.33
2.58 −0.13 −0.98

−0.20 −0.29 0.13 0.87
1.12
0.02 (0.01)
0.37
0.31
−0.37 −0.19
−2.08 −1.96

0.15
0.15
0.12
0.15
0.14
0.08
0.17
0.00 −0.03
αCARH
b
1.09
0.98
0.95
0.93
0.93
0.90
0.93
0.94
1.04
s
0.06 −0.04 −0.09 −0.03 −0.11 −0.10 −0.10
0.02
0.03
h
−0.21 −0.18
0.01
0.03
0.07
0.08 −0.10 −0.06 −0.20
w
−0.06
0.02
0.07 −0.02 −0.03
0.02
0.02 −0.01 −0.05
tαCARH
1.16
1.50
1.66
1.67
1.61
1.06
2.34 −0.01 −0.35

−0.14 −0.29 0.11 0.87
1.11
0.02 (0.01)
0.37
0.31
−0.39 −0.19
−0.06
0.00
−1.44 −1.69

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

0.27
1.11
−0.05
−0.22
−0.23
1.90
28.38
−0.80
−2.12
−2.39

0.23
0.99
−0.11
−0.13
−0.10
1.83
37.55
−2.20
−1.05
−1.29

0.22
0.07
0.11
0.94
0.95
0.93
−0.11 −0.04 −0.10
0.02
0.14
0.10
−0.05
0.03
0.00
2.80
0.71
1.25
45.92 34.75 41.62
−3.13 −1.20 −2.58
0.42
1.99
1.75
−1.54
0.53
0.04

−0.04
0.91
−0.05
0.17
0.13
−0.50
49.39
−1.76
2.33
2.69

44

0.12
0.93
−0.05
−0.14
0.13
1.60
41.47
−1.61
−3.23
2.99

−0.10
0.95
0.05
−0.05
0.12
−1.17
40.04
1.55
−0.88
2.82

High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.23 −0.30
0.75 −1.94

−0.10 −0.11
1.05
1.11
0.05
0.38
−0.28 −0.77
0.09
0.12
−1.03 −1.11
36.27
41.60
1.21
11.39
−3.77 −14.70
1.65
2.22

−0.39 0.14 0.87
0.00 (0.01)
0.42
−0.56
0.34
−2.48
−0.06
6.94
−5.31
4.16

Table 9 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Ten Industry Portfolios
(1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. We assign each NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stock to an industry portfolio at the end of June of year
t based on its four-digit SIC code at that time. We use Compustat SIC codes for the ﬁscal year ending in
calendar year t − 1. If Compustat SIC codes are unavailable, we use CRSP SIC codes for June of year t.
Monthly value-weighted returns are computed from July of year t to June of year t + 1. The ten-industry
classiﬁcation is from Kenneth French’s Web site. We exclude ﬁnancial ﬁrms from the last industry portfolio
(“Other”). We report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi +
β i M KTt +it ), the Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti −rtf = αiF F +bi M KTt +si SM Bt +hi HM Lt +it ),
the Carhart four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it )
and the q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ).
m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in
parentheses) beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the GRS test on the null that the alphas across all the
deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The
t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations.
NoDur Durbl Manuf Enrgy HiTec Telcm Shops

Hlth

Utils Other m.a.e.

R̄2

Mean
tMean

0.66
3.05

0.35
1.11

0.54
2.20

0.73
2.94

0.48
1.47

0.50
2.16

0.51
1.92

0.54
2.37

0.49
2.54

α
β
tα

0.31 −0.16
0.78
1.13
2.29 −0.93

0.07
1.04
0.74

0.37 −0.09
0.80
1.27
1.94 −0.58

0.15
0.78
0.94

0.07
0.99
0.46

0.17
0.80
1.15

0.26 −0.22 0.19
0.51
1.12 (0.00)
1.63 −2.49

0.64

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.24 −0.46
0.83
1.22
−0.10
0.17
0.17
0.57
1.82 −3.14

−0.02
1.08
−0.02
0.18
−0.25

0.28
0.18
0.89
1.10
−0.24
0.22
0.24 −0.61
1.49
1.34

0.14
0.83
−0.22
0.06
0.92

0.02
0.37
0.06 −0.31 0.21
0.98
0.80
0.64
1.11 (0.00)
0.12 −0.32 −0.19
0.21
0.07 −0.32
0.45
0.13
0.11
2.66
0.40 −3.76

0.69

αCARH
b
s
h
w
tαCARH

0.24 −0.23
0.83
1.17
−0.10
0.17
0.17
0.49
0.00 −0.24
1.82 −1.61

0.00
1.08
−0.02
0.18
−0.02
−0.06

0.13
0.29
0.92
1.08
−0.24
0.22
0.29 −0.65
0.16 −0.12
0.72
2.18

0.22
0.09
0.31 −0.01 −0.29 0.18
0.81
0.97
0.81
0.66
1.10 (0.00)
−0.22
0.12 −0.32 −0.19
0.21
0.03
0.04 −0.30
0.47
0.13
−0.08 −0.08
0.06
0.07 −0.02
1.29
0.65
2.09 −0.05 −3.35

0.69

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

-0.08 -0.32
0.86
1.16
0.02
0.14
0.35
0.55
0.31 −0.24
−0.60 −1.66
24.30 21.79
0.34
1.35
3.81
3.60
3.93 −2.02

-0.15
1.09
0.02
0.24
0.13
−1.57
48.05
0.56
3.16
2.12

0.09
0.91
−0.20
0.44
0.15
0.46
17.40
−2.49
3.38
1.49

0.42 -0.15 -0.04 -0.06 -0.37 0.22
0.80
0.99
0.87
0.62
1.11 (0.00)
−0.32
0.20 −0.17 −0.12
0.22
0.07
0.03 −0.05
0.58
0.13
−0.37
0.24
0.42
0.07
0.05
2.42 −0.99 −0.22 −0.32 −4.19
20.44 21.51 17.68 17.56 46.73
−5.70
2.20 −2.47 −1.91
3.81
0.73
0.35 −0.38
4.90
1.92
−4.05
2.85
4.66
0.78
1.29

0.69

0.57
1.09
0.08
−0.94
−0.31
3.53
25.30
1.18
−7.90
−3.44

45

0.28
1.04

Table 10 : Descriptive Statistics for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of 25 Size and
Momentum Portfolios (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
At the beginning of month t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
into quintiles based on their prior six-month returns from month t − 2 to t − 7 (skipping month t − 1).
Independently, in June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split on NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ
stocks into quintiles based on market equity observed at the end of June. Taking intersections, we form
25 size and momentum portfolios, and we calculate value-weighted returns for the portfolios from month
t to t + 5. We report mean percent excess returns, the CAPM alphas (α), the intercepts (αF F ) from the
Fama-French three-factor regressions, and the intercepts (αCARH ) from the Carhart four-factor regressions,
as well as t-statistics adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. For each factor model, we report
the mean absolute error (m.a.e., the average magnitude of the alphas) across the testing portfolios, the
average goodness-of-ﬁt (R̄2 ) across the testing portfolios, and the p-value (pGRS ) from the Gibbons, Ross,
and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the alphas of all the portfolios are jointly zero. The data for the
one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site.
Loser

2

3

4 Winner

W−L

Loser

2

0.10
0.16
0.24
0.33
0.16

0.68
0.67
0.61
0.57
0.44

0.79
0.76
0.70
0.63
0.39

0.89
0.78
0.71
0.63
0.45

1.12
0.98
0.90
0.84
0.68

1.02
0.81
0.66
0.51
0.52

0.24
0.44
0.69
1.00
0.54

−0.50
−0.46
−0.36
−0.25
−0.35

0.19
0.33
0.16
0.27
0.12
0.24
0.08
0.19
0.02 −0.01

0.41
0.29
0.25
0.17
0.05

0.54
0.40
0.35
0.31
0.20

1.04
0.86
0.71
0.56
0.55

−2.22
−2.59
−2.13
−1.65
−2.37

−0.76
−0.66
−0.53
−0.33
−0.34

−0.09
−0.08
−0.09
−0.07
0.03

0.07
0.05
0.03
0.03
0.00

0.19
0.10
0.09
0.06
0.09

0.45
0.37
0.36
0.36
0.34

1.22
1.03
0.88
0.70
0.68

−6.25
−5.74
−3.86
−2.35
−2.26

0.03
0.09
0.13
0.17
0.29

0.10
0.12
0.08
0.03
0.09
0.00
0.10 −0.03
0.07 −0.03

2.60
2.76
2.75
2.69
1.97

2.87
2.84
2.84
2.68
2.23

2.99
2.94
2.91
2.83
2.62

5.46
4.01
2.95
2.31
2.35

1.07
1.94
1.10
2.19
1.07
2.28
0.84
2.02
0.26 −0.17

2.39
2.32
2.46
2.20
0.88

2.54
2.51
2.53
2.26
1.83

6.10
4.65
3.40
2.67
2.51

−1.28
1.10
−0.97
0.84
−1.09
0.34
−0.77
0.31
0.34 −0.07

2.82
1.64
1.31
0.83
1.44

3.86
3.74
3.34
2.91
3.26

7.20
5.79
4.32
3.25
3.05

tαCARH (R̄2 = 0.93, pGRS = 0)

αCARH (m.a.e. = 0.11)
Small −0.37
2
−0.19
3
0.03
4
0.22
Big
0.20

2.09
2.23
2.21
2.16
2.01

tαF F (R̄2 = 0.89, pGRS = 0)

αF F (m.a.e. = 0.22)
Small
2
3
4
Big

W−L

tα (R̄2 = 0.78, pGRS = 0)

α (m.a.e. = 0.26)
Small
2
3
4
Big

4 Winner

tMean

Mean
Small
2
3
4
Big

3

0.18
0.55
0.08
0.27
0.04
0.01
0.00 −0.22
0.02 −0.18

46

−2.82
−2.13
0.31
2.38
2.08

0.45
1.15
1.79
2.00
5.03

1.42
1.70
1.25
0.49
1.08 −0.02
1.19 −0.35
1.16 −0.50

1.84
4.69
0.96
2.25
0.41
0.08
0.01 −1.97
0.22 −1.40

Table 11 : Q-factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of 25 Size and
Momentum Portfolios (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
At the beginning of month t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
into quintiles based on their prior six-month returns from month t − 2 to t − 7 (skipping month t − 1).
Independently, in June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split on NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ
stocks into quintiles based on market equity observed at the end of June. Taking intersections, we form 25 size
and momentum portfolios, and we calculate value-weighted returns for the portfolios from month t to t+5. We
report the q-factor regressions: rti −rtf = αiq +β iMKT M KTt +β iME rME,t +β iA/A rA/A,t +β iROE rROE,t +it .
See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE . The t-statistics are adjusted for
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across the testing
portfolios. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the testing portfolios. pGRS is p-value for the Gibbons,
Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the alphas of all the testing portfolios are jointly zero. The
data for the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site.
Loser

2

3

4 Winner

W−L

Loser

0.12
0.14
0.19
0.02
0.02 −0.02
0.03 −0.01 −0.07
0.05 −0.04 −0.11
0.16 −0.03 −0.09

1.04
1.16
1.15
1.16
1.07

0.92
0.99
1.01
1.04
0.96

0.88
0.96
0.98
1.00
0.92

0.90
0.97
0.98
1.01
0.94

0.41
0.54
0.16
0.28
0.11
0.07
0.15 −0.05
0.15
0.03

−0.72
−0.66
0.23
1.13
0.67

1.33
1.95
2.34
0.23
0.28 −0.27
0.24 −0.14 −0.98
0.44 −0.46 −1.47
1.60 −0.45 −1.37

1.04
1.10
1.09
1.08
1.04

0.00
−0.06
−0.06
−0.08
−0.03

24.85
27.00
23.12
22.11
22.68

36.72
38.01
34.53
35.82
37.03

−0.13
−0.18
−0.20
−0.17
−0.23

0.11
0.12
0.16
0.19
0.01

0.15
0.16
0.24
0.29
0.07

0.09
0.13
0.18
0.22
0.10

1.19
0.96
0.74
0.53
0.01

0.21
0.21
0.24
0.35
0.26

−0.82
−0.67
−0.64
−0.63
−0.45

−0.33 −0.17 −0.09
−0.16 −0.01
0.10
−0.15
0.03
0.16
−0.16
0.05
0.16
−0.13
0.04
0.19

39.26
52.62
36.04
33.30
47.68

40.11
49.32
43.59
48.67
55.96

15.09 19.83 26.31 37.15
8.27 11.34 18.21 20.01
4.51
5.89
6.19 10.58
1.70
2.48
2.48
7.32
−3.14 −5.59 −5.38 −6.04

30.79
37.18
30.72
24.62
31.42

−0.04
−0.89
−0.81
−1.01
−0.42

14.74
16.42
10.50
5.03
0.12

1.57
1.49
1.41
1.77
1.96

−2.59
−3.41
−2.05
−1.95
−2.40

−0.71
−0.49
−0.09
−0.35
−0.05

−0.34
3.28
3.75
3.23
3.75

5.54
5.55
4.99
5.19
4.76

tβ A/A
−0.27
−0.27
−0.22
−0.25
−0.24

−0.13
−0.10
−0.02
−0.08
−0.01

−0.92
−1.31
−1.47
−1.34
−1.79

β ROE
Small
2
3
4
Big

2.66
2.17
1.37
1.06
0.75
0.23
0.86 −0.18
1.13
0.09

tβ M E

β A/A
Small
2
3
4
Big

W−L

tβM KT

β ME
Small
0.98
0.93
0.93
0.96
2
0.76
0.77
0.75
0.78
3
0.50
0.47
0.46
0.53
4
0.17
0.19
0.20
0.27
Big
−0.26 −0.25 −0.19 −0.13

4 Winner

tαq (R̄ = 0.90, pGRS = 0)

β MKT
Small
2
3
4
Big

3
2

αq (m.a.e. = 0.11)
Small −0.13
2
−0.11
3
0.04
4
0.20
Big
0.13

2

1.57
1.74
1.95
2.12
0.12

2.70
3.02
3.15
3.52
1.67

1.84
3.09
3.30
3.75
2.47

tβROE
−0.03
0.23
0.28
0.26
0.27

0.79
0.90
0.92
0.89
0.72

47

−7.17
−5.98
−5.15
−5.89
−4.80

−6.80 −4.54 −2.04
−2.96 −0.15
2.94
−2.25
0.50
4.15
−2.40
0.88
3.78
−2.21
1.02
5.78

Table 12 : Descriptive Statistics for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of 25 Size and
Book-to-Market Portfolios (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
The data for the one-month Treasury bill rate and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. Book equity is stockholders’ book equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit
(Compustat annual item TXDITC) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock. The stockholders’
equity is the value reported by Compustat (item SEQ), if it is available. If not, we measure stockholders’
equity as the book value of common equity (item CEQ) plus the par value of preferred stock (item PSTK),
or the book value of assets (item AT) minus total liabilities (item LT). Depending on availability, we use
redemption (item PSTKRV), liquidating (item PSTKL), or par value (item PSTK) for the book value of
preferred stock. In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex, and
NASDAQ stocks into quintiles on market equity at the end of June of t. Independently, in June of each
year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into quintiles on
book-to-market equity. Book-to-market for June of year t is the book equity for the ﬁscal year ending in
calendar year t − 1 divided by the market equity at the end of December of t − 1. Taking intersections, we
form 25 size and book-to-market portfolios. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from
July of year t to June of t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced at the end of June. We report mean percent
excess returns, the CAPM alphas (α), the intercepts (αF F ) from the Fama-French three-factor regressions,
and the intercepts (αCARH ) from the Carhart four-factor regressions, as well as t-statistics adjusted for
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across the testing
portfolios. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the 25 portfolios. pGRS is p-value for the Gibbons, Ross,
and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the alphas of all the testing portfolios are jointly zero.
Low

2

3

4

High

H−L

Low

2

0.07
0.28
0.36
0.49
0.38

0.69
0.70
0.69
0.56
0.51

0.81
0.83
0.75
0.74
0.56

0.96
0.86
0.73
0.73
0.60

1.08
0.96
1.02
0.84
0.56

1.01
0.68
0.66
0.35
0.19

0.17
0.78
1.06
1.60
1.60

−0.57
−0.35
−0.24
−0.08
−0.07

0.13
0.15
0.17
0.07
0.09

0.29
0.33
0.28
0.27
0.17

0.48
0.40
0.30
0.30
0.25

0.59
0.48
0.57
0.41
0.21

1.17
0.83
0.81
0.49
0.28

−2.42
−1.98
−1.67
−0.59
−0.76

−0.54
−0.23
−0.10
0.13
0.16

0.00
0.03
0.03
−0.03
0.09

0.10
0.08
0.03
0.05
0.12

0.19
0.07
−0.02
0.01
0.01

0.15
0.03
0.14
0.03
−0.15

0.69
0.25
0.23
−0.10
−0.31

−4.74
−2.82
−1.28
1.59
2.67

−0.48
−0.19
−0.05
0.14
0.17

0.02
0.07
0.04
−0.02
0.06

0.09
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.10

0.19
0.11
0.00
0.04
−0.02

1.91
2.19
2.37
2.18
2.33

2.41
2.89
2.89
2.86
2.74

3.03
3.21
2.84
2.97
2.91

3.16
3.16
3.81
3.16
2.44

4.48
2.94
2.76
1.52
0.89

0.21
0.03
0.16
0.11
−0.12

0.62
0.98
1.38
0.65
1.06

1.56
2.29
2.20
2.26
1.71

2.63
2.83
2.31
2.35
2.08

2.90
2.55
3.32
2.59
1.30

5.40
3.70
3.57
2.14
1.31

0.04
0.39
0.44
−0.35
1.04

1.21
1.14
0.32
0.49
1.27

2.74
0.93
−0.20
0.14
0.06

1.74
0.30
1.25
0.27
−1.25

5.44
2.30
1.76
−0.71
−2.29

tαCARH (R̄2 = 0.89, pGRS = 0)

αCARH (m.a.e. = 0.11)
Small
2
3
4
Big

H−L

tαF F (R̄2 = 0.89, pGRS = 0)

αF F (m.a.e. = 0.10)
Small
2
3
4
Big

High

tα (R̄2 = 0.73, pGRS = 0)

α (m.a.e. = 0.29)
Small
2
3
4
Big

4

tMean

Mean
Small
2
3
4
Big

3

0.69
0.21
0.21
−0.03
−0.30

48

−3.93
−2.32
−0.66
1.66
2.86

0.24
0.93
0.51
−0.26
0.76

1.09
1.32
0.79
0.92
0.99

2.67
1.52
−0.02
0.34
−0.16

2.30
0.29
1.38
0.90
−0.94

5.50
1.86
1.55
−0.19
−2.04

Table 13 : Q-factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of 25 Size and
Book-to-Market Portfolios (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
The data for the one-month Treasury bill rate and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. Book equity is stockholders’ book equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax
credit (Compustat annual item TXDITC) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock. The
stockholders’ equity is the value reported by Compustat (item SEQ), if it is available. If not, we measure
stockholders’ equity as the book value of common equity (item CEQ) plus the par value of preferred
stock (item PSTK), or the book value of assets (item AT) minus total liabilities (item LT). Depending
on availability, we use redemption (item PSTKRV), liquidating (item PSTKL), or par value (item PSTK)
for the book value of preferred stock. In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the
NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into quintiles on market equity at the end of June of t. Independently,
in June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into
quintiles on book-to-market equity. Book-to-market for June of year t is the book equity for the ﬁscal
year ending in calendar year t − 1 divided by the market equity at the end of December of t − 1. Taking
intersections, we form 25 size and book-to-market portfolios. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns
are calculated, and the portfolios are rebalanced at the end of June. We report the q-factor regressions:
rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it . See the caption of Table
1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE . The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and
autocorrelations. m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across the testing portfolios. R̄2 is the
average goodness-of-ﬁt across the 25 portfolios. pGRS is p-value for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989)
test on the null that the alphas of all the testing portfolios are jointly zero.
Low

2

3

4

High

H−L

Low

2

Small −0.25
0.28
0.29
0.32
0.33
0.58
2
−0.16
0.08
0.03
0.09
0.08
0.24
3
−0.03 −0.03 −0.05 −0.02
0.15
0.18
4
0.15 −0.15
0.01
0.04
0.08 −0.08
Big
0.09 −0.05
0.09
0.02 −0.01 −0.10
0.96
1.02
1.05
1.07
0.98

0.92
1.01
1.01
1.05
0.93

0.88
0.94
0.94
0.98
0.86

0.96
1.00
1.01
1.02
0.89

−0.15
−0.14
−0.09
−0.08
−0.09

27.03
33.88
27.14
26.71
25.17

−2.56
−2.44
−1.63
−1.35
−2.05

16.77 17.02 21.82 36.12 16.12
16.54 32.94 15.21 13.68 13.68
14.34 16.41
6.75
7.24
5.19
6.27
7.26
3.30
3.76
2.32
−7.93 −2.65 −5.28 −1.65 −2.01

−1.22
−0.63
−1.76
−1.52
1.43

25.10
32.92
38.45
33.93
52.66

27.75
51.42
50.60
42.89
40.39

35.43
45.04
33.09
31.28
30.43

39.25
43.45
37.85
30.96
31.70

tβ M E

Small
1.13
1.19
1.09
1.01
0.99
2
0.92
0.93
0.81
0.73
0.86
3
0.72
0.66
0.51
0.43
0.49
4
0.40
0.32
0.25
0.20
0.19
Big
−0.23 −0.09 −0.20 −0.10 −0.12

−0.13
−0.06
−0.23
−0.21
0.11

β A/A
−0.65 −0.34 −0.11
−0.76 −0.16
0.24
−0.77
0.03
0.38
−0.71
0.17
0.39
−0.40
0.12
0.30

H−L

tβM KT

β ME

Small
2
3
4
Big

High

−1.46
2.25
2.79
4.08
2.84
2.89
−1.31
0.95
0.43
0.86
0.69
1.21
−0.31 −0.31 −0.48 −0.15
1.18
1.09
1.25 −1.61
0.13
0.33
0.59 −0.38
1.25 −0.56
0.98
0.12 −0.07 −0.54

β MKT
1.10
1.14
1.10
1.10
0.98

4

tαq (R̄2 = 0.87, pGRS = 0)

αq (m.a.e. = 0.12)

Small
2
3
4
Big

3

0.17
0.42
0.54
0.60
0.61

tβ A/A
0.53
0.62
0.80
0.78
0.82

1.18
1.37
1.57
1.49
1.22

β ROE
Small −0.40 −0.40 −0.31 −0.26
2
−0.04 −0.09 −0.03 −0.10
3
0.02
0.04
0.03 −0.09
4
0.06
0.08 −0.01 −0.14
Big
0.15
0.15 −0.04 −0.07

−5.27 −3.81 −1.38
−9.77 −3.11
3.79
−11.21
0.43
3.45
−8.33
2.38
3.88
−9.47
2.03
4.93

3.09
6.18
6.13
5.41
4.69

5.91
9.03
8.90
7.30
6.75

8.51
10.62
11.73
9.43
8.42

tβROE
−0.37
−0.18
−0.16
−0.17
−0.26

0.03
−0.14
−0.18
−0.23
49
−0.41

−3.29 −4.92 −5.21 −7.61 −7.24
0.26
−0.49 −2.21 −0.76 −2.06 −3.06 −1.22
0.33
0.83
0.50 −1.33 −2.11 −1.72
0.92
1.55 −0.08 −1.84 −2.14 −1.86
4.58
3.36 −0.75 −0.86 −3.23 −4.34

Table 14 : Descriptive Statistics for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of 25 A/A and ROE
Portfolios (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
The 25 A/A and ROE portfolios are the intersections of quintiles formed on A/A and quintiles formed
on ROE. A/A is annual change in total assets (Compustat annual item AT) divided by lagged total
assets. In each June we break NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into ﬁve A/A quintiles using the NYSE
breakpoints. ROE is income before extraordinary items (Compustat quarterly item IBQ) divided by onequarter-lagged book equity. Book equity is the shareholders’ equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and
investment tax credit (item TXDITCQ) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock. Depending on
availability, we use the stockholders’ equity (item SEQQ), or common equity (item CEQQ) plus the carrying
value of preferred stock (item PSTKQ), or total assets (item ATQ) minus liabilities (item LTQ) in that
order as the shareholders’ equity. We use redemption value (item PSTKRQ) if available, or carrying value
for the book value of preferred stock. Each month, we sort all stocks into ﬁve ROE quintiles based on the
NYSE breakpoints of the ranked ROE. Earnings and other accounting variables in Compustat quarterly
ﬁles are used in the sorts in the months immediately after the most recent public earnings announcement
dates (item RDQ). Taking intersections of the A/A quintiles and the ROE quintiles, we obtain the 25
testing portfolios. The portfolio returns are value-weighted. We report mean percent excess returns, the
CAPM alphas (α), the intercepts (αF F ) from the Fama-French three-factor regressions, and the intercepts
(αCARH ) from the Carhart four-factor regressions, as well as t-statistics adjusted for heteroscedasticity and
autocorrelations. For each factor model, we report the mean absolute error (m.a.e., the average magnitude
of the alphas) across the testing portfolios, the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the 25 portfolios (R̄2 ), and the
p-value (pGRS ) for the GRS test on the null that the alphas of all the testing portfolios are jointly zero. The
table entries at the intersection of the L−H rows and the H−L columns are for the high-ROE and low-A/A
portfolio minus the low-ROE and high-A/A portfolio, a zero-investment portfolio with the largest average
return spread across the double sorts.
Low

2

3

4

High H−L

Low

2

0.02
0.49
0.25
0.70
0.60
0.58

0.27
0.53
0.67
0.52
0.88
0.61

0.45
0.49
0.67
0.67
0.71
0.26

0.64
0.57
0.59
0.76
0.93
0.28

0.94
0.41
0.30
0.26
0.48
1.22

−0.80
0.53
1.00
1.68
1.27
3.75

−0.90 −0.51 −0.26 −0.08
−0.34
0.05
0.08
0.03
−0.19 −0.16
0.28
0.27
0.02
0.33
0.16
0.30
−0.12
0.14
0.45
0.29
0.78
0.64
0.71
0.36

0.10
0.17
0.20
0.36
0.47
0.36

1.01
0.51
0.39
0.34
0.58
1.37

−0.90
−0.46
−0.42
−0.18
−0.32
0.58

−0.49 −0.20
−0.06
0.01
−0.30
0.14
0.11
0.03
−0.05
0.27
0.44
0.47

0.06
0.11
0.26
0.22
0.14
0.08

−0.66 −0.32 −0.08
−0.22
0.07
0.03
−0.23 −0.17
0.15
0.00
0.16 −0.01
−0.09
0.11
0.28
0.57
0.43
0.37

0.88
2.22
3.10
2.52
3.58
3.01

1.64
2.03
3.16
3.10
2.85
1.30

2.18
2.62
2.69
3.44
3.51
1.38

4.36
1.94
1.34
1.13
2.09
4.69

0.78
1.61
1.70
2.91
3.14
1.74

4.81
2.52
1.88
1.56
2.62
5.54

tαF F (R̄2 = 0.76, pGRS = 0)
0.39
0.31
0.25
0.41
0.41
0.02

1.29
0.77
0.67
0.59
0.73
1.31

αCARH (m.a.e. = 0.18)
High A/A
4
3
2
Low A/A
L−H

0.08
1.93
1.07
3.30
2.18
3.28

−5.09 −4.04 −1.85 −0.63
−2.31
0.36
0.67
0.33
−1.19 −1.25
2.41
2.82
0.13
2.67
1.34
2.36
−0.65
0.94
3.54
2.04
3.92
3.53
3.50
1.87

αF F (m.a.e. = 0.26)
High A/A
4
3
2
Low A/A
L−H

High H−L

tα (R̄2 = 0.73, pGRS = 0)

α (m.a.e. = 0.25)
High A/A
4
3
2
Low A/A
L−H

4

tMean

Mean
High A/A −0.29
4
0.16
3
0.30
2
0.50
Low A/A
0.44
L−H
0.74

3

0.06
0.30 0.96
0.10
0.18 0.39
0.21
0.15 0.37
0.18
0.31 0.32
50
0.10
0.27 0.36
0.04 −0.03 0.93

−5.85
−3.14
−2.75
−1.04
−2.12
3.31

−3.79 −1.59
−0.41
0.11
−2.41
1.33
0.98
0.30
−0.38
2.13
2.72
2.52

0.53
1.13
2.74
1.68
0.99
0.41

3.65
3.27
2.28
3.35
2.81
0.09

6.86
4.10
3.49
2.73
3.41
5.66

tαCARH (R̄2 = 0.77, pGRS = 0)
−4.52 −2.67 −0.67
−1.41
0.54
0.23
−1.49 −1.24
1.29
−0.02
1.43 −0.08
−0.58
0.86
2.13
3.07
2.47
1.98

0.51
2.58
1.06
1.97
2.19
1.33
1.49
2.58
0.66
1.84
0.21 −0.17

5.08
2.15
1.98
1.32
1.68
4.09

Table 15 : Q-factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of 25 A/A and ROE
Portfolios (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
A/A is annual change in total assets (Compustat annual item AT) divided by lagged total assets. ROE
is income before extraordinary items (Compustat quarterly item IBQ) divided by one-quarter-lagged book
equity. Book equity is the shareholders’ equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit
(item TXDITCQ) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock. Depending on availability, we use the
stockholders’ equity (item SEQQ), or common equity (item CEQQ) plus the carrying value of preferred stock
(item PSTKQ), or total assets (item ATQ) minus liabilities (item LTQ) in that order as the shareholders’
equity. We use redemption value (item PSTKRQ) if available, or carrying value for the book value of
preferred stock. In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to break NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ
stocks into quintiles on A/A for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t−1. Independently, each month, we
sort all stocks into ROE quintiles based on the NYSE breakpoints. Earnings and other accounting variables
in Compustat quarterly ﬁles are used in the sorts in the months immediately after the most recent public
earnings announcement dates (item RDQ). Taking the intersections of the A/A quintiles and the ROE
quintiles, we form 25 A/A and ROE portfolios. We calculate monthly value-weighted portfolio returns. We
report the q-factor regressions: rti −rtf = αiq +β iMKT M KTt +β iME rME,t +β iA/A rA/A,t +β iROE rROE,t +it .
See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE . The t-statistics are adjusted for
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas. R̄2 is the average
goodness-of-ﬁt across the 25 portfolios. pGRS is the p-value for the GRS test on the null that the alphas of
all the 25 testing portfolios are jointly zero.
Low

2

3

4

High

H−L

Low

2

αq (m.a.e. = 0.09)
0.43
−0.06
−0.08
−0.18
−0.25
−0.07

−0.34 −0.08 0.35 0.57
0.48 1.30 0.79 0.10
−0.19 −0.07 0.25 0.63
0.68 1.86 −1.30 −0.28
1.06 0.65 0.74 −0.75
1.06 0.55 0.29 −1.01

β MKT
1.09
1.02
1.05
1.09
1.13
0.04

1.04 1.05 1.08
0.92 1.01 1.03
0.92 0.95 0.93
0.84 0.88 0.90
1.08 1.03 1.01
0.03 −0.02 −0.07

1.08
0.94
0.93
1.00
1.10
0.02

−0.01
−0.08
−0.11
−0.09
−0.03
0.01

22.56
31.02
29.58
33.17
39.80
0.77

23.21
21.49
24.72
27.53
38.51
0.62

0.20 0.14 0.01 −0.30
−0.03 −0.13 −0.11 −0.23
−0.03 −0.01 −0.06 −0.17
−0.03 0.08 −0.12 −0.11
0.11 0.10 0.23 −0.21
−0.09 −0.03 0.21 −0.09

−0.09
−0.08
−0.01
0.09
−0.06
0.03

29.57
30.75
33.54
33.13
25.74
−0.27

41.92
38.09
37.77
24.30
22.88
−1.33

4.58 0.99 4.16 3.37
1.53 3.57 −0.58 −3.75
1.67 −1.61 −0.63 −0.24
−0.17 2.24 −0.74 0.96
8.88 0.35 1.89 1.41
1.49 −0.88 −1.25 −0.35

2.65
−0.35
−0.45
−0.90
−1.32
−0.40

33.73
40.25
32.50
34.79
36.91
0.41

−0.15
−1.90
−2.59
−2.44
−0.87
0.18

0.23
−2.69
−1.30
−2.36
3.77
2.56

−4.19
−2.22
−2.13
−1.96
−3.07
−0.87

−8.14 −7.13 −6.73 −7.39 −10.18 −0.91
−0.05 −0.67 0.80 −1.90 −2.26 −1.28
3.13 2.91 6.57 2.62
1.63 −1.95
5.25 7.20 6.48 4.71
3.07 −3.32
6.80 6.32 8.43 4.72
7.21 1.31
11.43 11.40 11.56 7.21 12.24 10.32

β ROE
−0.35
−0.24
−0.40
−0.30
−0.39
−0.04

3.00
0.08
−0.94
−0.51
−0.82
−2.84

tβ A/A

High A/A −0.81 −0.57 −0.58 −0.54 −0.92 −0.11
4
0.00 −0.06 0.06 −0.14 −0.15 −0.15
3
0.34 0.26 0.52 0.15 0.13 −0.21
2
0.61 0.58 0.55 0.46 0.24 −0.37
Low A/A
0.41 0.60 0.73 0.55 0.53 0.12
L−H
1.22 1.16 1.32 1.10 1.45 1.34
−0.80
−0.68
−0.56
−0.63
−0.87
−0.07

H−L

tβ M E

β A/A

High A/A
4
3
2
Low A/A
L−H

High

tβ M KT

β ME
High A/A
0.31 0.08
4
0.12 0.17
3
0.12 −0.10
2
−0.01 0.12
Low A/A
0.44 0.02
L−H
0.12 −0.06

4

tαq (R̄ = 0.80, pGRS = 0.26)

High A/A −0.04 −0.01 0.04 0.07 0.39
4
0.07 0.19 0.10 0.01 0.01
3
−0.03 −0.01 0.03 0.06 −0.11
2
0.12 0.20 −0.17 −0.04 −0.06
Low A/A
0.13 0.08 0.09 −0.11 −0.11
L−H
0.18 0.09 0.05 −0.18 −0.50
High A/A
4
3
2
Low A/A
L−H

3
2

0.14
0.19
0.21
0.13
0.14
0.00

tβ ROE
0.28
0.40
0.39
0.50
0.40
0.12

1.08
1.08
51
0.96
1.14
1.27
1.20

−9.25
−9.73
−8.68
−9.18
−18.04
−0.68

−5.82
−3.86
−4.08
−4.92
−5.75
−0.45

−1.45 2.96
−1.13 3.73
−0.12 4.37
1.49 2.55
−0.84 1.53
0.33 −0.02

5.01
8.96
6.06
9.46
6.31
1.48

10.46
14.65
10.62
13.41
19.07
10.87

Table 16 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Market Equity (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. Market equity is stock price per share times shares outstanding from CRSP. In June of each year t, we
use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on market equity at the
end of June of t. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated, and the portfolios are rebalanced at
the end of June. We report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi +
β i M KTt +it ), the Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti −rtf = αiF F +bi M KTt +si SM Bt +hi HM Lt +it ),
the Carhart four-factor regressions (rti −rtf = αiCARH +bi M KTt +si SM Bt +hi HM Lt +wi W M Lt +it ), the
q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ), and the
q-factor regressions without the size factor (rti − rtf = aiq + biMKT M KTt + biA/A rA/A,t + biROE rROE,t + eit ).
m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in
parentheses) beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the GRS test on the null that the alphas across all
the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles.
The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption of Table 1 for the
description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
R̄2

Small

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Big

S−B m.a.e.

Mean
tMean

0.65
1.77

0.66
1.92

0.62
1.96

0.67
2.21

0.67
2.28

0.59
2.19

0.63
2.35

0.58
2.28

0.55
2.32

0.41
2.01

0.24
0.88

α
β
tα

0.12
1.16
0.58

0.09
1.26
0.53

0.06
1.22
0.45

0.13
1.21
0.97

0.13
1.19
1.19

0.08
1.13
0.88

0.12
1.12
1.53

0.08
1.10
1.03

0.09
1.02
1.61

0.00
0.91
−0.02

−0.08 −0.07 −0.08
0.94
1.05
1.05
1.25
1.16
0.96
0.12
0.06
0.07
−0.82 −1.18 −1.48

0.01
1.05
0.90
0.02
0.20

0.00 −0.01
1.06
1.04
0.74
0.54
0.08
0.06
0.09 −0.11

0.06
1.05
0.40
0.02
1.11

0.04
1.04
0.32
0.02
0.53

0.07
0.99
0.15
0.01
1.22

0.11 −0.19 0.05 0.95
0.93
0.01 (0.01)
−0.27
1.53
−0.16
0.28
2.93 −1.72

0.02
αCARH −0.07 −0.06 −0.09
b
0.94
1.05
1.05
1.04
s
1.25
1.16
0.96
0.90
h
0.12
0.06
0.07
0.02
w
−0.01 −0.01
0.00 −0.01
tαCARH −0.68 −0.96 −1.60
0.38

0.00
0.02
1.06
1.03
0.74
0.54
0.08
0.05
0.00 −0.03
0.04
0.37

0.07
0.05
1.05
1.04
0.40
0.32
0.02
0.01
0.00 −0.01
1.12
0.68

0.06
0.99
0.15
0.01
0.01
1.15

0.10 −0.17 0.05 0.95
0.93
0.01 (0.03)
−0.27
1.53
−0.15
0.27
0.01 −0.02
2.45 −1.47

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.12 0.09 0.83
0.25 (0.71)
0.49

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

0.14
0.93
1.10
−0.06
−0.39
1.16
30.24
29.02
−0.62
−5.05

0.09
1.03
1.05
−0.14
−0.27
1.02
46.03
35.19
−2.24
−4.74

−0.04
1.04
0.92
−0.10
−0.09
−0.75
67.77
31.56
−2.87
−2.82

0.07
1.04
0.85
−0.16
−0.10
1.32
64.42
41.70
−4.95
−2.90

0.04
1.05
0.71
−0.09
−0.05
0.70
79.83
30.28
−1.81
−1.55

0.01
1.03
0.51
−0.04
−0.04
0.13
60.95
16.11
−0.95
−1.29

0.08
1.05
0.38
−0.05
−0.03
1.19
69.50
19.00
−1.10
−1.08

0.10
1.04
0.28
−0.05
−0.10
1.33
57.64
8.47
−0.86
−2.97

0.13
0.10
0.04 0.08 0.95
0.98
0.94 −0.02 (0.00)
0.13 −0.28
1.37
−0.04 −0.12
0.06
−0.07
0.03 −0.42
2.02
2.53
0.35
56.66
81.33 −0.60
3.53 −17.35 40.51
−0.75 −4.16
0.88
−2.16
1.62 −6.22

aq
bMKT
bA/A
bROE
taq
tbM KT
tbA/A
tbROE

0.65
1.07
−0.10
−0.74
2.43
17.95
−0.62
−5.31

0.57
1.17
−0.18
−0.60
2.50
22.37
−1.21
−5.37

0.38
1.16
−0.14
−0.38
2.26
26.27
−1.12
−4.04

0.47
1.15
−0.19
−0.37
2.77
26.81
−1.45
−4.31

0.37
1.14
−0.12
−0.28
2.67
29.52
−0.94
−3.46

0.25
1.10
−0.06
−0.20
2.22
36.61
−0.76
−4.09

0.26
1.10
−0.07
−0.15
2.45
47.68
−0.78
−3.30

0.23
1.07
−0.06
−0.19
2.11
50.03
−0.69
−3.99

0.18
1.00
−0.05
−0.11
2.30
59.06
−0.67
−2.60

52

−0.02
0.68 0.34 0.85
0.91
0.16 (0.00)
−0.11
0.01
0.12 −0.86
−0.37
2.17
52.17
2.26
−1.97
0.03
3.38 −5.34

Table 17 : Alphas from Q-factor Regressions without the Size Factor, Monthly Percent
Excess Returns of 25 Size and Momentum Portfolios, 25 Size and Book-to-Market Portfolios,
and 25 A/A and ROE Portfolios (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
See the captions of Tables 10, 12, and 14 for the constructions of the 25 size and momentum portfolios, the
25 size and book-to-market portfolios, and the 25 A/A and ROE portfolios, respectively. We report the
alphas from the three-factor version of the q-factor regressions: rti −rtf = aiq +biMKT M KTt +biA/A rA/A,t +
biROE rROE,t + eit . See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rA/A and rROE . The t-statistics are
adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across
the testing portfolios. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across a given set of 25 testing portfolios. pGRS is
the p-value from the GRS test on the null that the alphas of a given set of 25 portfolios are jointly zero.
The data for the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ), the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are
from Kenneth French’s Web site.
Panel A: 25 size and momentum portfolios
Loser

2

3

4 Winner W−L

Loser

0.32
0.24
0.28
0.28
0.01

0.55 0.57 0.64
0.38 0.37 0.34
0.25 0.20 0.17
0.14 0.05 0.02
0.04 −0.11 −0.15

3

4 Winner W−L

taq (R̄2 = 0.81, pGRS = 0)

aq (m.a.e. = 0.31)
Small
2
3
4
Big

2

0.96
0.61
0.46
0.39
0.16

0.64
0.38
0.18
0.11
0.15

1.31
1.25
1.41
1.56
0.04

2.90 2.91 2.97
2.61 2.77 2.30
2.01 1.74 1.50
1.18 0.48 0.22
0.36 −1.41 −2.29

2.89
2.55
2.00
1.54
1.08

2.23
1.26
0.53
0.30
0.46

High

H−L

Panel B: 25 size and book-to-market portfolios
Low

2

3

4

High

H−L

Low

0.27 0.83
0.27 0.51
0.30 0.28
0.34 0.00
−0.01 −0.09

0.79 0.79
0.41 0.42
0.18 0.18
0.13 0.13
0.00 −0.03

3

4

2

aq (m.a.e. = 0.31)
Small
2
3
4
Big

2

taq (R̄ = 0.78, pGRS = 0)

0.79 0.52
0.48 0.20
0.38 0.08
0.17 −0.17
−0.06 −0.05

0.87 2.73
1.21 2.62
1.68 1.83
1.95 0.03
−0.17 −0.99

2.89 3.61
2.80 3.08
1.44 1.52
1.08 1.09
0.00 −0.25

3.91 2.31
2.72 1.06
2.52 0.39
1.21 −0.73
−0.40 −0.27

Panel C: 25 A/A and ROE portfolios
Low

2

3

4

High

H−L

0.10 0.03 0.14 0.14
0.12 0.27 0.09 −0.05
0.03 −0.06 0.01 0.05
0.12 0.26 −0.18 0.00
0.34 0.09 0.14 −0.06
0.24 0.06 0.01 −0.20

0.39
−0.04
−0.13
−0.12
−0.01
−0.40

2

3

4

High

H−L

taq (R̄2 = 0.79, pGRS = 0.06)

aq (m.a.e. = 0.12)
High A/A
4
3
2
Low A/A
L−H

Low

0.29
−0.17
−0.16
−0.24
−0.35
−0.11

53

0.71 0.21 0.99 1.02
0.85 1.83 0.73 −0.50
0.19 −0.36 0.10 0.58
0.65 2.30 −1.39 −0.02
2.28 0.72 1.13 −0.43
1.35 0.38 0.03 −1.04

3.13
−0.41
−1.21
−0.91
−0.06
−2.03

1.62
−0.90
−0.93
−1.23
−1.88
−0.61

Table 18 : Alphas from Q-factor Regressions without the Size Factor, Monthly Percent
Excess Returns of One-way Deciles
See the captions of Tables 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 for the constructions of the SU E, the IV O, the distress, the
net stock issues, the composite issuance, the abnormal corporate investment, and the total accrual deciles,
respectively. See the caption of Table 9 for the construction of the ten industry portfolios. We report the
alphas from the three-factor version of the q-factor regressions: rti −rtf = aiq +biMKT M KTt +biA/A rA/A,t +
biROE rROE,t + eit . See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rA/A and rROE . The t-statistics are
adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across
the testing portfolios. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across a given set of deciles. pGRS (in parentheses)
is the p-value from the GRS test on the null that the alphas of a given set of deciles are jointly zero. The
data for the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web site.
The sample for the failure probability deciles is from January 1976 to December 2011 (432 months). All the
other portfolios are from January 1972 to December 2011 (480 months).
Low

2

3

4

5

6

7

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

8

9

High

0.09
0.00
1.14 −0.04

0.04
0.49

0.18
2.16

0.19
0.05 0.88
1.24 (0.61)

0.45
2.71

0.15
0.70

0.37
0.14 0.86
1.35 (0.01)

0.40
3.00

0.26
0.96

0.22
0.20 0.87
0.60 (0.00)

0.09
0.84

0.00 −0.25
0.13 0.85
0.05 −1.62 (0.00)

Panel A: SU E
aq
taq

−0.01
−0.07

0.00
0.02

0.06
0.64

0.08
0.90

0.01 −0.05
0.06 −0.50

Panel B: IV OL
aq
taq

−0.22 −0.02
−2.28 −0.19

−0.01
−0.12

0.00 −0.02
0.02 −0.18

0.03
0.28

0.29
2.48

0.23
1.99

Panel C: Failure probability
aq
ta q

0.04 −0.16
0.25 −1.82

−0.17 −0.08
−2.06 −0.91

0.07
0.92

0.16
1.69

0.24
2.11

0.38
2.29

Panel D: Net stock issues
aq
ta q

0.26 −0.06
2.51 −0.80

0.07 −0.08 −0.06
0.50 −0.93 −0.68

0.07
0.81

0.30
2.87

0.32
3.17

Panel E: Composite issuance
aq
taq

−0.02
−0.17

0.10
0.96

−0.04 −0.32 −0.02
−0.40 −3.65 −0.22

0.16
1.68

0.21
1.75

0.18
1.78

0.06 −0.11 −0.09
0.12 0.85
0.63 −1.17 −0.62 (0.01)

Panel F: Abnormal corporate investment
aq
taq

0.31
1.84

0.40
3.13

0.29 −0.02
3.08 −0.22

0.08 −0.19 −0.17 −0.16
0.85 −1.99 −1.63 −1.89

0.19
2.03

0.07 −0.24
0.19 0.86
0.66 −1.22 (0.00)

Panel G: Total accruals (scaled by average total assets)
aq
taq

0.25
1.75

0.18
1.49

0.17
2.12

0.06
0.56

0.06 −0.07
0.67 −0.82

0.10 −0.08 −0.07
1.29 −0.91 −0.79

0.06 −0.19
0.11 0.86
0.54 −1.04 (0.10)

Panel H: Industries
NoDur Durbl Manuf Enrgy HiTec Telcm Shops
aq
taq

−0.07 −0.25
−0.54 −1.27

−0.13
−1.46

0.00
0.00

0.61
3.82

Hlth

Tils Other

0.27 −0.06 −0.12 −0.11 −0.27
1.44 −0.38 −0.70 −0.65 −2.79

54

0.19 0.68
(0.00)

A

The Definition of Failure Probability

We construct the failure probability (distress) measure following Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi
(2008, the third column in Table IV):
Distress(t) ≡ −9.164 − 20.264 N IM T AAV Gt + 1.416 T LM T At − 7.129 EXRET AV Gt
+ 1.411 SIGM At − 0.045 RSIZEt − 2.132 CASHM T At + 0.075 M Bt − 0.058 P RICEt

1 − φ3 
9
N IM T AAV Gt−1,t−12 ≡
12 N IM T At−1,t−3 + · · · + φ N IM T At−10,t−12
1−φ

1−φ 
11
EXRET AV Gt−1,t−12 ≡
+
·
·
·
+
φ
EXRET
EXRET
,
t−1
t−12
1 − φ12

(A.1)
(A.2)
(A.3)

in which φ = 2−1/3 . N IM T A is net income (Compustat quarterly item NIQ) divided by the sum
of market equity and total liabilities (item LTQ). The moving average N IM T AAV G is designed
to capture the idea that a long history of losses is a better predictor of bankruptcy than one large
quarterly loss in a single month. EXRET ≡ log(1 + Rit ) − log(1 + RS&P500,t ) is the monthly log excess return on each ﬁrm’s equity relative to the S&P 500 index. The moving average EXRET AV G
is designed to capture the idea that a sustained decline in stock market value is a better predictor
of bankruptcy than a sudden stock price decline in a single month.
T LM T A is the ratio of total liabilities (Compustat quarterly item LTQ) divided by the sum of
market equity
total liabilities. SIGM A is the annualized three-month rolling sample standard
 and
252
2
deviation:
k∈{t−1,t−2,t−3} rk , in which k is the index of trading days in months t − 1, t − 2,
N −1

and t − 3, rk2 is the ﬁrm-level daily return, and N is the total number of trading days in the three-

month period. SIGM A is treated as missing if there are less than ﬁve nonzero observations over the
three months in the rolling window. RSIZE is the relative size of each ﬁrm measured as the log ratio
of its market equity to that of the S&P 500 index. CASHM T A, used to capture the liquidity position of the ﬁrm, is the ratio of cash and short-term investments (item CHEQ) divided by the sum of
market equity and total liabilities. M B is the market-to-book equity, in which book equity is measured in the same way as the denominator of ROE. Following Campbell et al., we add 10% of the
diﬀerence between market and book equity to the book equity to alleviate measurement issues for extremely small book equity values. For ﬁrm-month observations that still have negative book equity
after this adjustment, we replace these negative values with $1 to ensure that the market-to-book ratios for these ﬁrms are in the right tail of the distribution. P RICE is each ﬁrm’s log price per share,
truncated above at $15. We further eliminate stocks with prices less than $1 at the portfolio formation date. Following Campbell et al., we winsorize the variables in the right-hand side of equation
(A.1) at the 5th and 95th percentiles of their pooled distribution across all ﬁrm-month observations.

55

B

Alternative Construction of Testing Portfolios

In Section 3, we construct testing portfolios using the NYSE breakpoints and value-weighted returns. As noted, this empirical design alleviates the impact of microcaps and small stocks. However,
some prominent papers that ﬁrst document the anomalies use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints and equal-weighted returns. In this appendix, we evaluate the performance of diﬀerence
factor models, using alternative constructions of the testing portfolios. The main ﬁnding is that
the alternative constructions tend to increase the magnitude of the anomalies. However, the basic
result that the q-factor model is competitive with the traditional factor models remains unchanged.

B.1

Post-earnings-announcement Drift, Equal-weighted Six-month Returns

Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996) use equal-weighted six-month holding-period returns after
portfolio formation when constructing the SU E deciles. (Chan et al. also use the NYSE breakpoints.) We redo the tests in Section 3.1 while matching exactly their research design.
Speciﬁcally, at the beginning of each month t, we rank all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
into deciles by their most recent past SU E with the NYSE breakpoints. Monthly equal-weighted
six-month holding-period returns on the SU E deciles are calculated from month t to t + 5, and the
portfolios are rebalanced at the beginning of month t + 1. Table B.1 shows that equal-weighting
returns makes the SU E eﬀect stronger. The high-minus-low SU E decile earns an average return
of 0.74% per month, which is more than six standard errors from zero. The CAPM beta and the
Fama-French factor loadings are all negative, going in the wrong direction in explaining the average
returns. The high-minus-low alpha rises to 0.88% in the Fama-French model, which is more than
eight standard errors from zero. The Carhart model helps with a positive W M L loading. The
high-minus-low alpha drops to 0.60%, which is still more than ﬁve standard errors from zero. The
q-factor model outperforms the Carhart model in reducing the high-minus-low alpha to 0.36% per
month, albeit still signiﬁcant (t = 2.80). However, the m.a.e. is 0.41%, which is larger than 0.34%
in the Carhart model. Finally, all the factor models are strongly rejected by the GRS test.

B.2

Idiosyncratic Volatility, the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints

Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006) use all NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to form deciles
on idiosyncratic volatility. We redo the tests in Section 3.1 using this alternative construction of
the IV OL deciles. Table B.2 shows that using the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints makes the
IV OL eﬀect stronger. The high-minus-low decile earns an average return of −1.34% per month,
which is more than three standard errors from zero. In contrast, this average return is only −0.54%
(t = −1.51) with the NYSE breakpoints (see Table 3).
The traditional factor models fail to explain the IV OL eﬀect. In the CAPM, four out of ten
deciles have signiﬁcant alphas. The m.a.e. is 0.41% per month. And the high-minus-low decile
has an alpha of −1.73%, which is more than 4.5 standard errors from zero. In the Fama-French
56

model, ﬁve out of ten deciles have signiﬁcant alphas. The m.a.e. is also 0.41%. The high-minus-low
decile has a Fama-French alpha of −1.77%, which is more than six standard errors from zero. In the
Carhart model, four out of ten deciles have signiﬁcant alphas. The m.a.e. drops to 0.29%. The highminus-low decile has a Carhart alpha of −1.37%, which is more than four standard errors from zero.
Although outperforming the traditional models, the q-factor model also fails to explain the
IV OL eﬀect. Two out of ten deciles have signiﬁcant alphas. The m.a.e. drops further to 0.18%.
All four factor models are strongly rejected by the GRS test. The high-minus-low alpha in the
q-factor model is −0.68%, which is slightly more than two standard errors from zero. Although still
large, this alpha represents a reduction of 50% in magnitude from the Carhart alpha of −1.37%.

B.3

Financial Distress, the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints

Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) use all NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to form deciles
on failure probability. We redo the tests in Section 3.1 using this alternative construction of the
distress deciles. Table B.3 shows that using the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints makes the
distress eﬀect stronger. The high-minus-low decile earns an average return of −0.96% per month,
which is slightly more than two standard errors from zero. In contrast, this average return is only
−0.57% (t = −1.42) with the NYSE breakpoints (see Table 4).
The traditional factor models fail to explain the distress eﬀect. In the CAPM, four out of ten
deciles have signiﬁcant alphas. The m.a.e. is 0.33% per month, and the high-minus-low decile has
an alpha of −1.45%, which is more than 3.5 standard errors from zero. In the Fama-French model,
six out of ten deciles have signiﬁcant alphas. The m.a.e. is 0.43%, and the high-minus-low alpha
inﬂates to −1.92%, which is about six standard errors from zero. In the Carhart model, three out
of ten deciles have signiﬁcant alphas. The m.a.e. drops to 0.21%, and the high-minus-low alpha
drops to −0.93%, which is more than three standard errors from zero.
The q-factor model again outperforms the traditional factor models. Two out of ten deciles have
signiﬁcant alphas. The m.a.e. drops further to 0.18%. The high-minus-low alpha falls to −0.28%,
which is within one standard error of zero. Although still sizable, this alpha represents a reduction
of 70% in magnitude from the Carhart alpha of −0.93%.

B.4

Composite Issuance, the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints, Equalweighted Returns

Daniel and Titman (2006) document the negative relation between composite issuance and average
stock returns using the Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions. This practice is similar
to a portfolio approach with all NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints and equal-weighted portfolio
returns. Table B.4 reports factor regressions of the composite issuance deciles constructed from this
alternative design. Doing so again increases the magnitude of the anomaly. The average return of
the high-minus-low decile is −0.74% per month, which is more than three standard errors from zero.
57

The CAPM produces a large high-minus-low alpha of −0.96% per month (t = −4.88) and a
large m.a.e. of 0.46%. In the Fama-French model, the HM L loading of the high-minus-low decile
−0.40, which goes in the right direction in explaining the average return. However, using equalweighted returns produces a large SM B loading of 0.70, which goes in the wrong direction. As
such, the high-minus-low decile has a Fama-French alpha of −0.84%, which is 5.5 standard errors
from zero. The m.a.e. is reduced to 0.26%. Relative to the Fama-French model, the Carhart model
reduces the high-minus-low alpha in magnitude to −0.64% (t = −3.79), but increases the m.a.e. to
0.36%. Both the Fama-French model and the Carhart model are rejected by the GRS test.
The q-factor model reduces the high-minus-low alpha in magnitude further to −0.28% per
month, which is within 1.5 standard errors from zero. The m.a.e. is 0.36%, which is the same as
that in the Carhart model. As in Table 6, the investment factor continues to help with a loading
of −0.75 for the high-minus-low decile, which is more than ﬁve standard errors from zero. Using
equal-weighted returns also brings the ROE factor to work. The high-minus-low decile has an
ROE factor loading of −0.63, which is more than 4.5 standard errors from zero.

B.5

Abnormal
Corporate
Investment,
Breakpoints, Equal-weighted Returns

the

NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ

We show in Section 3.1 that Titman, Wei, and Xie’s (2004) abnormal corporate investment does
not produce a signiﬁcant average return spread with the NYSE breakpoints and value-weighted
returns. Table B.5 shows that with the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints and equal-weighting,
the high-minus-low decile earns an average return of −0.39% per month, which is more than four
standard errors from zero. The high-minus-low alphas are signiﬁcant in both the CAPM and the
Fama-French model, which are in turn rejected by the GRS test.
The q-factor model performs about as well as the Carhart model. The high-minus-low alpha
is −0.30% in the q-factor model, which is slightly higher than −0.28% in the Carhart model. The
m.a.e. is 0.34% in the q-factor model, which is comparable with 0.33% in the Carhart model. However, both models are still strongly rejected by the GRS test. Also, the m.a.e. is 0.19% in the
Fama-French model, which is lower than those from the Carhart model and the q-factor model.

B.6

Total Accruals, the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints, Equal-weighted
Returns

Table B.6 reports the results for the accrual deciles constructed with the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ
breakpoints and equal-weighted returns, as in Sloan (1996). The average return of the high-minuslow decile is −0.78% per month, which is more than ﬁve standard errors from zero. This average
return is more than doubled in magnitude from −0.30% with the NYSE breakpoints and valueweighted returns. The traditional factor loadings of the high-minus-low decile are all close to zero,
giving rise to alphas that are close in magnitude to the average return.

58

As in the benchmark case with the NYSE breakpoints and value-weighted returns, the q-factor
model struggles to explain the accrual eﬀect. The high-minus-low alpha is −0.92% per month,
which is almost six standard errors from zero. This alpha is larger in magnitude than the FamaFrench alpha of −0.76% and the Carhart alpha of −0.75%. In addition, the m.a.e. is 0.47% in the
q-factor model, which is higher than 0.25% in the Fama-French model and 0.38% in the Carhart
model. The culprit is again the ROE factor loading. The high-minus-low decile has an ROE factor
loading of 0.39, which is almost 4.5 standard errors from zero, going in the wrong direction in
explaining the average return. Although going in the right direction, the investment factor loading
for the high-minus-low decile is only −0.24.

B.7

Size and Momentum, the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints, Equalweighted Returns

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) use all NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to sort stocks into price
momentum portfolios, and equal-weight the portfolio returns. We redo the tests in Section 3.2
using this alternative design. However, when equal-weighting returns, we also follow Jegadeesh
and Titman in excluding stocks with price under $5. Including these stocks produces a large and
negative January eﬀect, which reduces greatly the magnitude of the equal-weighted momentum
proﬁts. (Value-weighting returns as in Section 3.2 is immune to this issue.)
Table B.7 shows that using the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints and equal-weighted returns
increases momentum proﬁts by about ten basis points on average. For example, the average winnerminus-loser return across the ﬁve size quintiles is 0.80% per month, compared to 0.70% with the
NYSE breakpoints and value-weighted returns (see Table 10). The changes in the CAPM alphas
and the Fama-French alphas have similar magnitudes.
Focusing on the performance of the q-factor model relative to the Carhart model, we count nine
out of 25 individual portfolios and two out of ﬁve winner-minus-loser portfolios that have signiﬁcant
alphas in the Carhart model. The m.a.e. is 0.11% per month, and the Carhart model is rejected
by the GRS test. In comparison, Table B.8 shows that two out of 25 individual portfolios and one
out of ﬁve winner-minus-loser portfolios have signiﬁcant alphas in the q-factor model. The m.a.e.
is 0.13% per month, and the model is again rejected by the GRS test. Similar to Table 11, the
ROE factor loadings again provide the sole source of explanatory power for the q-factor model.

C
C.1

Additional One-way Deciles
Momentum

Table C.1 reports the results for one-way momentum deciles. At the beginning of each month t,
we use the NYSE breakpoints to split all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles based on

59

their prior six-month returns from month t − 2 to t − 7. Skipping month t−1, we calculate monthly
value-weighted returns for the portfolios from month t to t+5.
From Table C.1, the winner-minus-loser decile earns an average return of 0.87% per month
(t = 3.15). The CAPM alpha and the Fama-French alpha for the winner-minus-loser decile are
0.93% and 1.13%, respectively, which are both more than 3.5 standard errors from zero. The m.a.e.
in the CAPM is 0.17%, and that in the Fama-French model is 0.19%. Both models are strongly
rejected by the GRS test. The Carhart model performs extremely well for the one-way momentum
deciles. The winner-minus-loser alpha is only 0.05%, which is within 0.5 standard errors of zero.
The m.a.e. is only 0.10%, but the model is still rejected by the GRS test.
The q-factor model seems largely comparable with the Carhart model. The winner-minus-loser
alpha is 0.23% per month, which is within one standard error of zero. The m.a.e. is 0.09%, but
the model is rejected by the GRS test. None of the individual deciles has a signiﬁcant alpha in the
q-factor model, in contrast to three in the Carhart model. The average R2 in the q-factor model is
89%, which is slightly lower than 94% in the Carhart model.
Table C.2 repeats the exercise but with the momentum deciles formed with the NYSE-AmexNASDAQ breakpoints and equal-weighted portfolio returns, as in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993).
We again exclude stocks with price under $5. This alternative design increases the average winnerminus-loser return to 1.32% per month, which is more than 5.5 standard errors from zero. The
CAPM and the Fama-French model produce alphas of 1.36% and 1.50%, respectively, both of which
are more than six standard errors from zero. The Carhart model reduces the winner-minus-loser
alpha to 0.56% (t = 4.15). The m.a.e. is 0.13%, dropping from 0.29% in the Fama-French model.
The q-factor model again performs similarly as the Carhart model. The winner-minus-loser
alpha is 0.61% per month. Although large, this alpha is within 1.8 standard errors from zero. The
m.a.e. is 0.11%, which is comparable to 0.13% in the Carhart model. The average R2 is 93%, which
is again comparable to 96% in the Carhart model. Finally, three out of ten deciles have signiﬁcant
alphas in the q-factor model, in contrast to six in the Carhart model.

C.2

Book-to-Market

In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks
into deciles on book-to-market equity. Book-to-market for June of year t is the book equity for the
ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t−1 divided by the market equity at the end of December of t−1.
Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are computed from July of year t to June of t + 1, and
the portfolios are rebalanced in June. Book equity is stockholders’ book equity, plus balance sheet
deferred taxes and investment tax credit (Compustat annual item TXDITC) if available, minus the
book value of preferred stock. The stockholders’ equity is the value reported by Compustat (item
SEQ), if it is available. If not, we measure stockholders’ equity as the book value of common equity
(item CEQ) plus the par value of preferred stock (item PSTK), or the book value of assets (item AT)
60

minus total liabilities (item LT). Depending on availability, we use redemption (item PSTKRV),
liquidating (item PSTKL), or par value (item PSTK) for the book value of preferred stock.
Table C.3 shows that the value-minus-growth decile earns an average return of 0.68% per month,
which is more than 2.5 standard errors from zero. The value-minus-growth alpha in the CAPM
is 0.72% (t = 2.88). The m.a.e. is 0.23%, and the model is rejected by the GRS test. Both the
Fama-French model and the Carhart model succeed in explaining the value premium. The valueminus-growth alpha is −0.03% (t = −0.19) and the m.a.e. is 0.07% in both models, which are
in turn not rejected by the GRS test. The q-factor model delivers a value-minus-growth alpha of
0.19% per month, which is within one standard error of zero. The m.a.e. is 0.09%, and the model
is not rejected by the GRS test (p-value = 0.24). As in the Fama-French model and in the Carhart
model, none of the individual deciles has a signiﬁcant alpha in the q-factor model.

C.3

Investment-to-Assets, A/A

We measure A/A as annual change in total assets (Compustat annual item AT) divided by lagged
total assets. In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex, and
NASDAQ stocks into deciles on A/A for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Monthly
value-weighted portfolio returns are computed from July of year t to June of t+1, and the portfolios
are rebalanced in June. Table C.4 shows that the high-minus-low decile earns an average return
of −0.41% per month (t = −2.32). The CAPM alpha is −0.49%, which is more than 2.5 standard
errors from zero. The m.a.e. for the CAPM is 0.17%, and the CAPM is rejected by the GRS test.
The Fama-French model explains the investment eﬀect with a high-minus-low alpha of −0.14%
per month, which is within one standard error from zero. The Carhart model also does well with a
small high-minus-low alpha of −0.07%. The m.a.e. is 0.12% in the Fama-French model and 0.10%
in the Carhart model, but both models are still rejected by the GRS test. The q-factor model’s
performance is largely comparable. The high-minus-low alpha is 0.14% (t = 1.03), and the m.a.e.
is 0.09%. However, the model is also rejected by the GRS test.
When documenting the investment eﬀect, Cooper, Gulen, and Schill (2008) use the NYSEAmex-NASDAQ breakpoints and both equal-weighted and value-weighted returns. Table C.5 uses
such breakpoints and equal-weighted returns. The high-minus-low decile earns an average return
of −1.49% per month (t = −6.65). All the factor models fail to explain such a large spread.
The Carhart model produces a high-minus-low alpha of −1.30%, which is almost six standard errors from zero, and an m.a.e. of 0.43%. The q-factor model produces a high-minus-low alpha of
−1.47% (t = −5.89) and an m.a.e. of 0.49%. The reason why all the factor models fail to explain the
equal-weighted returns across the investment deciles is that microcaps dominate the equal-weighted
investment eﬀect (e.g., Fama and French (2008)). In contrast, all the common factors are based on
value-weighted returns, on which the impact of microcaps is negligible.
Using value-weighted returns limits the inﬂuence of microcaps. Table C.6 shows that with
61

value-weighted returns, the average return of the high-minus-low decile is only −0.56% per month
(t = −2.80), dropping from −1.49% with equal-weighted returns. The CAPM continues to fail, but
the Fama-French model and the Carhart model explain the value-weighted investment eﬀect. The
high-minus-low alphas are −0.29% and −0.23%, respectively, both of which are insigniﬁcant. The
m.a.e. is 0.13% in the Fama-French model and 0.12% in the Carhart model. The q-factor model
reduces the high-minus-low alpha somewhat to −0.16%, which is within one standard error of zero,
and the m.a.e. is 0.11%, which is comparable to 0.12% in the Carhart model.

C.4

ROE

At the beginning of each month, we sort all stocks into deciles based on the NYSE breakpoints
of the ranked values of ROE. Earnings and other accounting variables in Compustat quarterly
ﬁles are used in the monthly sorts in the months immediately after the most recent public earnings announcement dates (Compustat quarterly item RDQ). We calculate monthly value-weighted
portfolio returns for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly. The measure
of ROE is the same as in Section 2.
Table C.7 shows that high ROE stocks earn higher returns on average than low ROE stocks.
The high-minus-low decile earns an average return of 0.81% per month, which is more than three
standard errors from zero. The CAPM, the Fama-French model, and the Carhart model all fail to
explain the ROE eﬀect, with the high-minus-low alphas of 0.97%, 1.19%, and 0.86%, respectively,
which are close to or more than four standard errors from zero. The m.a.e.’s are 0.18%, 0.25%, and
0.16%, respectively, and the models are all rejected by the GRS test.
The q-factor model seems to outperform the traditional factor models. The high-minus-low alpha is only 0.03% per month (t = 0.25). The m.a.e. is 0.10%, dropping from 0.16% in the Carhart
model. However, the model is still rejected by the GRS test.

D

Alternative Value Portfolios

In Section 3.2, we have shown that the q-factor model performs roughly as well as the Fama-French
model and the Carhart model in explaining the average returns across the 25 size and book-tomarket portfolios. In this appendix, we extend this basic ﬁnding to additional testing portfolios,
which Fama and French (1996) show that their three-factor model does a good job in explaining.

D.1

Market Leverage

Table D.1 reports the results for the market leverage (A/M E) deciles. We measure A/M E as the
ratio of total book assets (Compustat annual item AT) to the market equity (price per share times
number of shares outstanding from CRSP). In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints
to sort NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on A/M E, in which A is total assets for

62

the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1 and M E is the market equity at the end of December
of t − 1. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of year t to June of
year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. The high-minus-low decile earns an average
return of 0.42% per month (t = 1.78). The high-minus-low alpha is 0.40% (t = 1.66) in the CAPM,
which also produces an m.a.e. of 0.21%. The Fama-French model reduces the m.a.e. to 0.11%, but
the high-minus-low alpha becomes signiﬁcantly negative, −0.32% (t = −2.40). The Carhart model
reduces the m.a.e. further to 0.07%, and the high-minus-low alpha is −0.23%, which is insigniﬁcant.
In the q-factor model, the m.a.e. is 0.06%, and the high-minus-low alpha is −0.10%. Also, both
the CAPM and the Fama-French model are rejected by the GRS test, whereas the Carhart model
and the q-factor model are not, with p-values 0.05 and 0.32, respectively.

D.2

Reversal

Table D.2 shows that the q-factor model is again comparable with the Carhart model in explaining
the reversal (prior 13–60 month returns) deciles. At the beginning of each month t, we use the
NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on the prior returns
from month t − 13 to t − 60. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are computed, and the
portfolios are rebalanced monthly. The average return and the alphas for the high-minus-low
deciles are all insigniﬁcant. The m.a.e. is somewhat high, 0.21% per month in the CAPM, but is
largely comparable among the other three models, around 0.11%. Finally, while the CAPM and the
Fama-French model are rejected by the GRS test, the Carhart model and the q-factor model are not.

D.3

Earnings-to-Price

Table D.3 reports the results for the earnings-to-price (E/P ) deciles. In June of each year t, we use
the NYSE breakpoints to split all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles based on E/P ,
calculated as total earnings before extraordinary items (Compustat annual item IB) for the last
ﬁscal year end in t − 1 divided by the market equity at the end of December of year t − 1. Stocks
with negative earnings for the last ﬁscal year end in t − 1 are excluded. We calculate monthly valueweighted portfolio returns from July of year t to June of t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced
in June. Table D.3 shows that high E/P stocks earn higher average returns than low E/P stocks.
The average return spread of 0.58% is more than 2.5 standard errors from zero. The CAPM fails
to explain the E/P eﬀect. The model is rejected by the GRS test, and the high-minus-low alpha
is 0.68% (t = 2.98). Both the Fama-French model and the Carhart model do a good job. The
high-minus-low alphas are both close to zero, and the GRS test fails to reject the models. The
q-factor model also performs well. The high-minus-low alpha is somewhat higher, 0.17%, but is
within one standard error of zero. The model is not rejected by the GRS test either. All three
multifactor models deliver comparable m.a.e.’s, around 0.10%.

63

E

Annually Rebalanced Testing Portfolios on Earnings Surprise,
Idiosyncratic Volatility, Financial Distress, and Momentum

We show that the original earnings surprise, idiosyncratic volatility, ﬁnancial distress, and momentum anomalies vanish, once we change the rebalancing frequency of the testing portfolios from
monthly to annual. We use the breakpoints and weighting schemes of returns following the original
papers that document these anomalies, as in Appendix B. As such, the only diﬀerence in portfolio
construction from Appendix B is that in this appendix, we follow the Fama-French (1993) timing
convention in constructing the testing portfolios with annual sorts.
Speciﬁcally, in June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort all NYSE, Amex, and
NASDAQ stocks into ten deciles based on the ranked values of SU E measured at the ﬁscal yearend
of t − 1. Monthly equal-weighted returns are calculated from July of year t to June of t + 1 and
the portfolios are rebalanced in June. In June of each year t, we use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ
breakpoints to sort all stocks into deciles based on the ranked values of IV OL calculated with the
information up to December of year t − 1. Separately, in June of year t, we use the NYSE-AmexNASDAQ breakpoints to sort all stocks into deciles based on the Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi
(2008) failure probability calculated at the ﬁscal yearend of t − 1. Monthly value-weighted returns
are calculated from July of year t to June of t+1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. Finally,
in June of each year t, we use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to sort all stocks into quintiles
based on the prior returns from July of year t−1 to December of year t−1. Independently, we use the
NYSE breakpoints to sort all stocks into quintiles based on the market equity at the end of December
of year t − 1. Taking intersections, we obtain 25 size and momentum portfolios. Monthly equalweighted returns are calculated from July of year t to June of t+1, and the portfolios are rebalanced
in June. Due to data limitations, we start the sample in July 1972 for the SU E deciles and in July
1976 for the distress deciles. The samples for the IV OL deciles and for the 25 size and momentum
portfolios both start in January 1972, as in the case for most testing portfolios studied in the paper.
Table E.1 shows that none of the annually rebalanced portfolios earn signiﬁcant average returns
or CAPM alphas. All of the high-minus-low average returns and CAPM alphas are within 1.5
standard errors of zero. In particular, Panel D shows that winners with high prior returns earn
insigniﬁcantly lower returns on average than losers with low prior returns. This evidence suggests
that momentum proﬁts are short-lived, consistent with Chan, Jegadeesh, and Lakonishok (1996).

64

Table B.1 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin’s (1984) Standardized Unexpected Earnings (SU E),
Equal-weighted Six-month Holding-period Returns (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
SU E is the change in the most recently announced quarterly earnings per share from its value announced
four quarters ago divided by the standard deviation of the change in quarterly earnings over the prior
eight quarters (at least six quarters). At the beginning of each month t, we rank all NYSE, Amex,
and NASDAQ stocks into deciles by their most recent past SU E with the NYSE breakpoints. Monthly
equal-weighted six-month holding-period returns on the SU E portfolios are calculated from month t to
t + 5, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly. We report mean monthly percent excess returns, the
CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf =
αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH +
bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt +
β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across the
testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses) beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross,
and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly
zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity
and autocorrelations. The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from
Kenneth French’s Web site. See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High

0.51
1.47

0.53
1.66

0.69
2.12

0.76
2.35

0.91
2.83

1.04
3.30

1.07
3.49

1.13
3.76

1.13
3.74

1.24
4.20

α
β
tα

−0.03
1.18
−0.16

0.02
1.14
0.11

0.16
1.15
1.03

0.24
1.15
1.53

0.40
1.15
2.55

0.52
1.14
3.54

0.56
1.13
3.97

0.62
1.13
4.56

0.62
1.13
4.42

0.73
0.76 0.39 0.75
1.13 −0.05 (0.00)
5.46
7.06

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

−0.29 −0.23 −0.09 −0.01
1.06
1.03
1.04
1.03
0.95
0.90
0.91
0.92
0.31
0.30
0.30
0.30
−2.65 −2.65 −1.08 −0.11

0.14
1.04
0.89
0.31
1.76

0.28
1.04
0.85
0.29
3.67

0.34
1.03
0.79
0.27
4.69

0.45
1.01
0.77
0.17
6.76

0.45
1.02
0.76
0.16
6.58

0.59
0.88 0.29 0.92
1.03 −0.04 (0.00)
0.68 −0.28
0.13 −0.18
7.85
8.29

Mean
tMean

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.74
6.24

0.06
0.03
0.14
0.22
0.32
0.42
0.47
0.55
0.52
0.66
0.60 0.34 0.94
αCARH
b
0.99
0.97
0.99
0.99
1.00
1.01
1.01
0.99
1.01
1.01
0.02 (0.00)
s
0.95
0.90
0.91
0.92
0.89
0.85
0.79
0.77
0.76
0.68 −0.28
h
0.19
0.21
0.22
0.22
0.25
0.24
0.22
0.14
0.14
0.11 −0.08
w
−0.37 −0.28 −0.24 −0.24 −0.19 −0.15 −0.13 −0.10 −0.07 −0.07
0.30
tαCARH
0.46
0.31
1.47
2.17
3.81
5.13
5.95
7.27
6.63
7.83
5.27
αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

0.26
0.98
0.73
−0.03
−0.69
1.44
27.30
10.28
−0.20
−6.75

0.19
0.26
0.34
0.40
0.49
0.47
0.55
0.51
0.62
0.36 0.41 0.93
0.96
0.99
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.01
1.00
1.01
1.02
0.03 (0.00)
0.73
0.75
0.74
0.75
0.74
0.71
0.70
0.71
0.65 −0.08
−0.01
0.07
0.09
0.16
0.15
0.17
0.07
0.06
0.03
0.06
−0.53 −0.49 −0.50 −0.40 −0.33 −0.25 −0.20 −0.14 −0.08
0.61
1.26
1.90
2.40
3.57
4.67
4.76
5.59
5.33
5.95
2.80
30.24 34.24 32.92 36.22 38.13 37.65 40.12 43.43 38.27
1.35
10.62 10.86 12.07 11.41 12.22 10.94 13.25 15.62 10.14 −2.10
−0.04
0.66
0.76
1.80
1.88
2.03
0.95
0.81
0.36
0.77
−6.27 −6.54 −6.43 −7.09 −6.13 −4.78 −3.57 −2.47 −1.33
8.01

65

Table B.2 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang’s (2006) Idiosyncratic Volatility (IV OL), All
NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
IV OL is the standard deviation of the residuals from the Fama-French three-factor regression. We form
value-weighted deciles each month by sorting all stocks on their IV OL computed using daily returns over the
previous month (with a minimum of 15 daily observations). We use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints.
We hold the IV OL deciles for one month, and rebalance the portfolios monthly. The data on the one-month
Treasury bill rate (rf ), the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. We report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti −rtf = αi +β i M KTt +it ),
the Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the qfactor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the
alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt
across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption
of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

Mean
tMean

0.51
2.87

0.51
2.52

0.55
2.33

0.55
2.02

0.63
2.05

0.39
1.09

0.39
1.00

α
β
tα

0.18
0.72
2.26

0.11
0.88
1.76

0.08
1.05
1.24

0.02
1.17
0.21

0.05 −0.24 −0.28 −0.68 −0.96 −1.54 −1.73 0.41 0.79
1.29
1.39
1.49
1.58
1.62
1.57
0.85 (0.00)
0.43 −1.55 −1.48 −3.39 −3.77 −4.85 −4.72

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

8

9

High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.03 −0.22 −0.83 −1.34
0.08 −0.48 −1.67 −3.13

0.17
0.11
0.10
0.06
0.13 −0.16 −0.18 −0.60 −0.95 −1.61 −1.77 0.41 0.86
0.78
0.91
1.04
1.11
1.18
1.21
1.27
1.33
1.34
1.29
0.51 (0.00)
−0.23 −0.14 −0.04
0.20
0.34
0.59
0.76
0.89
1.19
1.29
1.51
0.08
0.02 −0.04 −0.13 −0.24 −0.29 −0.39 −0.39 −0.30 −0.17 −0.26
2.43
2.00
1.51
0.72
1.37 −1.41 −1.27 −3.87 −5.00 −6.21 −6.20

0.12
0.11
0.14
0.11
0.16 −0.06 −0.01
αCARH
b
0.79
0.91
1.04
1.10
1.17
1.19
1.23
s
−0.23 −0.14 −0.04
0.20
0.34
0.59
0.76
h
0.10
0.03 −0.05 −0.15 −0.25 −0.32 −0.44
w
0.05
0.01 −0.04 −0.05 −0.03 −0.11 −0.18
tαCARH
1.65
1.92
1.98
1.34
1.72 −0.50 −0.07

−0.40
1.29
0.90
−0.45
−0.21
−2.76

−0.58
1.26
1.19
−0.43
−0.38
−2.72

−1.25
1.21
1.29
−0.30
−0.37
−4.25

−1.37 0.29 0.87
0.42 (0.00)
1.51
−0.40
−0.43
−4.22

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

−0.07
1.29
0.67
−0.77
−0.58
−0.47
30.03
9.25
−5.84
−6.17

−0.12
1.26
0.84
−0.81
−0.97
−0.57
21.19
9.33
−5.29
−6.79

−0.66
1.21
0.86
−0.59
−1.22
−2.30
17.90
7.65
−2.77
−6.56

−0.68 0.18 0.87
0.42 (0.01)
1.03
−0.81
−1.35
−2.08
5.63
8.52
−3.10
−6.09

0.02
0.03
0.13
0.13
0.28
0.14
0.79
0.92
1.04
1.11
1.17
1.20
−0.17 −0.11 −0.05
0.16
0.28
0.44
0.23
0.07 −0.09 −0.25 −0.45 −0.54
0.13
0.10
0.01 −0.03 −0.11 −0.32
0.29
0.55
1.59
1.35
2.77
1.09
46.50 51.75 41.73 43.37 55.92 40.39
−5.48 −3.70 −0.87
3.51
7.50
8.21
3.03
1.21 −1.26 −3.93 −7.00 −6.20
2.54
2.64
0.37 −0.71 −2.08 −4.16

66

0.23
1.24
0.58
−0.73
−0.43
1.46
30.25
8.10
−6.16
−5.03

Table B.3 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi’s (2008) Failure Probability, All NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ
Breakpoints (1/1976–12/2011, 432 Months)
We use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to sort all stocks at the beginning of each month into
deciles on the most recent failure probability. (Appendix A contains detailed the variable deﬁnition.)
Earnings and other accounting variables for a ﬁscal quarter are used in portfolio sorts in the months
immediately after the quarter’s public earnings announcement dates (Compustat quarterly item RDQ).
Monthly value-weighted returns on the portfolios are calculated for the current month, and the portfolios
are rebalanced monthly. The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ), the Fama-French factors,
and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. We report the mean monthly percent
excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the Fama-French three-factor
regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart four-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the q-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e. is the average
magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses) beneath the
m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the alphas across
all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles.
The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption of Table 1 for the
description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

Mean
tMean

0.72
3.11

0.55
2.65

0.61
2.81

0.55
2.48

0.61
2.50

0.55
1.89

0.55
1.72

α
β
tα

0.22
0.89
2.12

0.06
0.88
0.86

0.09
0.93
1.42

0.01
0.97
0.14

0.04 −0.11 −0.15 −0.41 −0.97 −1.23 −1.45 0.33 0.79
1.04
1.17
1.27
1.48
1.68
1.77
0.88 (0.00)
0.45 −0.80 −1.00 −1.99 −3.60 −3.53 −3.77

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

8

High

H−L m.a.e.

0.41 −0.04 −0.24 −0.96
1.05 −0.08 −0.42 −2.07

0.31
0.14
0.15
0.03
0.04 −0.13 −0.20 −0.50 −1.14 −1.61 −1.92 0.43 0.82
0.85
0.88
0.94
0.97
1.03
1.15
1.21
1.36
1.55
1.60
0.75 (0.00)
0.00 −0.13 −0.15 −0.03
0.02
0.15
0.29
0.63
0.77
1.33
1.33
−0.20 −0.12 −0.06 −0.02 −0.02
0.00 −0.02 −0.06
0.06
0.29
0.49
3.07
2.09
2.28
0.37
0.50 −0.99 −1.36 −2.79 −4.97 −5.80 −5.96

0.09
0.01
0.10
0.04
0.20
0.12
0.10 −0.09
αCARH
b
0.89
0.90
0.95
0.97
1.00
1.10
1.15
1.28
s
−0.03 −0.14 −0.16 −0.03
0.04
0.19
0.32
0.69
h
−0.12 −0.07 −0.05 −0.03 −0.08 −0.09 −0.12 −0.20
w
0.25
0.15
0.06 −0.02 −0.18 −0.29 −0.34 −0.47
tαCARH
0.98
0.19
1.56
0.58
2.14
1.05
0.68 −0.59
αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

9

R̄2

Low

0.02
0.89
0.12
−0.20
0.39
0.11
28.87
1.59
−1.44
5.32

−0.13
0.00
0.03
0.27
0.28
0.38
0.93
0.97
0.98
1.00
1.10
1.14
−0.05 −0.11 −0.04 −0.05
0.00
0.09
0.05
0.05
0.02 −0.16 −0.14 −0.34
0.26
0.15 −0.03 −0.21 −0.46 −0.58
−1.63
0.05
0.38
1.95
1.99
2.48
46.78 55.44 53.34 38.52 32.68 32.00
−1.48 −3.49 −1.49 −1.04 −0.03
1.23
0.76
0.99
0.46 −1.55 −1.29 −2.13
6.00
3.98 −0.75 −2.94 −6.57 −7.51

67

0.36
1.25
0.33
−0.51
−0.90
1.89
26.42
2.91
−2.46
−8.62

−0.54 −0.84 −0.93 0.21 0.87
1.44
1.45
0.56 (0.00)
0.85
1.43
1.46
−0.15
0.02
0.14
−0.69 −0.88 −1.14
−3.10 −3.35 −3.29
−0.09
1.42
0.40
−0.36
−1.19
−0.33
21.43
2.16
−1.41
−8.04

−0.26
1.43
0.82
−0.12
−1.64
−0.70
17.55
4.34
−0.39
−6.83

−0.28 0.18 0.86
0.54 (0.00)
0.70
0.08
−2.03
−0.59
5.49
2.80
0.19
−6.98

Table B.4 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Composite Issuance, All NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints and Equal-weighted Returns
(1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
We measure composite issuance as as the growth rate in the market equity not attributable to the stock
return, log (M Et /M Et−5 ) − r(t − 5, t). For June of year t, r(t − 5, t) is the cumulative log return on the
stock from the last trading day of June in year t − 5 to the last trading day of June in year t, and M Et is
the market equity on the last trading day of June in year t from CRSP. In June of each year t, we use the
NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to sort all stocks into deciles on composite issuance for the ﬁscal year
ending in calendar year t − 1. Monthly equal-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of year
t to June of year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. The data on the one-month Treasury
bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web site. We report the mean monthly
percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the Fama-French three-factor
regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart four-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ), and the q-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e. is the average
magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses) beneath the
m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the alphas across
all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles.
The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption of Table 1 for the
description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mean
tMean

1.06
4.42

0.99
4.34

0.92
3.63

1.01
3.71

0.98
3.40

1.02
3.11

1.06
2.96

0.93
2.63

0.75
2.03

α
β
tα

0.67
0.86
5.45

0.60
0.86
5.32

0.50
0.93
4.01

0.56
0.99
4.30

0.51
1.04
3.67

0.50
1.14
3.06

0.49
1.25
2.69

0.35
1.27
2.04

0.16 −0.29 −0.96 0.46 0.73
1.30
1.34
0.48 (0.00)
0.86 −1.28 −4.88

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.35
0.88
0.47
0.53
4.44

0.31
0.88
0.43
0.48
4.74

0.20
0.93
0.54
0.48
2.74

0.29
0.95
0.64
0.40
4.23

0.28
0.96
0.73
0.28
3.78

0.23
1.04
0.88
0.35
2.60

0.25
1.10
1.02
0.25
2.58

0.18
1.11
0.98
0.12
1.77

0.00 −0.49 −0.84 0.26 0.90
1.12
1.15
0.27 (0.00)
1.04
1.17
0.70
0.07
0.13 −0.40
0.04 −3.16 −5.50

0.32 −0.74
0.78 −3.14

0.44
0.38
0.30
0.39
0.44
0.42
0.43
0.35
0.21 −0.20
αCARH
b
0.86
0.87
0.90
0.93
0.92
1.00
1.07
1.08
1.08
1.09
s
0.47
0.43
0.54
0.64
0.73
0.88
1.02
0.98
1.04
1.17
h
0.50
0.46
0.44
0.36
0.22
0.28
0.19
0.07
0.00
0.03
w
−0.10 −0.07 −0.11 −0.10 −0.17 −0.20 −0.19 −0.18 −0.22 −0.30
tαCARH
5.10
5.59
4.15
5.14
5.16
4.38
3.94
3.08
1.96 −1.19

−0.64 0.36 0.91
0.22 (0.00)
0.70
−0.47
−0.21
−3.79

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

−0.28 0.36 0.90
0.23 (0.00)
0.47
−0.75
−0.63
−1.40
4.56
7.34
−5.31
−4.94

0.36
0.25
0.20
0.35
0.46
0.46
0.58
0.47
0.85
0.87
0.90
0.91
0.93
1.00
1.05
1.08
0.44
0.43
0.53
0.61
0.62
0.75
0.87
0.83
0.55
0.53
0.44
0.29
0.16
0.20 −0.04 −0.08
−0.13 −0.03 −0.07 −0.13 −0.29 −0.37 −0.42 −0.42
3.39
2.80
1.69
3.25
3.45
3.75
4.26
3.44
26.88 32.90 28.54 37.46 31.38 29.58 29.41 33.98
5.88
6.57
6.54 11.31
9.32
9.18 11.13 13.35
6.51
7.80
4.63
3.40
1.45
2.09 −0.41 −0.79
−1.97 −0.65 −1.14 −2.18 −3.98 −5.51 −5.66 −5.52

68

0.37
1.08
0.86
−0.16
−0.51
2.70
32.10
14.02
−1.63
−6.38

0.08
1.08
0.91
−0.20
−0.76
0.42
23.15
11.05
−1.38
−6.55

Table B.5 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Abnormal Corporate Investment, All NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints, Equal-weighted
Returns (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
We measure abnormal corporate investment (ACI) that applies for the portfolio formation year t, as
ACIt−1 ≡ 3CEt−1 /(CEt−2 + CEt−3 + CEt−4 ) − 1, in which CEt−1 is capital expenditure (Compustat
annual item CAPX) scaled by its sales (item SALE) in year t − 1. In June of each year t, we use the
NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to sort all stocks into deciles on ACI for the ﬁscal year ending in
calendar year t − 1. Monthly equal-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of year t to June
of year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate
(rf ), the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. We report
the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the
Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ), and the
q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the
alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt
across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption
of Table 1 for the description of rA/A , rROE , and rME .
High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mean
tMean

1.08
3.01

1.02
3.12

0.98
3.25

0.97
3.38

0.95
3.34

0.87
3.18

0.89
3.23

0.89
3.06

0.87
2.91

0.69 −0.39
2.12 −4.01

α
β
tα

0.55
1.17
2.78

0.51
1.12
2.93

0.47
1.11
3.32

0.48
1.07
3.54

0.47
1.06
3.64

0.40
1.04
3.45

0.40
1.07
3.48

0.39
1.11
3.09

0.37
1.12
2.65

0.18 −0.38 0.42 0.76
1.14 −0.03 (0.00)
1.08 −4.02

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.25
1.05
1.04
0.38
2.06

0.22
1.02
0.91
0.36
2.59

0.23
1.03
0.79
0.30
3.13

0.24
1.00
0.71
0.32
3.35

0.22
1.02
0.62
0.35
3.11

0.16
0.99
0.62
0.33
2.78

0.17
1.03
0.57
0.33
2.39

0.16
1.05
0.63
0.32
2.22

0.13 −0.06 −0.31 0.19 0.91
1.03
1.04 −0.01 (0.00)
0.76
0.85 −0.20
0.31
0.29 −0.09
1.70 −0.68 −3.30

0.43
0.33
0.42
0.38
0.37
0.28
0.33
0.32
0.29
0.16 −0.28 0.33 0.93
αCARH
b
1.01
1.00
0.99
0.97
0.99
0.97
1.00
1.02
1.00
0.99 −0.02 (0.00)
s
1.04
0.91
0.79
0.71
0.62
0.62
0.57
0.63
0.76
0.85 −0.20
h
0.32
0.32
0.23
0.28
0.30
0.29
0.28
0.26
0.25
0.21 −0.10
w
−0.20 −0.11 −0.19 −0.14 −0.15 −0.12 −0.16 −0.16 −0.17 −0.23 −0.03
tαCARH
3.10
3.35
5.50
4.66
4.63
5.23
4.59
4.38
3.67
1.52 −2.68
αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

0.52
0.36
0.43
0.36
0.34
0.25
0.29
0.27
0.32
0.22 −0.30 0.34 0.92
1.01
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.98
0.96
1.00
1.02
0.99
0.99 −0.01 (0.00)
0.88
0.81
0.68
0.63
0.56
0.57
0.52
0.57
0.68
0.71 −0.17
0.23
0.24
0.14
0.24
0.24
0.23
0.23
0.21
0.12
0.10 −0.13
−0.44 −0.26 −0.29 −0.22 −0.19 −0.16 −0.19 −0.19 −0.27 −0.40
0.03
2.57
2.75
3.30
2.98
3.10
3.08
2.80
2.66
3.06
1.51 −2.49
22.55 29.83 31.20 37.49 34.09 38.79 40.51 36.05 34.37 28.56 −0.48
9.33
9.17
8.19 10.69
7.31
8.68
7.53
7.71
8.85
8.52 −3.70
1.36
2.06
1.28
2.53
2.61
3.26
2.66
2.57
1.34
0.88 −1.46
−3.96 −3.70 −4.01 −3.42 −3.28 −3.50 −3.58 −3.21 −4.74 −4.98
0.44

69

Table B.6 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Total Accruals, All NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints, Equal-weighted Returns
(1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
Following Sloan (1996), we measure total accruals (T AC) as changes in noncash working capital minus
depreciation expense scaled by average total assets (Compustat annual item AT) in the prior two years. The
noncash working capital is the change in noncash current assets minus the change in current liabilities less
short-term debt and taxes payable. Speciﬁcally, T AC ≡ (CA−CASH)−(CL−ST D−T P )−DP ,
in which CA is the change in current assets (item ACT), CASH is the change in cash or cash equivalents
(item CHE), CL is the change in current liabilities (item LCT), ST D is the change in debt included
in current liabilities (item DLC), T P is the change in income taxes payable (item TXP), and DP is
depreciation and amortization expense (item DP). In June of each year t, we use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ
breakpoints to sort all stocks into deciles on total accruals scaled by average total assets for the ﬁscal year
ending in calendar year t − 1. Monthly equal-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of year
t to June of year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. The data on the one-month Treasury
bill rate (rf ), the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. We
report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the
Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ), and the
q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the
alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt
across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption
of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mean
tMean

1.21
2.84

0.99
2.92

1.12
3.56

1.06
3.55

0.95
3.30

0.90
3.13

0.83
2.75

0.84
2.63

0.80
2.39

α
β
tα

0.62
1.30
2.39

0.47
1.16
2.59

0.62
1.11
3.96

0.56
1.09
3.95

0.49
1.03
3.55

0.43
1.05
3.23

0.34
1.09
2.32

0.33
1.13
2.17

0.26 −0.16 −0.78 0.43 0.71
1.20
1.29 −0.01 (0.00)
1.56 −0.77 −5.42

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.41
1.09
1.24
0.12
2.37

0.23
1.04
0.92
0.27
2.06

0.38
1.02
0.81
0.28
4.30

0.33
1.00
0.77
0.29
4.33

0.25
0.96
0.73
0.32
3.07

0.18
0.98
0.75
0.31
2.78

0.11
0.98
0.85
0.26
1.62

0.13
1.00
0.88
0.18
1.75

0.09 −0.35 −0.76 0.25 0.90
1.04
1.10
0.01 (0.00)
0.96
1.12 −0.12
0.10
0.11
0.00
1.12 −2.74 −5.00

0.42 −0.78
1.08 −5.31

0.67
0.44
0.55
0.49
0.40
0.33
0.26
0.28
0.27 −0.08
αCARH
b
1.04
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.92
0.95
0.95
0.97
1.00
1.04
s
1.24
0.92
0.81
0.77
0.73
0.75
0.85
0.88
0.96
1.12
h
0.03
0.20
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.26
0.21
0.13
0.04
0.02
w
−0.27 −0.22 −0.18 −0.17 −0.16 −0.15 −0.15 −0.16 −0.19 −0.28
tαCARH
3.27
3.43
5.34
5.86
4.64
4.62
3.42
3.28
3.14 −0.53

−0.75 0.38 0.91
0.01 (0.00)
−0.12
−0.01
−0.02
−4.70

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

−0.92 0.47 0.91
−0.01 (0.00)
0.02
−0.24
0.39
−5.57
−0.27
0.31
−2.27
4.45

0.99
0.56
0.63
0.54
0.45
0.39
0.32
1.04
1.00
0.98
0.97
0.92
0.94
0.94
0.92
0.73
0.66
0.65
0.63
0.64
0.75
−0.09
0.15
0.19
0.21
0.19
0.17
0.05
−0.84 −0.52 −0.42 −0.36 −0.32 −0.32 −0.28
4.14
3.59
5.19
5.14
4.51
4.34
2.97
20.02 28.48 33.02 38.04 38.48 35.79 39.11
10.29
9.90 11.90 11.49 11.16 12.04 15.30
−0.53
1.22
2.16
2.68
2.74
2.52
0.56
−5.85 −6.00 −5.81 −6.43 −6.69 −6.42 −4.86

70

0.36
0.97
0.77
−0.04
−0.30
3.26
35.34
12.92
−0.47
−4.93

0.37
1.00
0.83
−0.17
−0.34
2.85
31.46
12.53
−1.60
−5.09

0.07
1.04
0.95
−0.33
−0.44
0.31
22.07
8.83
−1.86
−3.74

Table B.7 : Descriptive Statistics for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of 25 Size and
Momentum Portfolios, All NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints for Momentum,
Equal-weighted Returns (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
At the beginning of month t, we use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to split all NYSE, Amex, and
NASDAQ stocks into quintiles based on their prior six-month returns from month t − 2 to t − 7 (skipping
month t−1). Independently, in June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split on NYSE, Amex,
and NASDAQ stocks into quintiles based on market equity observed at the end of June. Taking intersections,
we form 25 size and momentum portfolios, and we calculate equal-weighted returns for the portfolios from
month t to t+5. We report mean percent excess returns, the CAPM alphas (α), the intercepts (αF F ) from the
Fama-French three-factor regressions, and the intercepts (αCARH ) from the Carhart four-factor regressions,
as well as t-statistics adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. For each factor model, we report
the mean absolute error (m.a.e., the average magnitude of the alphas) across the testing portfolios, the
average goodness-of-ﬁt (R̄2 ) across the testing portfolios, and the p-value (pGRS ) from the Gibbons, Ross,
and Shanken (1989) test on the null that the alphas of all the portfolios are jointly zero. The data for the
one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web site.
Loser

2

3

4 Winner

W−L

Loser

2

0.06
0.10
0.17
0.31
0.08

0.60
0.62
0.59
0.52
0.42

0.79
0.73
0.70
0.64
0.45

0.94
0.81
0.74
0.67
0.52

1.18
0.99
0.95
0.84
0.75

1.13
0.89
0.79
0.54
0.68

0.16
0.28
0.46
0.88
0.23

−0.48
0.16
−0.52
0.11
−0.46
0.09
−0.31
0.03
−0.49 −0.04

0.37
0.24
0.21
0.18
0.02

0.49
0.31
0.26
0.19
0.09

0.63
0.40
0.38
0.29
0.24

1.12
0.92
0.84
0.59
0.73

−0.73
−0.68
−0.59
−0.37
−0.48

−0.10
0.12
−0.12
0.01
−0.12
0.02
−0.12
0.03
−0.09 −0.02

0.28
0.13
0.12
0.10
0.09

0.04
0.10
0.17
0.18
0.22

0.17
0.21
0.09
0.08
0.12
0.03
0.13
0.03
0.09 −0.01

2.86
2.64
2.67
2.69
2.13

3.26
2.92
2.86
2.76
2.43

3.39
2.97
3.01
2.70
2.60

7.08
4.94
3.59
2.25
2.71

2.35
1.85
2.00
2.00
0.38

3.05
2.43
2.48
2.33
1.65

3.20
2.45
2.64
1.92
1.77

7.46
5.36
4.02
2.61
2.92

tαF F (R̄2 = 0.88, pGRS = 0)
0.54
0.37
0.38
0.35
0.36

1.27
1.05
0.97
0.72
0.84

−7.18
−5.49
−3.67
−2.27
−2.65

−1.28
1.69
−1.32
0.18
−1.25
0.21
−1.13
0.42
−0.96 −0.24

4.39
2.21
1.89
1.51
1.48

5.48
3.76
3.78
2.66
2.78

8.51
6.02
4.61
3.04
3.28

tαCARH (R̄2 = 0.93, pGRS = 0)

αCARH (m.a.e. = 0.11)
Small −0.37
2
−0.20
3
0.05
4
0.29
Big
0.16

2.06
2.09
2.07
1.94
1.72

−2.65
0.98
−2.93
0.75
−2.49
0.69
−1.81
0.23
−2.84 −0.50

αF F (m.a.e. = 0.22)
Small
2
3
4
Big

W−L

tα (R̄2 = 0.78, pGRS = 0)

α (m.a.e. = 0.26)
Small
2
3
4
Big

4 Winner

tMean

Mean
Small
2
3
4
Big

3

0.31
0.68
0.11
0.31
0.11
0.06
0.02 −0.27
0.03 −0.13

71

−3.96
−2.13
0.41
2.43
1.30

0.58
1.28
2.29
2.14
3.47

2.28
3.21
1.27
1.19
1.66
0.52
1.57
0.34
1.34 −0.15

3.50
7.33
1.31
2.95
1.19
0.45
0.18 −1.95
0.26 −0.90

Table B.8 : Q-factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of 25 Size and
Momentum Portfolios, All NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints for Momentum,
Equal-weighted Returns (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
At the beginning of month t, we use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to split all NYSE, Amex, and
NASDAQ stocks into quintiles based on their prior six-month returns from month t − 2 to t − 7 (skipping
month t − 1). Independently, in June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split on NYSE,
Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into quintiles based on market equity observed at the end of June. Taking
intersections, we form 25 size and momentum portfolios, and we calculate equal-weighted returns for the
portfolios from month t to t+5. We report the q-factor regressions: rti −rtf = αiq +β iMKT M KTt +β iME rME,t +
β iA/A rA/A,t +β iROE rROE,t +it . See Table 1 for the description of rA/A , rROE , and rME . The t-statistics
are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across
the testing portfolios. FGRS and pGRS are the test statistic and its p-value from the Gibbons, Ross, and
Shanken (1989) test on the null that the alphas of all the testing portfolios are jointly zero. The data for
the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web site.
Loser

2

3

4 Winner

W−L

Loser

0.03
0.14
0.24
0.01
0.00
0.03
0.06
0.02 −0.02
0.07 −0.01 −0.05
0.08 −0.03 −0.03

0.99
1.14
1.16
1.19
1.16

0.85
1.00
1.03
1.06
1.03

0.82
0.98
1.01
1.01
0.98

0.85
0.99
1.00
1.03
0.98

0.46
0.76
0.19
0.34
0.19
0.07
0.18 −0.13
0.26
0.08

−1.65
−0.72
0.47
1.28
0.82

0.27
1.39
2.89
0.11
0.02
0.40
0.46
0.18 −0.22
0.53 −0.11 −0.65
0.63 −0.38 −0.59

0.89
0.80
0.59
0.31
0.02

1.01
1.13
1.12
1.11
1.07

0.02
−0.01
−0.04
−0.09
−0.09

24.52
26.20
22.42
19.93
21.14

26.94
34.94
29.18
28.99
35.41

−0.08
−0.31
−0.46
−0.34
−0.43

0.13
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.05

0.18
0.16
0.17
0.23
0.11

0.10
0.10
0.09
0.12
0.07

1.08
0.97
0.77
0.56
0.25

0.26
0.23
0.26
0.39
0.43

−0.52
−0.60
−0.73
−0.76
−0.64

−0.21 −0.09 −0.02
−0.20 −0.02
0.07
−0.21 −0.01
0.14
−0.21
0.03
0.16
−0.17
0.02
0.13

27.56
40.11
33.52
34.94
49.10

8.55 10.19 11.55
6.11
8.69 10.58
3.80
4.53
5.67
1.30
1.67
3.11
−1.73 −1.89 −1.38

32.47
43.48
43.44
43.39
56.67

33.77
41.52
35.02
26.44
29.38

0.42
−0.20
−0.57
−1.00
−1.15

20.74
16.47
12.30
6.97
0.84

21.88
21.12
15.04
6.20
2.83

2.19
1.64
1.54
1.76
2.35

tβA/A
−0.20 −0.12
−0.29
0.02
−0.29
0.16
−0.32
0.02
−0.39
0.05

−0.49
−1.72
−2.16
−1.73
−2.60

β ROE
Small
2
3
4
Big

3.60
3.49
1.66
1.31
1.46
0.21
1.05 −0.38
1.60
0.22

tβ M E

β A/A
Small
2
3
4
Big

W−L

tβ M KT

β ME
Small
0.82
0.80
0.82
2
0.74
0.74
0.74
3
0.51
0.48
0.49
4
0.18
0.17
0.24
Big
−0.18 −0.14 −0.07

4 Winner

tαq (R̄ = 0.89, pGRS = 0)

β MKT
Small
2
3
4
Big

3
2

αq (m.a.e. = 0.13)
Small −0.30
2
−0.15
3
0.12
4
0.31
Big
0.19

2

1.20
0.99
0.84
0.94
0.45

1.96
2.12
2.06
2.86
1.76

1.49
2.07
1.87
2.35
1.83

−2.21 −0.71
−4.20
0.08
−3.45
0.62
−2.83
0.07
−3.40
0.18

tβ ROE
0.02
0.19
0.24
0.21
0.17

0.55
0.79
0.97
0.97
0.82

72

−5.30
−5.23
−4.99
−5.48
−5.76

−3.44 −1.74 −0.44
−3.33 −0.49
2.17
−2.73 −0.22
3.63
−3.08
0.51
3.77
−2.76
0.51
3.76

0.26
2.73
3.38
2.65
2.11

4.39
5.49
5.19
5.15
4.94

Table C.1 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of One-way Momentum
Deciles (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
At the beginning of each month t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ
stocks into deciles based on their prior six-month returns from month t − 2 to t − 7. Skipping month
t − 1, we calculate monthly value-weighted returns for the portfolios from month t to t + 5. We report
the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the
Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the
q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the GRS test on the null that the alphas across all the deciles from
a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics
are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ),
the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. See the caption
of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

0.00
0.00

0.27
0.97

0.43
1.76

0.50
2.25

0.44
2.12

0.45
2.25

0.49
2.39

0.54
2.50

0.64
2.71

0.87
2.74

α
β
tα

−0.61 −0.23 −0.03
1.35
1.09
1.00
−3.50 −1.93 −0.30

0.07
0.94
0.99

0.03
0.92
0.45

0.04
0.90
0.85

0.08
0.90
1.69

0.12
0.93
1.93

0.18
1.02
2.34

0.32 0.93 0.17 0.86
1.21 −0.14 (0.00)
2.17 3.59

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

−0.68 −0.28 −0.08
0.03 −0.01
0.01
0.06
0.12
0.21
1.28
1.09
1.03
0.98
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.94
1.00
0.41
0.08 −0.02 −0.06 −0.06 −0.08 −0.08 −0.03
0.04
0.06
0.09
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.01 −0.07
−4.28 −2.34 −0.90
0.42 −0.22
0.23
1.03
1.79
2.71

0.44 1.13 0.19 0.88
1.07 −0.22 (0.00)
0.37 −0.04
−0.34 −0.39
3.33 4.42

αCARH
b
s
h
w
tαCARH

−0.02
0.17
0.25
0.24
0.11
0.04 −0.01 −0.04 −0.04
1.14
1.00
0.96
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.94
0.98
1.05
0.41
0.08 −0.02 −0.06 −0.06 −0.08 −0.08 −0.03
0.04
−0.18 −0.07 −0.01
0.02
0.06
0.07
0.09
0.07
0.02
−0.70 −0.47 −0.34 −0.22 −0.13 −0.02
0.07
0.17
0.26
−0.21
2.41
4.17
4.21
1.73
0.60 −0.17 −0.69 −0.65

0.03 0.05 0.10 0.94
1.15 0.01 (0.00)
0.37 −0.04
−0.19 −0.02
0.43 1.13
0.33 0.44

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

0.01
1.19
0.16
−0.34
−0.75
0.06
24.06
1.49
−2.41
−6.02

Mean
tMean

0.07
1.04
−0.04
−0.09
−0.36
0.39
25.57
−0.50
−0.75
−4.11

0.11
1.00
−0.08
0.01
−0.20
0.94
35.66
−1.22
0.15
−2.96

9 Winner W−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Loser

0.11
0.00 −0.07 −0.10 −0.10 −0.04
0.96
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.97
1.03
−0.08 −0.06 −0.05 −0.02
0.04
0.12
0.07
0.09
0.14
0.16
0.12
0.02
−0.09
0.00
0.09
0.15
0.23
0.28
1.22 −0.06 −1.20 −1.63 −1.54 −0.44
40.66 42.32 48.78 54.78 54.32 38.53
−1.73 −1.15 −1.27 −0.58
1.62
3.19
0.93
1.55
3.03
3.95
2.78
0.24
−1.49
0.03
2.48
4.44
6.69
5.11

73

0.24
1.10
0.43
−0.41
0.28
1.31
27.01
4.69
−3.16
3.27

0.87
3.15

0.23 0.09 0.89
−0.09 (0.00)
0.27
−0.06
1.03
0.65
−1.10
1.44
−0.26
5.40

Table C.2 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of One-way Momentum
Deciles, All NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints, Equal-weighted Returns (1/1972–12/2011,
480 Months)
At the beginning of each month t, we use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to split all NYSE, Amex,
and NASDAQ stocks into deciles based on their prior six-month returns from month t − 2 to t − 7. Skipping
month t − 1, we calculate monthly equal-weighted returns for the portfolios from month t to t + 5. We
report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the
Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the
q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the GRS test on the null that the alphas across all the deciles from
a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics
are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ),
the Fama-French factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. See the caption
of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
9 Winner W−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Loser

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Mean
tMean

−0.17
−0.44

0.31
0.97

0.50
1.74

0.62
2.30

0.66
2.57

0.72
2.86

0.73
2.88

0.85
3.18

0.93
3.13

1.15
3.16

α
β
tα

−0.81 −0.23
1.41
1.18
−4.20 −1.61

0.01
1.08
0.08

0.15
1.03
1.31

0.21
1.00
1.86

0.27
1.00
2.53

0.28
1.01
2.58

0.37
1.06
3.25

0.41
1.14
2.98

0.55
1.36 0.33 0.78
1.34 −0.08 (0.00)
2.88
6.37

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

−0.94 −0.41 −0.19 −0.05
1.25
1.09
1.02
0.97
0.92
0.73
0.65
0.59
0.05
0.20
0.26
0.28
−6.65 −4.20 −2.32 −0.77

0.01
0.95
0.57
0.27
0.11

0.09
0.93
0.59
0.24
1.49

0.11
0.93
0.62
0.19
2.27

0.24
0.33
0.95
0.99
0.68
0.81
0.11 −0.02
4.72
4.76

0.56
1.50 0.29 0.92
1.09 −0.16 (0.00)
1.01
0.09
−0.25 −0.31
4.59
6.89

αCARH
b
s
h
w
tαCARH

−0.32 −0.02
0.08
0.12
0.12
0.12
1.12
1.00
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.93
0.93
0.73
0.65
0.60
0.57
0.59
−0.16
0.06
0.16
0.22
0.23
0.22
−0.65 −0.42 −0.29 −0.19 −0.12 −0.04
−2.57 −0.24
1.38
2.07
2.03
2.04

0.07
0.94
0.62
0.20
0.04
1.35

0.12
0.97
0.68
0.15
0.12
2.45

0.23
1.16
1.01
−0.14
0.34
2.42

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

−0.17
1.15
0.62
−0.46
−0.85
−0.64
23.40
4.70
−2.01
−5.48

0.11
1.03
0.81
0.06
0.23
1.95

−0.01
0.03
0.05
0.03
0.06 0.03 0.13
0.20
1.02
0.97
0.94
0.93
0.92 0.93 0.96
1.00
0.57
0.56
0.55
0.55
0.59 0.62 0.69
0.82
−0.11
0.05
0.14
0.17
0.15 0.13 0.06 −0.09
−0.46 −0.27 −0.15 −0.06 −0.01 0.05 0.08
0.10
−0.07
0.19
0.46
0.33
0.81 0.55 2.21
2.33
28.87 31.70 35.19 35.75 39.02 44.38 45.34 43.01
5.41
5.95
6.79
7.08
9.34 13.40 21.20 22.91
−0.78
0.49
1.59
2.19
2.44 2.91 1.36 −1.66
−5.42 −4.15 −3.10 −1.48 −0.22 1.62 2.27
1.78

74

1.32
5.89

0.56 0.13 0.96
0.04 (0.00)
0.09
0.02
0.99
4.15

0.44
0.61 0.11 0.93
1.12 −0.03 (0.00)
1.01
0.39
−0.39
0.08
0.11
0.96
2.83
1.76
33.63 −0.44
14.14
2.15
−4.20
0.28
1.21
5.01

Table C.3 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of One-way
Book-to-Market Deciles (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
Book equity is stockholders’ book equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax credit
(Compustat annual item TXDITC) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock. The stockholders’
equity is the value reported by Compustat (item SEQ), if it is available. If not, we measure stockholders’
equity as the book value of common equity (item CEQ) plus the par value of preferred stock (item PSTK),
or the book value of assets (item AT) minus total liabilities (item LT). Depending on availability, we use
redemption (item PSTKRV), liquidating (item PSTKL), or par value (item PSTK) for the book value
of preferred stock. In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex,
and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on book-to-market equity. Book-to-market for June of year t is the
book equity for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1 divided by the market equity at the end of
December of t − 1. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated from July of year t to June
of t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced at the end of June. We report the mean monthly percent
excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the Fama-French three-factor
regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart four-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the q-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e. is the average
magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses) beneath the
m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the GRS test on the null that the alphas across all the deciles from a given factor
model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ), the Fama-French
factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. See the caption of Table 1 for the
description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High

0.30
1.15

0.49
2.12

0.54
2.39

0.51
2.09

0.59
2.76

0.66
3.00

0.65
3.02

0.70
3.15

0.73
3.12

0.98
3.54

α
β
tα

−0.18
1.06
−1.75

0.04
1.00
0.54

0.10
0.98
1.22

0.05
1.00
0.59

0.18
0.91
1.81

0.24
0.92
2.75

0.26
0.85
2.41

0.32
0.84
2.71

0.34
0.87
2.51

0.54
0.72 0.23 0.80
0.96 −0.10 (0.03)
3.03
2.88

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.10
0.13
0.12 −0.05
0.09
0.99
0.97
0.97
1.03
0.95
−0.17 −0.02
0.02
0.08 −0.02
−0.53 −0.17 −0.04
0.20
0.20
1.54
1.81
1.40 −0.59
0.90

0.13
0.95
0.07
0.22
1.44

0.02
0.93
0.11
0.46
0.27

0.03 −0.01
0.93
0.96
0.15
0.21
0.56
0.65
0.32 −0.11

0.07 −0.03 0.07 0.87
1.06
0.07 (0.15)
0.41
0.57
0.86
1.39
0.59 −0.19

αCARH
b
s
h
w
tαCARH

0.11
0.13
0.10 −0.07
0.06
0.98
0.97
0.97
1.03
0.96
−0.17 −0.02
0.02
0.08 −0.02
−0.53 −0.17 −0.04
0.20
0.20
−0.01 −0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
1.63
1.84
1.22 −0.81
0.64

0.10
0.04 −0.01
0.03
0.08 −0.03 0.07 0.87
0.96
0.92
0.93
0.96
1.06
0.07 (0.22)
0.07
0.11
0.15
0.21
0.41
0.57
0.22
0.45
0.57
0.64
0.86
1.39
0.03 −0.02
0.04 −0.04 −0.01
0.00
1.16
0.45 −0.09
0.28
0.63 −0.19

Mean
tMean

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

0.03
1.02
−0.13
−0.59
0.18
0.38
48.71
−4.01
−12.27
4.70

−0.03 −0.01 −0.17 −0.02
0.15
0.10
0.03
0.12
0.22
1.00
0.99
1.02
0.96
0.94
0.89
0.89
0.91
1.00
0.02
0.06
0.13
0.00
0.05
0.09
0.17
0.17
0.32
−0.09
0.02
0.25
0.36
0.27
0.46
0.60
0.65
0.90
0.16
0.13
0.10
0.03 −0.10 −0.15 −0.09 −0.24 −0.33
−0.33 −0.07 −1.84 −0.24
1.67
0.96
0.30
1.07
1.47
53.76 34.28 36.38 32.13 38.33 33.92 33.17 34.03 27.06
0.69
1.78
3.29 −0.05
1.50
1.74
3.25
3.34
4.73
−1.71
0.28
3.33
4.98
4.60
4.62
5.98
7.25
9.52
3.67
2.69
1.63
0.47 −2.16 −2.05 −1.36 −3.25 −5.12

75

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.68
2.73

0.19 0.09 0.84
−0.02 (0.24)
0.44
1.49
−0.51
0.98
−0.36
5.11
12.39
−5.90

Table C.4 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of One-way
Investment-to-Assets (A/A) Deciles (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
A/A is annual change in total assets (Compustat annual item AT) divided by lagged total assets. In
June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into
deciles on A/A for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns
are calculated from July of year t to June of t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. We report
the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the
Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart
four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the
q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e.
is the average magnitude of the alphas across the deciles. The numbers (in parentheses) are the p-values
for the GRS test on the null that the alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly
zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity
and autocorrelations. The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from
Kenneth French’s Web site. See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High

Mean
tMean

0.69
2.41

0.72
3.13

0.65
3.23

0.54
2.69

0.52
2.59

0.56
2.64

0.52
2.43

0.51
2.24

0.49
1.84

0.28
0.91

α
β
tα

0.19
1.09
1.53

0.29
0.95
3.06

0.26
0.86
2.81

0.16
0.83
1.91

0.14
0.85
1.81

0.15
0.90
1.84

0.10
0.92
1.37

0.06
1.00
0.81

−0.01
1.12
−0.12

−0.30
1.27
−2.65

−0.49 0.17 0.84
0.18 (0.00)
−2.75

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.02
1.08
0.33
0.26
0.22

0.15 0.14 0.11 0.07 0.10 0.13 0.17
0.99 0.93 0.86 0.89 0.94 0.96 0.98
0.09 −0.06 −0.04 −0.05 −0.11 −0.20 −0.09
0.26 0.27 0.12 0.14 0.14 −0.01 −0.21
1.74 1.50 1.28 0.99 1.34 1.73 2.46

0.19
1.02
0.05
−0.42
2.21

−0.12
1.15
0.19
−0.40
−1.39

−0.14 0.12 0.87
0.07 (0.00)
−0.14
−0.67
−0.98

0.00 0.23 0.09 0.11 0.06 0.06 0.08 0.14
αCARH
b
1.09 0.97 0.94 0.86 0.89 0.95 0.97 0.98
s
0.33 0.09 −0.07 −0.04 −0.05 −0.11 −0.20 −0.09
h
0.27 0.23 0.29 0.12 0.14 0.15 0.01 −0.20
w
0.03 −0.08 0.05 0.00 0.01 0.03 0.05 0.04
tαCARH −0.02 2.56 0.92 1.32 0.80 0.83 1.05 1.88

0.17
1.03
0.05
−0.42
0.02
1.97

−0.08
1.14
0.19
−0.42
−0.05
−0.87

−0.07 0.10 0.87
0.05 (0.02)
−0.14
−0.69
−0.07
−0.46

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

−0.12
1.12
0.29
0.62
−0.11
−1.06
41.75
5.48
9.93
−2.14

0.04
1.03
0.04
0.64
−0.14
0.50
45.59
1.04
12.24
−2.96

−0.14
0.97
−0.03
0.66
0.12
−1.59
38.03
−0.60
10.25
2.47

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

−0.41
−2.32

0.03 0.01 −0.06 0.03 0.11
0.36
0.02
0.14 0.09 0.89
0.87 0.89 0.96 0.96 0.99
1.01
1.14
0.02 (0.01)
−0.03 −0.04 −0.05 −0.15 −0.05
0.03
0.16 −0.13
0.29 0.27 0.26 0.05 −0.31 −0.81 −0.73 −1.35
−0.02 0.00 0.14 0.13 0.18
0.05
0.03
0.14
0.33 0.08 −0.74 0.33 1.57
3.72
0.24
1.03
37.10 41.02 50.35 48.76 44.01 52.01 36.81
0.57
−0.47 −1.14 −1.54 −5.36 −1.44
0.64
3.14 −1.93
4.82 5.35 3.86 0.72 −6.44 −10.79 −11.61 −15.01
−0.40 0.07 2.53 3.05 4.93
1.51
0.59
2.06

76

Table C.5 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of One-way
Investment-to-Assets (A/A) Deciles, All NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints,
Equal-weighted Returns (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
A/A is annual change in total assets (Compustat annual item AT) divided by lagged total assets. In
June of each year t, we use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to split stocks into deciles on A/A
for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Monthly equal-weighted portfolio returns are calculated
from July of year t to June of t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. We report the mean
monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the Fama-French
three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart four-factor
regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the q-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e. is the average
magnitude of the alphas across the deciles. The numbers (in parentheses) are the p-values for the GRS test
on the null that the alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average
goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations.
The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mean
tMean

1.53
3.18

1.30
3.46

1.19
3.75

1.05
3.72

0.99
3.58

0.93
3.37

0.82
2.90

0.79
2.59

0.50
1.48

α
β
tα

0.94
1.31
2.92

0.79
1.13
3.46

0.71
1.06
4.20

0.59
1.00
4.30

0.54
1.00
4.06

0.46
1.03
3.63

0.33
1.07
2.66

0.27 −0.06 −0.59 −1.53 0.53 0.71
1.14
1.25
1.41
0.10 (0.00)
2.01 −0.40 −2.96 −6.92

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.67
1.07
1.50
0.20
2.91

0.50
0.98
1.16
0.32
3.50

0.39
0.99
0.83
0.45
4.17

0.32
0.94
0.71
0.38
4.36

0.27
0.95
0.69
0.37
4.23

0.25
0.95
0.69
0.26
3.74

0.14
0.98
0.72
0.22
2.33

0.10 −0.19 −0.69 −1.35 0.35 0.89
1.03
1.10
1.21
0.14 (0.00)
0.77
0.85
1.01 −0.49
0.16
0.06 −0.05 −0.25
1.48 −2.10 −5.03 −6.12

0.04 −1.49
0.11 −6.65

0.95
0.70
0.58
0.46
0.41
0.35
0.25
0.24
0.01 −0.35 −1.30 0.43 0.90
αCARH
b
1.01
0.94
0.95
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.13
0.13 (0.00)
s
1.50
1.16
0.83
0.71
0.69
0.69
0.72
0.77
0.85
1.01 −0.49
h
0.10
0.25
0.38
0.34
0.32
0.23
0.18
0.11 −0.01 −0.17 −0.27
w
−0.30 −0.21 −0.20 −0.14 −0.14 −0.10 −0.12 −0.15 −0.22 −0.35 −0.06
tαCARH
3.64
4.25
5.07
5.67
5.73
4.86
3.92
3.45
0.15 −2.56 −5.95
αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

1.34
0.89
0.62
0.46
0.40
0.36
0.29
1.02
0.94
0.96
0.92
0.91
0.92
0.94
1.12
0.92
0.68
0.61
0.62
0.62
0.65
0.05
0.24
0.43
0.38
0.28
0.13
0.00
−1.07 −0.68 −0.46 −0.31 −0.23 −0.18 −0.17
4.61
4.75
4.29
4.53
3.83
3.77
3.42
17.64 26.46 28.71 34.82 36.92 42.03 40.41
12.57 15.46
8.19
9.74 11.19 13.85 11.68
0.27
1.69
3.68
4.43
3.53
1.82
0.01
−6.88 −6.68 −5.59 −5.64 −4.03 −3.56 −3.78

77

0.29
0.99
0.70
−0.11
−0.20
3.25
38.57
11.33
−1.58
−4.21

0.13
1.05
0.73
−0.30
−0.32
0.93
32.47
8.76
−2.67
−4.65

−0.13
1.13
0.79
−0.58
−0.55
−0.60
24.73
7.37
−3.36
−4.75

−1.47 0.49 0.90
0.11 (0.00)
−0.33
−0.63
0.51
−5.89
2.60
−2.91
−3.85
4.82

Table C.6 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of One-way
Investment-to-Assets (A/A) Deciles, All NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ Breakpoints,
Value-weighted Returns (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
A/A is annual change in total assets (Compustat annual item AT) divided by lagged total assets. In
June of each year t, we use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to split stocks into deciles on A/A
for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated
from July of year t to June of t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. We report the mean
monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the Fama-French
three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart four-factor
regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the q-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e. is the average
magnitude of the alphas across the deciles. The numbers (in parentheses) are the p-values for the GRS test
on the null that the alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average
goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations.
The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mean
tMean

0.77
2.38

0.64
2.45

0.75
3.43

0.60
3.12

0.55
2.71

0.52
2.48

0.55
2.56

0.50
1.98

0.46
1.60

α
β
tα

0.24
1.19
1.45

0.19
1.00
1.54

0.33
0.93
3.52

0.22
0.83
2.75

0.16
0.86
2.36

0.11
0.91
1.34

0.12
0.95
1.87

0.01
1.07
0.13

−0.08
1.19
−0.68

−0.38 −0.62 0.19 0.84
1.33 0.14 (0.00)
−2.93 −3.09

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.09
1.10
0.63
0.15
0.62

0.06
1.02
0.16
0.23
0.48

0.18
0.15 0.09
0.09 0.18 0.14
0.98
0.89 0.90
0.95 0.96 1.00
0.06 −0.10 −0.06 −0.15 −0.14 0.05
0.30
0.17 0.17
0.07 −0.09 −0.27
2.01
1.99 1.42
1.23 2.78 1.75

0.15
1.08
0.06
−0.47
1.66

−0.20
1.19
0.24
−0.42
−1.86

−0.29 0.13 0.87
0.10 (0.00)
−0.40
−0.57
−1.63

αCARH
b
s
h
w
tαCARH

0.07 0.07 0.19
0.17 0.08
0.04 0.17 0.11
1.10 1.02 0.98
0.88 0.91
0.96 0.96 1.01
0.63 0.16 0.06 −0.10 −0.06 −0.15 −0.14 0.05
0.16 0.23 0.29
0.16 0.17
0.09 −0.08 −0.26
0.02 −0.01 −0.01 −0.02 0.01
0.05 0.01 0.03
0.39 0.59 2.05
2.02 1.26
0.55 2.32 1.41

0.15
1.08
0.06
−0.47
0.00
1.61

−0.16
1.18
0.24
−0.43
−0.05
−1.46

−0.23 0.12 0.87
0.08 (0.00)
−0.40
−0.59
−0.07
−1.07

0.12 0.17
0.38 −0.09
0.96 1.00
1.06
1.19
−0.10 0.06
0.02
0.22
−0.12 −0.47 −0.91 −0.73
0.14 0.10
0.00
0.05
1.74 1.82
3.66 −0.81
54.40 44.04 37.43 39.19
−4.09 1.45
0.45
4.64
−2.71 −6.97 −12.89 −11.17
4.26 1.95
0.11
0.93

−0.16 0.11 0.88
0.05 (0.00)
−0.30
−1.19
0.33
−0.85
1.05
−3.31
−8.80
2.56

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

0.06
1.13
0.53
0.46
−0.28
0.39
23.46
6.92
3.95
−2.36

−0.10
1.06
0.14
0.64
−0.10
−0.94
42.77
2.95
10.00
−2.15

0.01
1.02
0.04
0.68
−0.05
0.06
44.87
1.03
12.02
−0.94

−0.04
0.92
−0.09
0.51
0.04
−0.47
45.60
−2.73
9.72
0.76

0.07
0.90
−0.06
0.28
−0.06
1.09
49.90
−2.22
6.36
−1.71

−0.08
0.96
−0.09
0.18
0.17
−0.93
48.02
−2.59
2.34
2.78

78

High

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.22 −0.56
0.67 −2.80

Table C.7 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of One-way ROE Deciles
(1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
ROE is income before extraordinary items (Compustat quarterly item IBQ) divided by one-quarter-lagged
book equity. Book equity is the shareholders’ equity, plus balance sheet deferred taxes and investment tax
credit (item TXDITCQ) if available, minus the book value of preferred stock. Depending on availability,
we use the stockholders’ equity (item SEQQ), or common equity (item CEQQ) plus the carrying value
of preferred stock (item PSTKQ), or total assets (item ATQ) minus liabilities (item LTQ) in that order
as the shareholders’ equity. We use redemption value (item PSTKRQ) if available, or carrying value
for the book value of preferred stock. At the beginning of each month, we sort all stocks into deciles
based on the NYSE breakpoints of the ranked values of ROE. Earnings and other accounting variables
in Compustat quarterly ﬁles are used in the sorts in the months immediately after the most recent
public earnings announcement dates (item RDQ). We calculate monthly value-weighted portfolio returns
for the current month, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly. We report the mean monthly percent
excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the Fama-French three-factor
regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart four-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the q-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e. is the average
magnitude of the alphas across the deciles. The numbers (in parentheses) are the p-values for the GRS test
on the null that the alphas across all the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average
goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations.
The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High

Mean
tMean

−0.12
−0.32

0.31
1.07

0.32
1.23

0.36
1.67

0.55
2.65

0.42
1.80

0.57
2.60

0.50
2.26

0.54
2.41

0.69
2.88

α
β
tα

−0.73
1.34
−3.93

−0.20
1.12
−1.70

−0.14 −0.06
1.02 0.92
−1.41 −0.63

0.14 −0.02
0.91 0.98
1.79 −0.26

0.13
0.97
1.80

0.06
0.97
0.84

0.10
0.97
1.37

0.24 0.97 0.18 0.84
0.99 −0.35 (0.01)
2.40 3.96

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

−0.78
1.18
0.73
−0.07
−4.73

−0.30
1.11
0.21
0.15
−2.63

−0.25 −0.15
1.03 0.91
0.15 0.19
0.19 0.14
−2.39 −1.61

0.08 −0.06 0.13 0.13 0.22 0.41 1.19 0.25 0.86
0.93 0.98 0.97 0.97 0.95 0.96 −0.22 (0.00)
0.00 0.07 −0.01 −0.12 −0.13 −0.18 −0.91
0.12 0.05 0.00 −0.11 −0.22 −0.30 −0.23
0.95 −0.69 1.90 1.74 3.42 4.36 5.36

αCARH
b
s
h
w
tαCARH

−0.55
1.14
0.73
−0.15
−0.24
−3.46

−0.08
1.07
0.21
0.08
−0.23
−0.75

−0.07 −0.06 0.12 −0.04 0.15 0.08 0.12 0.31 0.86 0.16 0.87
1.00 0.90 0.93 0.97 0.97 0.98 0.97 0.98 −0.15 (0.00)
0.15 0.19 0.00 0.07 −0.01 −0.12 −0.13 −0.18 −0.91
0.12 0.11 0.10 0.05 −0.01 −0.09 −0.19 −0.27 −0.12
−0.20 −0.10 −0.04 −0.01 −0.02 0.05 0.10 0.11 0.35
−0.66 −0.64 1.42 −0.51 2.20 1.06 1.75 3.45 3.99

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

0.00
0.21
0.27 0.04 0.14 −0.02 0.09 −0.08 0.07 0.04
1.12
1.06
0.97 0.89 0.93 0.98 0.98 1.00 0.97 1.02
0.37 −0.01 −0.07 0.11 −0.04 0.03 0.00 −0.05 −0.05 −0.04
−0.32
0.06
0.02 0.10 0.19 0.07 0.01 −0.02 −0.26 −0.21
−1.01 −0.67 −0.63 −0.27 −0.14 −0.07 0.05 0.24 0.27 0.49
0.02
2.27
3.14 0.47 1.62 −0.22 1.17 −0.97 0.83 0.42
33.22 42.75 31.04 35.44 39.77 46.98 47.09 54.39 49.86 57.02
6.12 −0.20 −1.22 3.29 −1.28 1.13 −0.14 −1.73 −2.05 −1.24
−3.99
0.86
0.34 1.82 3.21 1.12 0.24 −0.29 −4.69 −3.76
−16.84 −17.03 −10.90 −5.76 −2.99 −1.61 1.32 7.44 8.44 12.46

79

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.81
3.08

0.03 0.10 0.90
−0.10 (0.02)
−0.41
0.11
1.51
0.25
−2.75
−6.43
1.01
20.78

Table D.1 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Market Leverage (A/M E) (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
We measure A/M E as the ratio of total book assets (item AT) to the market equity. In June of each
year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on A/M E
for the ﬁscal year ending in calendar year t − 1. Monthly value-weighted portfolio returns are calculated
from July of year t to June of year t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. We report the mean
monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the Fama-French
three-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart four-factor
regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the q-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e. is the average
magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses) beneath the
m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the GRS test on the null that the alphas across all the deciles from a given factor
model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ), the Fama-French
factors, and the momentum factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site. See the caption of Table 1 for the
description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High

0.32
1.24

0.39
1.74

0.54
2.42

0.60
2.79

0.73
3.44

0.54
2.43

0.70
3.38

0.68
3.04

0.73
2.89

0.74
2.43

0.42
1.78

α
β
tα

−0.16 −0.05
1.07
0.96
−1.54 −0.63

0.10
0.97
1.18

0.18
0.92
2.09

0.31
0.93
3.44

0.12
0.91
1.18

0.32
0.83
3.29

0.30
0.85
2.49

0.32
0.91
2.22

0.24
1.12
1.45

0.40 0.21 0.80
0.05 (0.00)
1.66

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.12
0.05
0.09
0.98
0.94
0.98
−0.10 −0.08 −0.02
−0.55 −0.17
0.01
1.80
0.65
1.10

0.12
0.21 −0.06
0.95
0.98
0.98
0.01 −0.05
0.04
0.13
0.21
0.37
1.46
2.63 −0.72

0.13
0.90
0.03
0.38
1.69

0.00 −0.06 −0.20 −0.32 0.11 0.87
0.96
1.03
1.21
0.23 (0.00)
0.08
0.12
0.40
0.50
0.58
0.73
0.80
1.35
0.04 −0.62 −1.79 −2.40

αCARH
b
s
h
w
tαCARH

0.13
0.07
0.07
0.97
0.94
0.99
−0.10 −0.08 −0.02
−0.56 −0.18
0.02
−0.01 −0.02
0.02
1.94
0.89
0.83

0.06
0.17 −0.05
0.96
0.99
0.98
0.01 −0.05
0.04
0.15
0.23
0.37
0.07
0.04 −0.01
0.66
2.06 −0.57

0.05
0.02
0.00 −0.09 −0.23 0.07 0.87
0.92
0.95
1.02
1.19
0.21 (0.05)
0.03
0.08
0.12
0.40
0.50
0.40
0.58
0.71
0.76
1.32
0.08 −0.01 −0.07 −0.11 −0.10
0.71
0.17
0.05 −0.82 −1.68

Mean
tMean

αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβ M KT
tβ M E
tβ A/A
tβ ROE

0.10
1.01
−0.09
−0.65
0.13
1.12
44.42
−2.20
−12.46
3.11

−0.10 −0.07 0.03
0.97
1.00 0.95
−0.02
0.03 0.03
−0.12
0.11 0.23
0.20
0.15 0.04
−1.30 −0.77 0.40
40.00 39.07 36.50
−0.71
0.91 0.89
−2.26
2.01 3.13
4.77
3.46 0.79

0.06
0.99
0.00
0.37
0.09
0.80
35.50
0.05
5.16
1.85

−0.12
0.09
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.97
0.89
0.91
0.98
1.15
0.07
0.05
0.09
0.10
0.29
0.49
0.47
0.60
0.73
0.81
−0.03 −0.03 −0.08 −0.16 −0.39
−1.11
1.03
0.20
0.15
0.06
41.32 37.56 25.77 27.67 31.58
1.47
1.20
1.30
1.44
3.28
4.49
5.80
6.32
7.26
7.02
−0.47 −0.48 −1.00 −2.15 −5.01

80

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

−0.10 0.06 0.85
0.14 (0.32)
0.38
1.46
−0.52
−0.48
2.86
3.19
10.26
−5.48

Table D.2 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Prior 13–60 Month Returns (Reversal) (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s
Web site. At the beginning of each month t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split the NYSE, Amex,
and NASDAQ stocks into deciles on the prior returns from month t−13 to t−60. Monthly value-weighted
portfolio returns are computed, and the portfolios are rebalanced monthly. We report the mean monthly
percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti − rtf = αi + β i M KTt + it ), the Fama-French three-factor
regressions (rti − rtf = αiF F + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + it ), the Carhart four-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it ) and the q-factor regressions
(rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ). m.a.e. is the average
magnitude of the alphas across the testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses) beneath the m.a.e.’s are
the p-values for the GRS test on the null that the alphas across the deciles for a given factor model are jointly
zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity
and autocorrelations. See the caption of Table 1 for the description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Mean
tMean

0.86
2.50

0.77
3.02

0.83
3.54

0.57
2.65

0.67
3.26

0.63
3.02

0.63
3.12

0.51
2.45

0.43
1.74

α
β
tα

0.31
1.21
1.63

0.30
1.03
2.17

0.40
0.94
3.26

0.17
0.89
1.86

0.29
0.85
3.08

0.24
0.86
2.59

0.24
0.87
2.66

0.11 −0.02
0.87
0.99
1.20 −0.22

−0.07 −0.38 0.21 0.79
1.23
0.02 (0.00)
−0.54 −1.50

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.01
1.14
0.85
0.41
0.05

0.10
1.03
0.37
0.32
0.80

0.24
0.96
0.19
0.29
2.19

0.01
0.15
0.16
0.21
0.14
0.05
0.92
0.93
0.91
0.92
0.90
1.00
0.14 −0.06 −0.09 −0.16 −0.16 −0.16
0.28
0.30
0.18
0.10 −0.01 −0.10
0.14
1.69
1.82
2.22
1.48
0.50

0.18
0.17 0.12 0.83
1.14
0.00 (0.03)
−0.06 −0.91
−0.49 −0.90
1.69
0.93

0.22
0.03
0.10
0.09
0.14
0.07 −0.01
0.97
0.91
0.94
0.92
0.94
0.92
1.01
0.19
0.14 −0.06 −0.09 −0.16 −0.16 −0.16
0.30
0.28
0.31
0.20
0.12
0.01 −0.08
0.02 −0.02
0.05
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.06
1.88
0.33
1.16
1.02
1.38
0.73 −0.10

0.18
0.03 0.11 0.83
1.14
0.03 (0.14)
−0.06 −0.91
−0.49 −0.85
0.00
0.15
1.59
0.15

0.15
0.14
αCARH
b
1.10
1.02
s
0.85
0.37
h
0.36
0.30
w
−0.15 −0.04
tαCARH
0.99
1.08
αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

0.28
0.14
0.16
1.10
1.02
0.97
0.70
0.31
0.17
0.41
0.41
0.43
−0.53 −0.20 −0.03
1.95
1.15
1.41
30.46 28.03 31.07
11.30
5.19
3.40
4.74
4.93
4.52
−8.33 −3.31 −0.39

High

0.49 −0.37
1.58 −1.46

−0.04
0.01
0.03
0.00 −0.05 −0.15
0.17
0.92
0.93
0.91
0.94
0.92
1.02
1.15
0.14 −0.01 −0.03 −0.08 −0.09 −0.07 −0.02
0.40
0.45
0.27
0.24
0.08 −0.05 −0.72
−0.05
0.09
0.12
0.22
0.21
0.26
0.20
−0.35
0.05
0.31 −0.03 −0.51 −1.63
1.40
34.10 37.42 33.30 32.67 36.25 41.85
38.24
2.81 −0.24 −0.81 −1.84 −2.13 −1.83 −0.39
4.28
4.91
3.12
3.35
1.16 −0.74 −10.59
−0.76
1.47
1.77
3.46
3.99
4.35
3.48

81

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

−0.10 0.10 0.84
0.05 (0.18)
−0.71
−1.13
0.73
−0.54
0.95
−8.41
−9.55
7.15

Table D.3 : Factor Regressions for Monthly Percent Excess Returns of Deciles Formed on
Earnings-to-Price (E/P ) (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
The data on the one-month Treasury bill rate (rf ) and the Carhart factors are from Kenneth French’s Web
site. Earnings-to-price used in the annual sorts in June of year t are total earnings before extraordinary
items (Compustat annual item IB) for the last ﬁscal year end in t − 1 divided by the market equity at the
end of December of year t − 1. In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to split all NYSE, Amex,
and NASDAQ stocks into deciles based on E/P . Stocks with negative earnings for the last ﬁscal year end in
t − 1 are excluded. We calculate monthly value-weighted portfolio returns, and the portfolios are rebalanced
annually in June. We report the mean monthly percent excess returns, the CAPM regressions (rti −rtf = αi +
β i M KTt +it ), the Fama-French three-factor regressions (rti −rtf = αiF F +bi M KTt +si SM Bt +hi HM Lt +it ),
the Carhart four-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiCARH + bi M KTt + si SM Bt + hi HM Lt + wi W M Lt + it )
and the q-factor regressions (rti − rtf = αiq + β iMKT M KTt + β iME rME,t + β iA/A rA/A,t + β iROE rROE,t + it ).
m.a.e. is the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in
parentheses) beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the GRS test on the null that the alphas across all
the deciles from a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles.
The t-statistics are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. See the caption of Table 1 for the
description of rME , rA/A , and rROE .
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High

0.31
1.02

0.39
1.61

0.52
2.33

0.53
2.60

0.47
2.22

0.62
2.88

0.71
3.49

0.74
3.47

0.72
3.27

0.89
3.40

α
β
tα

−0.24 −0.08
1.20
1.04
−1.90 −1.05

0.10
0.92
1.19

0.14
0.87
1.46

0.07
0.89
0.66

0.23
0.86
2.22

0.33
0.83
3.22

0.37
0.82
3.26

0.34
0.84
2.61

0.44
0.68 0.23 0.79
0.99 −0.22 (0.01)
3.10
2.98

αF F
b
s
h
tαF F

0.06
0.04
0.14
0.15
0.00
0.08
0.18
1.08
1.02
0.93
0.89
0.94
0.93
0.91
0.00 −0.12 −0.10 −0.10 −0.09 −0.02 −0.05
−0.59 −0.23 −0.06
0.00
0.16
0.30
0.32
0.61
0.63
1.81
1.78 −0.04
0.95
1.94

0.17
0.90
0.00
0.41
1.57

0.07
0.93
0.10
0.52
0.67

0.09
1.08
0.22
0.66
0.76

Mean
tMean

0.10
0.03
0.11
0.13
0.00
0.09
0.14
αCARH
b
1.07
1.02
0.94
0.89
0.94
0.93
0.92
s
0.01 −0.12 −0.10 −0.10 −0.09 −0.02 −0.05
h
−0.61 −0.23 −0.05
0.00
0.16
0.30
0.33
w
−0.05
0.01
0.04
0.01 −0.01
0.00
0.04
tαCARH
1.10
0.42
1.18
1.58
0.05
0.97
1.47
αq
β MKT
β ME
β A/A
β ROE
tαq
tβM KT
tβ M E
tβA/A
tβROE

0.11
1.11
−0.04
−0.66
−0.01
0.87
35.32
−0.77
−8.45
−0.11

−0.10 −0.14 −0.03 −0.18 −0.04
1.04
0.96
0.92
0.95
0.93
−0.04
0.01 −0.04
0.00
0.03
−0.24
0.07
0.15
0.25
0.42
0.23
0.31
0.16
0.19
0.07
−1.23 −1.57 −0.35 −1.90 −0.38
47.99 43.74 36.40 35.78 34.97
−1.24
0.21 −1.14
0.01
0.74
−4.17
0.89
1.83
2.69
4.96
5.77
5.24
2.82
2.57
1.11

82

H−L m.a.e.

R̄2

Low

0.58
2.54

0.04 0.10 0.83
0.00 (0.22)
0.22
1.25
0.23

0.15
0.08
0.10 −0.01 0.09 0.84
0.91
0.92
1.08
0.01 (0.42)
0.00
0.10
0.22
0.22
0.42
0.52
0.66
1.26
0.02 −0.01 −0.01
0.04
1.34
0.74
0.82 −0.03

0.00 0.07
0.15
0.28
0.17 0.11 0.82
0.90 0.89
0.88
0.99 −0.12 (0.14)
0.04 0.04
0.09
0.21
0.24
0.43 0.50
0.46
0.37
1.03
0.16 0.05 −0.11 −0.12 −0.11
0.02 0.64
1.21
1.85
0.71
34.20 25.93 25.64 21.31 −1.93
0.70 0.58
1.50
1.97
1.87
5.20 5.11
5.01
3.05
5.80
2.39 0.65 −1.31 −1.16 −0.77

Table E.1 : Descriptive Statistics for Monthly Percent Excess Returns on Annually
Rebalanced Deciles Formed on Standardized Unexpected Earnings, Idiosyncratic Volatility,
and Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi’s (2008) Failure Probability and on Annually
Rebalanced 25 Size and Momentum Portfolios
In June of each year t, we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort all NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ stocks into ten
deciles based on SU E at the ﬁscal year end of t− 1. Monthly equal-weighted returns are computed from July
of year t to June of t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced in June. In June of each year t, we use the NYSEAmex-NASDAQ breakpoints to sort all stocks into deciles on IV OL calculated with the information up to
December of year t−1. Separately, in June of year t, we use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints to sort all
stocks into deciles based on the Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) failure probability calculated at the
ﬁscal yearend of t − 1. Monthly value-weighted returns are calculated from July of year t to June of t + 1, and
the portfolios are rebalanced in June. In June of each year t, we use the NYSE-Amex-NASDAQ breakpoints
to sort all stocks into quintiles based on the prior returns from July of year t − 1 to December of year t − 1.
Independently, we use the NYSE breakpoints to sort all stocks into quintiles on the market equity at the
end of December of year t − 1. Taking intersections, we obtain 25 size and momentum portfolios. Monthly
equal-weighted returns are calculated from July of year t to June of t + 1, and the portfolios are rebalanced
in June. We report average returns and t-statistics in monthly percent and the CAPM regression. m.a.e. is
the average magnitude of the alphas across a given set of testing portfolios. The numbers (in parentheses)
beneath the m.a.e.’s are the p-values for the GRS test on the null that the alphas across all the deciles from
a given factor model are jointly zero. R̄2 is the average goodness-of-ﬁt across the deciles. The t-statistics are
adjusted for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelations. The data on one-month Treasury bill and the market
factor are from Kenneth French’s Web site.
Low

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

High

H−L

m.a.e.

R̄2

0.40
(0.03)

0.75

Panel A: Ten SU E deciles (7/1972–12/2011, 474 Months)
Mean
tMean

0.86 0.82
2.57 2.54

0.89 0.94
2.82 2.91

0.91
2.90

0.92
2.97

0.94
3.15

0.84
2.84

0.93
3.11

0.92
3.16

0.06
0.60

α
β
tα

0.34 0.31
1.16 1.13
2.05 2.05

0.39 0.43
1.13 1.14
2.55 2.76

0.41
1.12
2.69

0.42
1.11
2.88

0.45
1.10
3.11

0.35
1.11
2.62

0.44
1.10
3.11

0.42
0.08
1.12 −0.04
3.23
0.84

Panel B: Ten idiosyncratic volatility deciles (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
0.34
0.92

0.49
1.24

0.35
0.76

0.32 −0.13
0.70 −0.36

Mean
tMean

0.45 0.51
2.49 2.41

0.46 0.59
1.89 2.15

0.65
2.13

0.61
1.80

α
β
tα

0.10 0.09 −0.02 0.07
0.77 0.94
1.07 1.16
1.51 1.63 −0.29 0.80

0.08
1.25
0.68

0.00 −0.32 −0.17 −0.36 −0.35 −0.45
1.35
1.47
1.45
1.56
1.47
0.71
0.00 −1.73 −0.92 −1.30 −1.33 −1.47

0.16
(0.08)

0.80

Panel C: Ten failure probability deciles (7/1976–12/2011, 426 Months)
Mean
tMean

0.58 0.48
2.41 2.22

0.55 0.51
2.54 2.28

0.63
2.51

0.65
2.43

0.52
1.77

α
β
tα

0.06 0.00
0.98 0.90
0.59 0.02

0.08 0.00
0.89 0.97
0.99 0.03

0.08
1.03
0.99

0.08 −0.08
1.09
1.13
0.65 −0.55

0.84
2.38

0.68
1.65

0.17 −0.12
1.27
1.52
0.93 −0.53

0.80
1.70

0.22
0.61

0.01 −0.06
1.51
0.53
0.03 −0.17

0.07
(0.51)

0.80

Panel D: 25 Size and momentum portfolios (1/1972–12/2011, 480 Months)
Loser

2

3

4 Winner W−L

Loser

2

0.72
0.68
0.66
0.84
0.67

0.87
0.72
0.67
0.64
0.49

0.85
0.82
0.71
0.66
0.51

0.77
0.79
0.73
0.59
0.49

0.55
0.49
0.63
0.56
0.47

−0.18
−0.19
−0.04
−0.28
−0.20

1.99
1.85
1.77
2.49
2.17

0.18
0.06
0.05
0.26
0.16

0.41
0.20
0.16
0.13
0.02

0.41
0.33
0.24
0.19
0.08

0.31
0.28
0.25
0.12
0.05

−0.01
−0.12
0.01
−0.02
−0.06

2.86
2.35
2.29
2.27
1.91

3.01
2.91
2.70
2.63
2.23

2.63
2.78
2.82
2.44
2.23

1.58
1.42
1.85
1.72
1.61

−1.12
−1.00
−0.15
−1.15
−0.76

tα (R̄2 = 0.75, pGRS = 0)

α (m.a.e. = 0.17)
Small
2
3
4
Big

4 Winner W−L

tMean

Mean
Small
2
3
4
Big

3

−0.18
−0.18 83
−0.04
−0.28
−0.22

0.86
0.30
0.25
1.37
0.84

2.43
1.22
1.11
1.02
0.19

2.62
2.43
2.01
2.01
0.94

2.02
2.16
2.23
1.29
0.79

−0.04
−0.69
0.09
−0.15
−0.41

−1.14
−0.92
−0.15
−1.09
−0.79

