NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STRUCTURAL AND CYCLICAL FORCES IN THE LABOR MARKET DURING THE GREAT RECESSION:
CROSS-COUNTRY EVIDENCE
Luca Sala
Ulf Söderström
Antonella Trigari
Working Paper 18434
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18434

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012

This paper was prepared for the NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2012. We are grateful
to Matthias Hertweck, Alejandro Justiniano, Per Krusell, Fabrizio Perri, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé,
Karl Walentin, as well as participants at the ISOM and the Greater Stockholm Macro Group for comments,
to Regis Barnichon and Francesco Zanetti for help with the data, and to Volker Lindenthal for excellent
research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and
should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Executive Board of Sveriges Riksbank or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Luca Sala, Ulf Söderström, and Antonella Trigari. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Structural and Cyclical Forces in the Labor Market During the Great Recession: Cross-Country
Evidence
Luca Sala, Ulf Söderström, and Antonella Trigari
NBER Working Paper No. 18434
October 2012
JEL No. E24,E32
ABSTRACT
We use an estimated monetary business cycle model with search and matching frictions in the labor
market and nominal price and wage rigidities to study four countries (the U.S., the U.K., Sweden,
and Germany) during the financial crisis and the Great Recession. We estimate the model over the
period prior to the financial crisis and use the model to interpret movements in GDP, unemployment,
vacancies, and wages in the period from 2007 until 2011. We show that contractionary financial factors
and reduced efficiency in labor market matching were largely responsible for the experience in the
U.S. Financial factors were also important in the U.K., but less so in Sweden and Germany. Reduced
matching efficiency was considerably less important in the U.K. and Sweden than in the U.S., but
matching efficiency improved in Germany, helping to keep unemployment low. A counterfactual experiment
suggests that unemployment in Germany would have been substantially higher if the German labor
market had been more similar to that in the U.S.

Luca Sala
IGIER, Università Bocconi
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
Italy
luca.sala@unibocconi.it
Ulf Söderström
Monetary Policy Department
Sveriges Riksbank
10337 Stockholm
Sweden
ulf.soderstrom@riksbank.se

Antonella Trigari
IGIER, Università Bocconi
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
Italy
antonella.trigari@unibocconi.it

1

Introduction

The financial crisis and the following “Great Recession” had severe consequences for economic activity in most industrialized countries. But labor market outcomes have differed
considerably across countries. As an illustration, Figure 1 shows the level of output, the
rate of unemployment, the rate of labor productivity, and the labor share since 2005 in four
countries: the U.S., the U.K., Sweden, and Germany.1 All countries experienced a sharp contraction in GDP from late 2007 until early 2009: the contraction was of a similar magnitude
in all countries, but slightly larger in the European countries than in the U.S. Since 2009 all
countries have seen a recovery in GDP, but this has been slower in the U.K. and faster in
Sweden than in the other countries.
At the same time there are striking differences in the development of unemployment. In
the U.S., the unemployment rate more than doubled from 2007 to 2009, and it has only fallen
slowly since then. In Germany, unemployment has been falling throughout, with just a small
increase during the crisis. Unemployment in Germany is today lower than before the financial
crisis. The U.K. and Sweden are in-between, with fairly large increases in unemployment from
2007 to 2009. In Sweden, unemployment has fallen back slightly, while in the U.K. it remains
at a much higher level than before 2007.
The different experiences in terms of output and unemployment are reflected in labor
productivity (output per worker), which declined sharply in Germany, the U.K., and Sweden
during the crisis, but increased throughout in the U.S.2
The final panel of Figure 1 shows the labor share, that is, the ratio of the total wage bill
to output or, equivalently, the real wage over labor productivity, in the four countries.3 In the
U.S. during the Great Recession growth in real wages has lagged behind productivity growth.
In contrast, relative to productivity, wages have increased substantially in Germany.4 For
the U.K. and Sweden, labor productivity has decreased and the labor share has increased,
but less so than in Germany.
Another way to study the relationship between output and unemployment is in terms
of an Okun’s law relationship. Figure 2 plots the yearly growth rate in GDP against the
yearly change in the unemployment rate since 1995. The blue (dark) sections of the curves
correspond to the period 1995–2007Q1 and the green (light) sections to the period since
2007Q1.
It is clear from this figure that the Great Recession period since 2007 is very different
from the earlier period: the points during the Great Recession and subsequent recovery lie far
away from the pre-recession points. For all countries but Germany, GDP growth is unusually
low in the earlier part of the crisis and unemployment increased substantially.
1

The figure has all variables indexed to 1 in 2007Q1.

2

The figure shows the measure of labor productivity that will be relevant when we use the theoretical model
to interpret the data. Since we will use data on unemployment, but not on employment, this measure is the
ratio of GDP to the difference between a constant labor force and the rate of unemployment.
3
Similarly to labor productivity, the figure shows the measure of the labor share that will be relevant for
the theoretical model.
4

The initial sharp increase is due at least in part to contracts negotiated in previous years coming into
force at the start of 2008 (see, for instance, Burda and Hunt (2011)).

1

But there is also a change in the relation between output growth and unemployment. The
straight lines represent regression lines for the two sub-periods. There was a change in the
slope for all four countries, but the change went in opposite directions for the U.S. relative to
the other countries. For the U.S., the increase in unemployment was unusually large relative
to the fall in output, while the opposite is true for the other countries.5
Finally, there are also large differences in the relationship between unemployment and
vacancies, the so-called Beveridge curve. Figure 3 shows Beveridge curves for the four countries over the period from 1995 until 2011.6 It is well-known that the Beveridge curve in
the U.S. has shifted outwards since early 2010, when unemployment has fallen very slowly
despite an increase in vacancies, and has only partially moved back. Some commentators
have interpreted this as a sign that labor market matching has become less efficient in the
U.S. (see, in particular, Kocherlakota (2010)). Sweden also shows signs of an outward shift
in the Beveridge curve, while there are no signs of shifts in the U.K. Beveridge curve. In
Germany, in contrast, the Beveridge curve seems to have shifted inwards since 2008: for a
given level of vacancies the rate of unemployment has decreased.
One possible explanation for these patterns is that different countries were hit by different
types of shocks: the U.S. and the U.K. were directly affected by financial shocks, while Sweden
and Germany were mainly affected through shocks to the external sector (such as a fall in
export demand). Thus, to some extent the differences may be due to cyclical factors. But
there are also structural differences across countries that could explain the diverse patterns.
The purpose of this paper is to study the role of structural and cyclical forces in labor
market dynamics across these four countries during the financial crisis and the Great Recession. For this purpose we estimate a business cycle model with search and matching frictions
and nominal wage and price rigidities on data until 2007. We then use the estimated model
to interpret the period from mid 2007 until late 2011. To study the determinants of labor
market fluctuations, we compare the structural features of the estimated models and their
interpretation of cyclical movements in output, unemployment, and vacancies.
The analysis builds on the model developed and estimated on U.S. data in Gertler, Sala,
and Trigari (2008) (henceforth GST). The GST model introduces labor market frictions via
a variant of the Diamond, Mortensen, and Pissarides framework into the now conventional
monetary business cycle models developed by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005),
Smets and Wouters (2007) and others. The variant allows for staggered Nash wage bargaining
as in Gertler and Trigari (2009), but in nominal terms. As emphasized by Hall (2012), nominal
wage rigidities help reconciling search and matching frictions with the recent behavior of
unemployment and inflation in the U.S. when monetary policy has been restricted by the
zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.
We differ from GST in a number of aspects. First, we allow for two types of hiring costs:
search costs of recruiting new workers, incurred during the process of finding new workers,
5

In the U.S., the estimated slope coefficient increased (in absolute value) from −0.28 before 2007 to −0.5
after 2007, but it fell (in absolute value) from −0.37 to −0.23 in the U.K., from −0.42 to −0.22 in Sweden,
and from −0.43 to −0.14 in Germany.
6

In Figure 3 unemployment is measured directly in terms of the unemployment rate while vacancies are
normalized to be 1 in 2008Q4.

2

and internal costs of adding new workers to a firm’s labor force, incurred after the workers
and the firm have matched and started an employment relationship. While evidence in Silva
and Toledo (2009) and Yashiv (2000) indicates that post-match hiring costs account for a
larger fraction of total hiring costs, pre-match costs make hiring costs dependent on the
tightness of aggregate labor markets (see Furlanetto and Groshenny (2012a) for a careful
analysis of the role of the two costs within a simple New Keynesian model with search and
matching frictions). Second, we add to the model a “risk premium” shock that creates a
wedge between the risk-free rate and the return on assets held by households and a shock
to the efficiency of the matching technology. Both changes are justified by the focus on the
Great Recession. The risk premium shock has similar effects as a shock to net worth in models
that explicitly model the external finance premium (e.g., Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist
(1999) and Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2003, 2008)). It has the potential to capture
the disruptions in financial markets that have characterized the recent financial crisis. The
shock to the matching efficiency may play a significant role in the Great Recession. Changes
in matching efficiency have the potential to explain the shifts in Beveridge curves recently
experienced in, for instance, the U.S. and Germany (see Furlanetto and Groshenny (2012b)
for an analysis of the U.S. experience). However, the effects of matching efficiency shocks
on unemployment depend crucially on the importance of pre-match versus post-match hiring
costs. With only post-match hiring costs such shocks affect only vacancies without any effect
on unemployment. But if pre-match hiring costs are important, also unemployment moves in
response to matching efficiency shocks. (See Furlanetto and Groshenny (2012a) for details.)
Finally, we differ from GST by including unemployment and vacancies among the set of
observable variables used in the estimation instead of total hours worked. Unemployment
and vacancies are the two key variables in the model when describing the state of the labor
market.7
Our analysis proceeds in three steps. After estimating the model on data until 2007Q1,
including the key labor market parameters, we first discuss the estimated structural parameters in different countries. Among the key labor market parameters, we find that the relative
flow value of unemployment is higher in the U.K. and Sweden than in the U.S., consistently
with a higher replacement rate in European countries, but smaller in Germany, possibly due
to recent labor market reforms. A second key parameter concerns the weight on pre-match
versus post-match hiring costs. Here, we find that post-match hiring costs are completely
dominant in the U.K. and Sweden and also very important in the U.S., while the weights
are roughly equal in Germany. This helps to account for the shifts in the Beveridge curve in
Germany and the U.S.
Next, we interpret movements in the estimated shocks over the sample period as well as the
period after 2007. For the U.S., we show that the financial crisis and the Great Recession were
characterized by unusually large positive shocks to the risk premium (that is, contractionary
financial shocks) and negative shocks to matching efficiency. Also, as monetary policy was
restricted by the zero lower bound, our model finds large contractionary monetary policy
7

To facilitate comparability with the literature, GST estimated the model on the same aggregate variables
and including the same structural shocks as Smets and Wouters (2007).

3

shocks after 2008. For the U.K. we also identify contractionary financial shocks and reduced
labor market matching efficiency, but in addition we find negative shocks to technology. In
Sweden, shocks were rather similar to the U.K., although shocks to financial factors and
matching efficiency were less serious. In Germany, we do not find any large shifts in financial
shocks or matching efficiency shocks. This pattern is consistent with the impression that
Sweden and Germany were less directly hit by financial shocks than were the U.S. and the
U.K.
Finally, we interpret the effects of shocks on output, unemployment, and vacancies over
the crisis period, and we compare with the period before the financial crisis. For the U.S.,
our model assigns important roles to financial factors and reduced matching efficiency in the
labor market for explaining the fall in output and vacancies and the increase in unemployment
after 2007. These factors are considerably more important during the financial crisis and the
Great Recession than in the period prior to 2007, and are crucial in understanding the outward
shift in the U.S. Beveridge curve. Financial shocks dominate the story also for the U.K., but
were relatively less important in Sweden and, in particular, in Germany. Lower matching
efficiency mostly affected vacancy posting in the U.K. and Sweden, but had little impact on
unemployment. In Germany matching efficiency shocks acted to increase GDP and reduce
unemployment. This is possibly a sign that recent labor market reforms in Germany were
successful in improving labor market matching.
We also run counterfactual experiments to illustrate how the structure of the labor market
contributes to shaping economic outcomes. In particular, we study how output and unemployment would have hypothetically behaved in Germany during the Great Recession if the
German labor market had been more similar to the U.S. one. We find that the unemployment
rate in Germany would have risen significantly, more in line with the U.S. experience.
Our paper is related to several other recent papers. Justiniano and Michelacci (2012)
study labor market dynamics in the same four countries, as well as in France and Norway,
within a rich, estimated DGSE model. However, they use a real model without any role
for demand-side factors, they model real wage rigidity with an ad-hoc wage rule, do not use
data on wages in the estimation and focus on technology shocks. Also, they focus on the
period before the financial crisis. They find that technology shocks account for most of the
variation in labor market variables in the U.S., while shocks to the matching efficiency and
job destruction are more important in European countries.
Galı́, Smets, and Wouters (2012) estimate a model that includes unemployment through
a reinterpretation of the more standard Smets and Wouters (2007) framework. The use the
model to interpret postwar recoveries in the U.S., with special focus on Great Recession. They
find that the decline in GDP is mainly due to shocks to the risk premium and investment,
but wage setting shocks are an important factor behind the slow recovery in GDP and the
persistently high rate of unemployment. In contrast, our framework with search and matching
frictions does not assign an important role to wage setting shocks for unemployment in the
U.S., this role instead seems to be taken over, at least during the Great Recession, by shocks
to the matching efficiency.
Furlanetto and Groshenny (2012a) study how the transmission mechanism of shocks to
the efficiency of the matching technology depends on the nature of hiring costs and nominal

4

rigidities, and Furlanetto and Groshenny (2012b) estimate a model with search and matching
frictions and nominal rigidities on U.S. data to study the role of matching efficiency shocks
for the recent U.S. labor market experience. They find that matching efficiency shocks contributed to increase the U.S. unemployment rate by at most one percentage point during the
Great Recession, which is broadly consistent with our results. While the empirical exercise
they conduct on the U.S. is similar to ours, we differ in a number of aspects: they do not
distinguish between an estimation and an evaluation period; they use different observables
in the estimation; they do not estimate most of the labor market parameters, and the details
of the model differ.
Finally, Christiano, Trabandt, and Walentin (2011) estimate an open-economy model with
search and matching frictions and financial frictions as in Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist
(1999) and Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2003, 2008) on Swedish data until 2010. Their
model assigns a more important role to financial shocks for the fall in GDP and increase in
unemployment than our model, and a less important role for technology shocks. They also
find that in Sweden post-match hiring costs are important than pre-match costs, similar to
our results.
Our paper is organized as follows. We develop our model in Section 2. We then discuss
the data and our estimation technique in Section 3. In Section 4 we present our results.
Finally, we conclude in Section 5.

2

The model

The analysis builds on the GST model, which is an evolution of the frameworks in Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), Smets and Wouters (2007) and others. The main difference is
the treatment of the labor market. GST introduce search and matching frictions via a variant
of the Diamond, Mortensen, and Pissarides framework that has staggered Nash bargaining
as in Gertler and Trigari (2009). Importantly, Nash bargaining takes place in nominal terms,
rather than over real wages as in Gertler and Trigari (2009).
We here provide a sketch of the model; for more details, see Gertler, Sala, and Trigari
(2008). There are only two differences relative to GST. First, the set of shocks included in
the model is different: we add a risk premium shock and a shock to the efficiency of the
matching technology. But we remove a shock to consumer preference. Second, we allow for
a more general hiring cost function that allows for both costs in posted vacancies and costs
in filled vacancies or new matches.
There are three types of agents in the model: households, wholesale firms, and retail firms.
Following Merz (1995) we assume a representative family in order to introduce complete consumption insurance. Production takes place at competitive wholesale firms that hire workers
subject to search and matching frictions and negotiate wage contracts via staggered Nash
bargaining. Monopolistically competitive retail firms buy goods from wholesalers, repackage
them as final goods, and set prices on a staggered basis.

5

2.1

Households

There is a representative household with a continuum of members of measure unity. At each
time t a measure nt of household members are employed and a measure 1 − nt are unemployed. Household members are assumed to pool their labor income to insure themselves
against income fluctuations. The household consumes final goods, saves in one-period nominal government bonds, and accumulates physical capital through investment. It transforms
physical capital to effective capital by choosing the capital utilization rate, and then rents
effective capital to firms.
The household thus chooses consumption ct , bond holdings Bt , the rate of capital utilization ν t , investment it , and physical capital ktp to maximize the utility function
Et

(∞
X

)
s

β log (ct+s − hct+s−1 ) ,

(1)

s=0

where β is a discount factor and h measures the degree of habits in consumption preferences.8
The capital utilization rate ν t transforms physical capital into effective capital according
to
p
kt = ν t kt−1
,

(2)

which is rented to wholesale firms at the rate rtk . The cost of capital utilization per unit of
physical capital is given by A(ν t ), and we assume that ν t = 1 in steady state, A(1) = 0 and
A0 (1)/A00 (1) = η ν , as in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and others.
Physical capital accumulates according to



it
p
p
i
kt = (1 − δ)kt−1 + εt 1 − S
it ,
it−1

(3)

where δ is the rate of depreciation, εit is an investment-specific technology shock with mean
unity, and S (·) is an adjustment cost function which satisfies S(γ z ) = S 0 (γ z ) = 0 and
S 00 (γ z ) = η k > 0, where γ z is the steady-state growth rate.
Let pt be the nominal price level, rt the one-period nominal interest rate, wt the real
wage, bt the flow value of unemployment (including unemployment benefits), Πt lump-sum
profits, and Tt lump-sum transfers. The household’s budget constraint is then given by
ct + it +

Bt
Bt−1
p
p
= wt nt + (1 − nt )bt + rtk ν t kt−1
+ Πt + Tt − A(ν t )kt−1
+
,
b
pt
pt εt rt

(4)

where εbt is a “risk premium” shock with mean εb that drives a wedge between the risk-free
interest rate set by the central bank and the return on assets held by the households. The
first-order conditions with respect to ct , Bt , ν t , it , and ktp imply relationships that jointly
determine consumption, capital utilization, the rental rate of capital, investment, and Tobin’s
Q.
8

As in GST, we do not allow for variation in hours on the intensive margin. This choice is consistent with
the observation that most of the cyclical variation in hours in the U.S. being on the extensive margin.

6

2.2

Unemployment, vacancies and matching

There is a continuum of wholesale firms measured on the unit interval. To attract new workers
wholesale firms need to post vacancies vit . The total number of vacancies and employed
R1
R1
workers are then equal to vt = 0 vit di and nt = 0 nit di. All unemployed workers are
assumed to look for a job, and unemployed workers who find a match go to work immediately
within the period. Accordingly, the pool of unemployed workers is given by
ut = 1 − nt−1 .

(5)

The number of new hires is determined by the number of searchers and vacancies according
to a matching function
σ 1−σ
mt = εm
,
t ut vt

(6)

m
where εm
t is a shock to the efficiency of the matching process with mean ε . The probability

that a firm fills a vacancy is then given by qt = mt /vt , and the probability that a worker
finds a job is st = mt /ut . Both workers and firms take qt and st as given.

2.3

Wholesale firms

Each wholesale firm i produces output yit using capital kit and labor nit according to the
Cobb-Douglas production function
yit = (kit )α (zt nit )1−α ,

(7)

where zt is a common labor-augmenting productivity factor, whose growth rate εzt = zt /zt−1
follows a stationary exogenous process with steady-state value εz which corresponds to the
economy’s steady-state (gross) growth rate γ z . Thus, technology is non-stationary in levels
but stationary in growth rates. We assume that capital is perfectly mobile across firms and
that there is a competitive rental market for capital.
To hire new workers firms post vacancies vit . It is useful to define the hiring rate xit as
the ratio of new hires qt vit to the existing workforce nit−1 :
xit =

qt vit
,
nit−1

(8)

where the law of large numbers implies that the firm knows xit with certainty at time t, as
it knows the likelihood qt that each vacancy will be filled. Therefore, we can treat the hiring
rate as the firm’s control variable.
Firms exogenously separate from a fraction 1 − ρ of their existing workforce nit−1 in each
period, and workers who lose their jobs are not allowed to search until the next period. The
total workforce is then the sum of the number of surviving workers and new hires:
nit = ρnit−1 + xit nit−1 ,

(9)

which reflects the assumption that new hires go to work immediately.

7

n
Let pw
t denote the relative price of intermediate goods, wit the nominal wage and βEt Λt,t+1

be the firm’s discount rate, where Λt,t+s = λt+s /λt and λt is the marginal utility of consumpn, n
tion at time t. Then the value of firm i, Ft (wit
it−1 ), is given by
n
Ft (wit
, nit−1 ) = pw
t yit −

n


wit
κt
n
nit − x2it nit−1 − rtk kit + βEt Λt,t+1 Ft+1 wit+1
, nit , (10)
pt
2

where (κt /2)x2it nit−1 is a quadratic hiring cost with
−η q

κt = κzt qt

,

(11)

where η q ∈ [0, 2] is a parameter denoting the elasticity of hiring costs to the vacancy filling rate
qt . As in GST, we allow hiring costs to drift proportionately with productivity zt in order to
maintain a balanced steady-state growth path. We differ from GST by allowing for two types
of hiring costs: search costs of recruiting new workers (advertising, screening, interviewing)
and internal costs of adding new workers to a firm’s labor force (such as training and other).
Recruiting costs pertain to posted vacancies, vit , while training costs are associated with
filled vacancies or new matches, mit = qt vit . We will also refer to recruiting costs as prematch hiring costs, since they are incurred during the process of finding a new worker, and
to training costs as post-match hiring costs, since they take place after the worker and the
firm have matched and start an employment relationship. The combination of the two types
of hiring costs is similar to formulations in Christiano, Trabandt, and Walentin (2011) and
Furlanetto and Groshenny (2012b).
Our formulation encompasses both types of costs. If η q = 0, hiring costs are given
by (κzt /2) (qt vit /nit−1 )2 nit−1 and the cost function reduces to the one used in GST that
emphasizes internal costs of adjusting employment. In this case, hiring costs have only to
do with new hires and are not associated with the number of vacancies posted per se. For
this reason, they are not affected by the likelihood qt that a vacancy is filled. If η q = 2, then
hiring costs become (κzt /2) (vit /nit−1 )2 nit−1 and are only associated with posted vacancies.
In this case, an increase in the aggregate likelihood qt with which each vacancy vit is filled
decreases the cost of hiring new workers. Because of the quadratic formulation, when only
pre-match hiring costs are present the elasticity equals (minus) 2. For intermediate values of
η q , in between 0 and 2, both costs are allowed for, with equal weight given to each cost when
η q = 1.
The firm maximizes its value by choosing the hiring rate xit and its capital stock kit ,
given its existing employment stock nit−1 , the rental rate on capital rtk , the relative price of
intermediate goods pw
t , the likelihood of filling vacancies qt , and the current and expected
n /p . The first-order condition for capital is given by
path of wages wit
t

rtk = pw
t α

yit
yt
= pw
,
t α
nit
nt

(12)

where all firms chose the same capital/output ratio due to Cobb-Douglas technology and
perfect capital mobility.

8

Firms choose nit by setting xit . The optimal hiring decision yields
κt xit = pw
t at −

n
n
wit
κt+1 2 o
+ βEt Λt,t+1
x
+ ρβEt {Λt,t+1 κt+1 xit+1 } ,
pt
2 it+1

(13)

where
at = (1 − α)

yt
yit
= (1 − α)
nit
nt

(14)

denotes the current marginal product of labor, which is also equal across firms. The hiring
rate xit thus depends on the discounted stream of earnings and the saving on adjustment
costs. Observe that the only firm-specific variable affecting the hiring rate is the wage.
n ), the value to
Finally, for the purpose of the wage bargain it is useful to define Jt (wit

the firm of having another worker at time t after new workers have joined the firm, i.e., after
n, n
adjustment costs are sunk. Differentiating Ft (wit
it−1 ) with respect to nit , taking xit as

given, and making use of the optimal hiring decision as well as the relation for the evolution
of the workforce yields:

n
Jt (wit
) = pw
t at −

n
n


wit
κt+1 2 o
n
xit+1 + (ρ + xit+1 ) βEt Λt,t+1 Jt+1 wit+1
− βEt Λt,t+1
, (15)
pt
2

n ) is expressed as expected average profits per worker net of first period adjustwhere Jt (wit

ment costs, with the discount factor accounting for future changes in workforce size.

2.4

Workers

n ) be the value to a worker of employment at firm i, and let U be the value of
Let Vt (wit
t

unemployment. These values are defined after hiring decisions at time t have been made and
are measured in units of consumption goods. The value of employment is given by
n
Vt (wit
)=

n




wit
n
+ βEt Λt,t+1 ρVt+1 wit+1
+ (1 − ρ)Ut+1 .
pt

(16)

To construct the value of unemployment, denote by Vx,t the average value of employment
conditional on being a new worker, given by
Z
Vx,t =
0

1


xit nit−1
Vit
di.
xt nt−1

(17)

Then, Ut can be expressed as
Ut = bt + βEt {Λt,t+1 [st+1 Vx,t+1 + (1 − st+1 ) Ut+1 ]} ,

(18)

where, as before, st is the probability of finding a job, and
bt = bktp

(19)

9

is the flow value of unemployment (measured in units of consumption goods). The flow
value is assumed to grow proportionately with the physical capital stock in order to maintain
balanced growth.
n ), and the average worker surplus conditional
Finally, the worker surplus at firm i, Ht (wit

on being a new hire, Hx,t , are given by
n
n
Ht (wit
) = Vt (wit
) − Ut ,

Hx,t = Vx,t − Ut .
It follows that
n
Ht (wit
)=

2.5

n




wit
n
− bt + βEt Λt,t+1 ρHt+1 wit+1
− st+1 Hx,t+1 .
pt

(20)

Wage bargaining

Firms and workers are not able to negotiate their wage contract in every period, but wage
bargaining is assumed to be staggered over time, as in Gertler and Trigari (2009). As in
Gertler, Sala, and Trigari (2008), firms and workers bargain over nominal wages. In each
period, each firm faces a fixed probability 1 − λw of being able to renegotiate the wage. The
fraction λw of firms that cannot renegotiate the wage instead index the nominal wage to past
inflation according to
γ

n
n
w
wit
= γ w π t−1
wit−1
,

(21)

where π t = pt /pt−1 is the gross rate of inflation, γ w = γ z π 1−γ w , and γ w ∈ [0, 1] measures the
degree of indexing.
Let wtn∗ denote the nominal wage of a firm-worker pair that renegotiates at t. Given
constant returns to scale, all sets of renegotiating firms and workers set the same wage.
The firm negotiates with the marginal worker over the surplus from the marginal match.
Assuming Nash bargaining, the contract wage wtn∗ is chosen to solve
n ηt
n 1−η t
max Ht (wit
) Jt (wit
)
,

(22)

subject to
n
wit+j


γw
 γ wn
w it+j−1 π t+j−1 with probability λw
=
 wn∗
with probability 1 − λw .
t+j

(23)

The variable η t ∈ [0, 1] reflects the worker’s relative bargaining power, and is assumed to
evolve according to
η t = ηεηt ,

(24)

where εηt is a shock with mean unity that implies a disturbance to the wage equation.

10

The first-order condition for the Nash bargaining solution is given by
χt (wt∗n ) Jt (wt∗n ) = [1 − χt (wt∗n )] Ht (wt∗n ) ,

(25)

where
n
χt (wit
)=

ηt
n ) /
η t + (1 − η t )µt (wit
t

(26)

is the (horizon-adjusted) effective bargaining power of workers,
n
µt (wit
)




γ w n  pt
γw
γw n 
γ π µ
γ π w
= 1 + βλw Et Λt,t+1 ρ + xt+1 (γ w π t wit )
pt+1 w t t+1 w t it

(27)

is the firm’s cumulative discount factor, and

t = 1 + βρλw Et

pt
γ
Λt,t+1
γ π w t+1
pt+1 w t


(28)

is the worker’s cumulative discount factor.
Finally, the average nominal wage is given by
wtn

1

Z
=
0

n nit
wit
nt


di.

(29)

Given that the probability of wage adjustment is i.i.d., the law of large numbers implies
that the evolution of the average nominal wage is a linear contract of the target nominal wage
and last period’s nominal wages of non-adjusters, after factoring in indexing arrangements:
n
wt+1

= (1 −

∗n
λw ) wt+1

Z
+ λw
0

2.6

1


γ
n
γ w π t w wit


γ
n n
ρ + xt+1 γ w π t w wit
it
di.
γw n 
ρ + xt+1 γ w π t wit nt

(30)

Retailers

There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive retailers indexed by j on the unit
interval. These buy intermediate goods from the wholesale firms, differentiate them with a
technology that transforms one unit of intermediate goods into one unit of retail goods, and
sell them to households. Retailers set prices on a staggered basis.
Following Smets and Wouters (2007), we assume that each firm’s elasticity depends inversely on its relative market share, as in Kimball (1995), who generalizes the standard
Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator. Thus, letting yjt be the quantity of output sold by retailer j and
pjt the nominal price, final goods, denoted yt , are a composite of individual retail goods
following
Z

1


G

0


yjt p
, ε dj = 1,
yt t

(31)

where the function G(·) is increasing and strictly concave with G(1) = 1, and εpt is a shock
that influences the elasticity of demand.
We assume that prices are staggered as in Calvo (1983), but with indexing as in Christiano,

11

Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003). Thus, each retailer faces a
fixed probability 1 − λp of reoptimizing its price in a given period, in which case it sets its
price to p∗t to maximize the expected discounted stream of future profits. All firms that
reoptimize set the same price. Firms that do not reoptimize instead index their price to past
inflation following
γ

p
pjt = γ p π t−1
pjt−1 ,

(32)

where γ p = π 1−γ p is an adjustment for steady-state inflation.
It is possible to show that the optimal price p∗t depends on the expected discounted stream
of the retailers’ nominal marginal cost given by pt pw
t . Using the hiring condition (13), real
marginal cost is given by
pw
t =



n
κt+1 2 o
1 wit
+ κt xit − βEt Λt,t+1
xit+1 − ρβEt {Λt,t+1 κt+1 xit+1 } ,
at pt
2

(33)

so real marginal cost depends on unit labor cost plus a term that corrects for the cost if hiring
workers.

2.7

The government sector

The government sets government spending gt according to


1
gt = 1 − g yt ,
εt

(34)

where εgt follows an exogenous process. Our model neglects open-economy elements. The
estimated process for gt therefore reflects the sum of government spending and net exports
(and inventories). This choice is made for simplicity, but is potentially important when
interpreting the recession in Sweden and Germany where external shocks were an important
part of the recession.
The central bank sets the short-term nominal interest rate rt according to the Taylor rule
rt  rt−1 ρs
=
r
r



Et π t+1
π

rπ 

yt
ytn

ry 1−ρs

εrt ,

(35)

where ytn is the level of output with flexible prices and wages and without shocks to the price
markup and the bargaining power of workers, and εrt is a monetary policy shock.

2.8

Resource constraint and model summary

Finally, the resource constraint implies that output is equal to the sum of consumption,
investment, government spending, and adjustment and utilization costs:
κt
yt = ct + it + gt +
2

Z
0

1


p
x2it nit−1 di + A(ν t )kt−1
.

(36)

The complete model consists of 28 equations for the 28 endogenous variables. There are

12

also eight exogenous disturbances: to technology, investment, the risk premium, matching
efficiency, the price markup, workers’ bargaining power, government spending, and monetary
policy. The technology shock follows a unit-root process, while the remaining seven shocks
are stationary. In particular, technology growth and the other seven shocks follow
 



log εjt = (1 − ρj ) log εj + ρj log εjt−1 + ζ jt ,

(37)

for j = z, i, b, σ, p, η, g, r, where εi = εb = εσ = εη = εr = 1, and where ζ jt are mean-zero innovations with constant variances σ 2j . We log-linearize the model around its deterministic steady
state with balanced growth, allowing for the fact that output, investment, consumption, and
the real wage are non-stationary. The derivation of the steady state and the log-linearized
system of equations are available in the Appendix A.

3

Estimation

3.1

Data and parameters

We estimate the log-linearized version of the model on quarterly data from four countries:
the U.S., the U.K., Sweden, and Germany. We estimate the model on data up to 2007Q1,
before the start of the financial crisis, to prevent our estimates from being distorted by
the non-linearities induced by the different size of the shocks and the zero lower bound
on nominal interest rates. We then use the estimated model to interpret the period from
2007Q2 to 2011Q2.9 The first date of the sample period varies across countries. For the U.S.,
the data start in 1982Q1 (after the Volcker disinflation), for Germany in 1992Q1 (after the
reunification), and for the U.K. and Sweden in 1994Q4 (after the introduction of inflation
targeting regimes for monetary policy).
For each country we use data for eight variables: (1) output growth: the quarterly growth
rate of per capita real GDP; (2) investment growth: the quarterly growth rate of a measure of
per capita real investment; (3) consumption growth: the quarterly growth rate of a measure of
per capita real consumption; (4) real wage growth: the quarterly growth rate of a measure of
real compensation per hour; (5) inflation: the quarterly growth rate of the GDP deflator; (6)
the nominal interest rate: the quarterly average of a short-term interest rate; (7) a measure
of unemployment; and (8) a measure of vacancies. Data definitions and sources differ slightly
across countries; they are available in Appendix B.
We estimate the model using Bayesian likelihood-based methods (see An and Schorfheide
(2007) for an overview). Letting θ denote the vector of structural parameters to be estimated
and Y the data sample, we use the Kalman filter to calculate the likelihood L(θ, Y), and
then combine the likelihood function with a prior distribution of the parameters to be estimated, p(θ), to obtain the posterior distribution, L(θ, Y)p(θ). We use numerical routines to
maximize the value of the posterior, and then generate draws from the posterior distribution
using the Random-Walk Metropolis-Hastings algorithm.
9

Our empirical strategy thus follows Galı́, Smets, and Wouters (2012) who also use a model estimated on
pre-crisis data to interpret the Great Recession and the recovery in the U.S.

13

We use growth rates for the non-stationary variables in our data set (output, consumption, investment, and the real wage, which are non-stationary also in the theoretical model)
and express unemployment, vacancies, gross inflation and gross interest rates in percentage
deviations from their sample mean. We write the measurement equation of the Kalman filter
to match the eight observable series with their model counterparts. Thus, the state-space
form of the model is characterized by the state equation
Xt = A(θ)Xt−1 + B(θ)εt ,

εt ∼ i.i.d. N (0, Σε ),

(38)

where Xt is a vector of endogenous variables, εt is a vector of innovations to the eight
structural shocks, and θ is a vector of parameters; and the measurement equation
Yt = C(θ) + DXt + η t ,

η t ∼ i.i.d. N (0, Ση ),

(39)

where Yt is a vector of observable variables, that is,
Yt = 100 [∆ log Yt , ∆ log It , ∆ log Ct , ∆ log Wt , log π t , log Rt , log(ut /ū), log(vt /v̄)] , (40)
and η t is a vector of measurement errors.
The model contains twenty-two structural parameters, not including the parameters that
characterize the exogenous shocks and measurement errors. We calibrate four parameters
using standard values: the discount factor β is set to 0.99, the capital depreciation rate δ to
0.025, the capital share α in the Cobb-Douglas production function is set to 1/3, and the
average ratio of government spending to output G/Y is set to the average value for each
country over the sample period. We also calibrate five other parameters. The steady-state
growth rate, γ z is set to the average GDP growth rate over the sample period. The degree of
indexation in price setting, γ p is set to zero.10 The match elasticity to unemployment, σ in
the matching function, is calibrated to 0.5, a value within the range of empirical estimates,
see Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001). Finally, the steady-state quarterly job survival and
job finding probabilities ρ and s, are computed from the yearly averages of monthly figures
reported in Elsby, Hobijn, and Şahin (2012), following Justiniano and Michelacci (2012), but
recalculated on our sample periods. These parameters indicate that labor markets are more
or less sclerotic in the different countries. The U.S. is the most fluid labor market with high
separation and job finding rates. Germany is at the other extreme. The U.K. and Sweden
are similar also in this dimension, and are again intermediate cases between the U.S. and
Germany. The calibrated parameters are shown in Table 1.
We estimate the remaining thirteen structural parameters. Of the thirteen, there are five
parameters that are related to the labor market. These include: the steady-state bargaining
power of workers η; the steady-state flow value of unemployment as a fraction of the contribution of the worker to the job, that is, the relative value of non-work to work activity,
denoted with eb;11 the weight on hiring costs, η q ; the wage rigidity parameter λw and the
10

When estimating the model without this restriction, γ p always ended up very close to zero for all countries,
with no effect on other parameters.


11
The relative flow value of unemployment is given by e
b = b̄/ pw ā + β (κ̄/2) x2 , where variables with no

14

wage indexing parameter γ w . The remaining eight parameters that we estimate include: the
elasticity of the utilization rate to the rental rate of capital, η ν ;12 the elasticity of the investment adjustment cost function, η k ; the habit parameter h; the steady-state price markup εp ;
the price rigidity parameter λp ; and the monetary policy rule parameters rπ , ry , and ρs . In
addition, we estimate the autoregressive parameters of the eight exogenous shock processes,
as well as the standard deviations of the innovations. We allow for an i.i.d. measurement
error on the real wage. This could be interpreted as proper errors in the measurement of
wages, as in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2012), or as volatility in the real wage
that cannot be explained by our model, possibly due to model misspecification.

3.2

Priors

Before estimation we assign prior distributions to the parameters to be estimated. Most of the
priors are standard in the literature; see, for example, Smets and Wouters (2007), Justiniano,
Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010) and, for the labor market parameters in particular, GST.
The utilization rate elasticity ψ ν and the habit parameter h are both assigned Beta priors
with mean 0.5 and standard deviation 0.1; while the capital adjustment cost elasticity η k is
assigned a Normal prior with mean 4 and standard deviation 1.5.
The Calvo parameter for price adjustment, λp , is assigned Beta prior with mean 2/3 and
standard deviation 0.1. The steady-state price markup εp is assigned a Normal prior centered
at 1.15, with a standard deviation of 0.05.
The coefficient rπ on inflation in the monetary policy rule is given a Normal prior with
mean 1.7 and standard deviation 0.3, while the coefficient ry on output growth is given a
Gamma prior with mean 0.125 and standard deviation 0.1. The coefficient on the lagged
interest rate, ρs , is assigned a Beta prior with mean 0.75 and a standard deviation of 0.1. All
these are broadly consistent with empirically estimated monetary policy rules.
Of the five estimated labor market parameters, four are also estimated in GST and we
assign the same priors as in GST. The steady-state bargaining power of workers η and the
relative flow value of unemployment eb are both assigned a Beta prior with mean 0.5 and
standard deviation 0.1. The Calvo parameter for wage adjustment, λw , is assigned Beta
prior with means 3/4 and standard deviation 0.1, while the wage indexation parameter γ w is
given a Uniform prior over the unit interval. The fifth labor market parameter, η q , denoting
the relative weight of recruiting costs in hiring, is new relative to GST and is assigned a
Gamma distribution with mean 0.145 and standard deviation 0.1. The prior mean has been
specified following Silva and Toledo (2009) who estimate the relative importance of recruiting
(pre-match) versus training (post-match) costs in the U.S. Their estimates correspond to
η q = 0.145 in our framework. In the absence of evidence on the value of η q for the other
countries, we will use the same prior for all of them.
All persistence parameters for the shocks are given Beta priors with mean 0.5 and standard deviation 0.1. Following much of the literature, we normalize some of the shocks betime index denote steady-state values of stationary variables and variables with a bar denote steady-state
values of detrended variables.
12

Following Smets and Wouters (2007), we define ψ ν such that η ν = (1 − ψ ν ) /ψ ν and estimate ψ ν .

15

fore estimation, in order to better define a plausible range of variation. Three shocks—the
investment-specific shock εit , the price markup shock εpt , and the bargaining power shock εw
t —
are normalized to have a unitary contemporaneous impact on the physical capital stock, the
real wage and price inflation, respectively.13 The priors assigned to the standard deviations
of all innovations are Inverse Gamma, with mean 0.15 and standard deviation 0.15. The
standard deviation of the measurement error on the real wage is assigned a Beta prior with
mean and standard deviation equal, respectively, to 1/3 and 1/10 of the sample standard
deviation of the real wage growth series.
All prior distributions are summarized in Tables 2 and 3.

4

Results

4.1

Parameter estimates

We begin by studying the estimated parameters. This will give an idea of structural differences across countries, in addition to the differences in the calibrated parameters. Tables 2–3
report the median and 5th and 95th percentiles of the estimated posterior distributions.
For the U.S., many parameter estimates are similar to those in the literature, e.g., Smets
and Wouters (2007), Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010), and Sala, Söderström,
and Trigari (2010). Key labor market parameters, e.g., the steady-state bargaining power
of workers, η, the flow value of unemployment, eb, and the degree of wage rigidity, λw , are
very similar to the estimates in GST. Other parameters differ from GST, however. The
estimated wage indexing parameter γ w is zero, compared with 0.8 in GST. At the same
time, bargaining power shocks are quite persistent, ρη = 0.68, more so than in GST, where
ρη = 0.26. Furthermore, the price markup shocks are not very persistent, ρp = 0.17, compared
with 0.8 in GST.14
Comparing parameter estimates across countries, the weight on pre-match hiring costs,
η q , is a key parameter for our analysis. Recall that η q = 0 indicates that only internal
costs in new hires are present, η q = 2 indicates that all weight is assigned to search costs
in posted vacancies, while η q = 1 indicates equal weights of the two costs. The parameter
η q is estimated around 0.5 in the U.S., close to zero in the U.K. and Sweden, and close
to one in Germany. The U.S. estimate is larger than the prior mean of 0.145, which is
adapted from Silva and Toledo (2009). Our estimate confirms their finding, as well as those
of Yashiv (2000) and Furlanetto and Groshenny (2012b), that post-match training costs are
quantitatively more important than pre-match recruiting costs in the U.S. This is true also
in the U.K. and Sweden, similar to the results in Christiano, Trabandt, and Walentin (2011)
13

To be more precise, as shown in Appendix A, the log-linearized Phillips curve is given by
π
b t = ιb π
bt−1 + ιo (b
pw
εpt ) + ιf Et π
bt+1 ,
t +b

where ιb , ιo , ιf are convolutions of parameters. Instead of estimating the stochastic process for the price
markup shock b
εpt , we define the shock e
εpt ≡ ιob
εpt , and estimate the properties of e
εpt , which has a unitary
contemporaneous impact on inflation. Similar normalizations are applied to the investment shock b
εit and the
w
bargaining power shock b
εt .
14

These differences might be due to the different sample period relative to GST, but may also reflect weak
identification between the persistence of shocks and the indexation parameters (see Canova and Sala (2009)).

16

for Sweden.
Germany stands out with a large estimate for η q , assigning approximately equal weights
to recruiting and training costs. This is likely due to the shifts in the Beveridge curve in
the estimation period. In Germany, unemployment was trending upwards until 2005, while
vacancies were more cyclical. The Beveridge curve thus shifted outwards before 2005 (see
Figure 3), which requires an important role for matching efficiency shocks, and therefore a
relatively large η q .
For the U.K. and Sweden there was no shift in the Beveridge curve during the (fairly
short) estimation period (again, see Figure 3). This is likely the reason why η q is estimated
close to zero. For these countries matching efficiency shocks will not be an important driver
of unemployment dynamics. In the U.S., the Beveridge curve shifted inwards during the
estimation period (see Daly, Hobijn, Şahin, and Valletta (2012)). This requires some role for
matching efficiency shocks, and therefore a non-zero estimate for η q , although the estimates
still assign a larger role to post-match training costs.
The relative flow value of unemployment, eb, is larger in the U.K. and Sweden than in
the U.S., which is consistent with the U.S. having a lower replacement rate than European
countries. However, it is even smaller in Germany. This is possibly explained by the recent
Hartz reforms in 2002–2006. A key feature of the reforms was to change the benefit system,
reducing the level and the duration of unemployment benefit entitlements and conditioning
them on active search behavior (see Burda and Hunt (2011) and Krause and Uhlig (2012)).
The steady-state bargaining power of workers, η, is large for all countries, in line with the
results of GST.
A final parameter that stands out is the standard deviation of matching efficiency shocks,
σ m , which is considerably larger than the other standard deviations, and is particularly large
in Germany. The large values are mainly due to the fact that we did not normalize this shock
before estimation, in contrast to many other shocks.15

4.2

Driving forces prior to the financial crisis

Before studying how the model interprets the financial crisis and the Great Recession, we look
at the driving forces of business cycles in the estimation period up until 2007Q1. Figures 4–7
present the time paths of the estimated shocks in the four countries (the vertical lines indicate
the last observation in the sample used for estimation), and Table 4 shows a long-run variance
decomposition of output growth, unemployment, and vacancies in the four countries.
In the U.S., most shocks are fairly stable during the estimation period, without any clear
trend. The exception is the government spending shock, which shows a downward trend,
consistent with the actual patterns in the ratios of government spending and net exports to
GDP. Shocks to technology, investment, and the risk premium explain most of the variance
in all variables. Matching efficiency shocks are only important for vacancies. They are not
important drivers of business cycles since they do not generate a Beveridge curve, that is,
they imply a positive co-movement between unemployment and vacancies. As in GST, shocks
15
In particular, we could have normalized it to have a unitary effect on employment. This would have
reduced the standard deviation of the shock leaving everything else basically unchanged.

17

to the price markup, workers’ bargaining power, government spending, and monetary policy
are not important driving forces of business cycle fluctuations.
In the U.K. the estimated shocks and the variance decomposition are similar to the U.S.
The main exception is that shocks to government spending (and net exports) have a larger
impact on output and vacancies compared with the U.S., and also monetary policy shocks
are more important. As in the U.S., bargaining power shocks and price markup shocks do not
contribute at all to business cycle fluctuations, while matching efficiency shocks are important
only for vacancies.
For Sweden, there is a slight upward trend in the estimated risk premium shock and a
downward trend in government spending and net exports, reflecting the off-setting effects of
a fiscal consolidation since the mid-1990s and a build-up of a current account surplus. The
variance decomposition is similar to the U.K., with a more important role of government
spending and net exports as well as monetary policy than in the U.S.
In Germany, there are upward trends in both the risk premium and government spending
and net exports, reflecting the strong external position of Germany. There is substantial
variation also in the bargaining power shock, which falls until 2000, then increases until
around 2004 and finally falls back again. The matching efficiency shock is characterized by a
series of negative realizations during the estimation period.
To understand the role of labor market shocks, it is important to recall that Germany
experienced significant trends in unemployment, which increased after reunification from
1992 to 2005 (basically during our estimation period) and decreased after that (during our
evaluation period). In contrast, vacancies do not display any trend and only display cyclical
behavior. The increasing trend in unemployment during the estimation period is largely
attributed to matching efficiency shocks. The matching efficiency shocks (together with an
important role for pre-match recruiting costs) are required to explain the outward shift of the
German Beveridge curve from 1994 to 2005. On the other hand, cyclical fluctuations in both
unemployment and vacancies are due to both matching efficiency shocks and bargaining power
shocks. Indeed those two shocks explain together 92 percent of the variance in unemployment,
while bargaining power shocks explain 53 percent of the variation in vacancies. Another factor
that may explain why those shocks that are important to explain the variance in output only
play a minor role in explaining unemployment is the structure of the labor market, particularly
the fact that the German labor market is highly sclerotic, that is, it displays low job finding
and separation rates (see also the discussion of the counterfactuals below). Intuitively, shocks
that do not affect labor markets directly do not propagate much in sclerotic labor markets.
The variance decomposition of output in Germany is not very different from the other
three countries.
Summing up, the main differences between Germany and the other countries lie in the
labor market. While in the U.S., U.K., and Sweden the same shocks (to technology, government spending, investment, and the risk premium) explain the bulk of variation in both GDP
and labor market variables (unemployment and vacancies), in Germany output is explained
with the same shocks as for the other three countries, while unemployment and vacancies are
mostly explained by the labor market shocks.

18

4.3

What happened during the financial crisis?

We now focus on how our estimated models interpret the period after 2007Q1. For this purpose we compare the estimated time paths of the shocks in Figures 4–7 before and after 2007,
and we present decompositions of output growth, unemployment, vacancies, and wages from
2007Q1 until mid-2011. Finally, we decompose movements in the Okun’s law relationship
and the Beveridge curve.
4.3.1

Driving forces after 2007

In the U.S., the period after 2007 is characterized by a large increase in the risk premium
shock (capturing the effects of financial frictions) and a large drop in matching efficiency.
Since 2008 there is also an increase in the monetary policy shock, as the zero-lower bound on
the nominal interest rate becomes binding, and the interest rate is set at a level higher than
that implied by the monetary policy rule.
The technology shock increases gradually in the aftermath of the financial crisis capturing
an increase in productivity associated with the slow recovery in unemployment relatively to
output. The shock to workers’ bargaining power (that is, to wage setting) rises moderately
in the recession, reflecting the fact that wage growth did not slow down as much as implied
by the severity of the recession. In contrast, the shocks to investment and the price markup
are fairly stable throughout.
In the U.K., the period following the financial crisis is characterized by negative technology
shocks, an increased risk premium, reduced wage pressure (a low bargaining power shock),
and reduced matching efficiency. To counter the effects of the crisis, monetary policy was
more expansionary after 2007 than implied by the estimated policy rule, so the zero-lower
bound did not seem to be binding. Comparing with the U.S., we note the opposite patterns
for the technology shock, the monetary policy shock, and the bargaining power shock. As
in the U.S. matching efficiency initially decreased, but while in the U.S it remained at low
levels, in the U.K. it returned to more normal levels.
In Sweden and Germany the estimated shocks are largely similar to those in the U.K.
One exception is the risk premium shock, which does not increase as much in Sweden and
Germany during the financial crisis, and in particular in Germany there are no signs of
increased financial frictions after 2007. As in the U.K., the zero-lower bound did not seem
to be binding in Sweden and Germany. Matching efficiency fell also in Sweden in 2007,
and remained at low levels until 2011. This helps to account for the outward shift in the
Swedish Beveridge curve. For Germany, in contrast, we see that the matching efficiency
shock trends up mildly in the Great Recession period, consistently with the decreasing trend
in unemployment starting from 2005. As we previously discussed, in Germany changes in
matching efficiency capture movements in the Beveridge Curve associated with trends in
unemployment.
In all countries, the shock to government spending and net exports follow closely movements in the ratio of government spending and net exports to GDP. At the time of the crisis
or slightly later there was an increase in government spending relative to GDP in all countries. In the U.S. there was also an increase in net exports relative to GDP, while in the

19

other three countries there was a significant decrease in net exports relative to GDP. Thus,
the combined effect of government spending and net exports is positive in the U.S., but it
is reversed quickly due to a contraction in government spending from 2009 onwards. In the
U.K. and Sweden, the increase in government spending dominates the fall in net exports
relative to GDP. In Germany the two effects basically offset each other.
4.3.2

Explaining the contraction in output

Figure 8 shows the contribution of different shocks to GDP from 2007 until 2011. (The figure
shows cumulated GDP growth since 2007Q1.) The patterns are quite different in the U.S.
relative to the European countries.
In the U.S. the fall in GDP during 2008 and 2009 is mainly explained by the risk premium
shock. A similar pattern is visible for the U.K., although to a lesser extent, but it is virtually
absent in Sweden and Germany. One interpretation is that this shock reflects the reduction
in both consumption and investment driven by increases in financial frictions affecting both
households and firms.
The risk premium shock in our model is a short-cut to model financial frictions, following Smets and Wouters (2007). More careful modeling of financial frictions motivate similar
shocks as due to moral hazard and asymmetric information in the firm sector (e.g., Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999)) or tightened credit constraints due to an increase in the perception of risk of household debt (as in Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2011)). A positive risk
premium shock increases the wedge between the cost of borrowing and its benefit to the
household as well as the wedge between the cost of borrowing and the return to capital to
the firm. Thus it reduces consumption and investment. Other papers consider either wedge
in isolation, whereas our model captures both wedges, although in a reduced-form manner
where the wedges are exogenous and cannot be separately identified. Hall (2012), in contrast,
considers both wedges and can separately identify them.
There is a striking difference between the U.S. and the other three countries in the role
of technology shocks. These shocks explain all of the decrease in output in Sweden, most
of it in the U.K. (even though the risk premium is also important), and part of the decline
in output in Germany, but they contribute to keeping output high in the U.S. To a large
extent, the negative impact of technology shocks in the European countries may capture the
reduction in output per worker due to labor hoarding associated, in turn, with a reduction in
hours per worker and, possibly, with a temporary reallocation of workers from productive to
organizational activities. While the U.S. experienced almost no change in hours per worker,
so that almost the entire decrease in total hours was due to a decrease in employment, in
the U.K. the decrease in total hours was associated with changes in employment and hours
per worker of similar magnitude. In Sweden, hours per worker remained fairly stable after
2007, implying that most of the decrease in total hours was due to a decrease in employment.
Germany again differs from the other countries, as hours per worker fell more than total hours
and employment therefore increased. The reduction in hours per worker in Germany was due
to the use of both government-sponsored short-time work and working time accounts16 , in
16

The personnel management practice of working time accounts allows employers to raise hours above

20

addition to a reduction in standard weekly hours and overtime.
Government spending and net exports contribute positively to output in all countries,
although the effects are short-lived in the U.S., where the increase was quickly reversed (see
Figure 4). As noted earlier, the zero lower bound seems to be binding only for the U.S., where
monetary policy is contractionary. For the three other countries monetary policy contributes
to keeping output high.
Finally, the labor market shocks (to the bargaining power and matching efficiency) have
some effects on output. In particular, reduced matching efficiency in the U.S. contributes
to lower output starting in the second half of 2008. In general, however, the labor market
shocks are relatively more important for the labor market variables to which we turn next.
4.3.3

Unemployment

The role of financial shocks for the U.S. is even more clear when explaining the increase in
unemployment, see Figure 9. From the end of 2008 the risk premium shock increases the unemployment rate by more than two percentage points. Reduced matching efficiency explains
another percentage point of the increase in unemployment. These effects are quite persistent,
helping to explain why unemployment stayed high through 2011. Shocks to investment are
also important for the increase in unemployment.
Wage setting shocks (to workers’ bargaining power) are small and therefore have a modest
impact on unemployment. This is in stark contrast to Galı́, Smets, and Wouters (2012),
where similar wage setting shocks (to the wage markup) are the dominant explanation for
the increase in unemployment since 2008. In our model, this role seems to be taken over
by shocks to the matching process, an explanation that has also featured prominently in
the policy debate (see, for instance, Kocherlakota (2010)). At the same time, the fact that
bargaining power shocks are not large indicates that in this model there are not large tensions
between the dynamics of wages and employment.
Monetary policy shocks and investment shocks also contribute to high unemployment in
the U.S., while technology shocks have a more muted impact on unemployment compared
with output.
These results are broadly consistent with Furlanetto and Groshenny (2012b), who also
find that shocks to the risk premium, investment, and matching efficiency are important to
explain the increase in unemployment in the U.S.
The estimated changes in matching efficiency in the U.S. may of course capture a number
of factors that are not present in our model. For instance, skill or geographical mismatch
(as discussed by Şahin, Song, Topa, and Violante (2011) and Sterk (2011)), a reduction in
the recruiting intensity with which firms try to fill posted vacancies (see Davis, Faberman,
and Haltiwanger (2012)), a reduction in the search intensity of unemployed workers, due to
the extended unemployment benefit programs (see Kuang and Valletta (2010)), or changes
in the composition of the unemployment pool or in demographics (see Barnichon and Figura
(2011, 2012)). Finally, matching efficiency shocks could capture an increase in separations
standard hours with no immediate payment, as long as hours are reduced in compensation over a time window
in the future with no correspondent cut in pay (see Burda and Hunt (2011)).

21

during the early part of the financial crisis, which is not allowed for in our model where the
separation rate is constant.
In the U.K. the increase in unemployment is largely due to the risk premium shock
and technology shocks, but also shocks to government spending and net exports contribute
to keeping unemployment high, despite the fact that these factors also tended to increase
output. The increase in unemployment is moderated by expansionary monetary policy and
shocks to investment-specific technology. Further analysis (not reported here) shows that
the investment shock mainly explains the low-frequency component of unemployment, rather
than the cyclical component. We find similar patterns for Sweden as in the U.K. In both
Sweden and the U.K., matching efficiency shocks have a small impact on unemployment, as
post-match training costs are more important than pre-match recruiting costs. As we will
see below, matching efficiency shocks in these countries have a larger effect on vacancies than
on unemployment.
The unemployment decomposition in Germany follows a very different pattern than in
the other countries. According to our model, the persistent reduction in unemployment in
Germany during the evaluation period is largely explained by labor market shocks: improved
matching efficiency and reduced bargaining power of workers. These shocks potentially capture three important aspects of the German labor market since 2000. First, the labor market
reforms undertaken in the first half of the 2000, which reduced the duration of unemployment benefits and made requirements for benefits stricter (see Burda and Hunt (2011) or
Krause and Uhlig (2012)), and increased the efficiency of job search by introducing stricter
sanctions for refusing job offers (see Fahr and Sunde (2009)). Second, the increased use of
short-time work and working time reductions to adjust the labor input at the intensive margin. Third, the delayed effect of the wage moderation that characterized the German labor
market between 2000 and 2008, a consequence of the reduced power of labor unions.
4.3.4

Vacancies

For vacancies in Figure 10, financial shocks lead to a reduction in vacancies in the U.S., while
the reduced efficiency of the matching process has a positive impact on vacancies since early
2008. Matching efficiency shocks thus contribute to keep vacancies high, while at the same
time keeping output growth low and unemployment high.
Matching efficiency shock also play a similar role in the U.K. and Sweden. There is almost
no effect of matching efficiency shocks on vacancies in Germany, as pre-match recruiting
costs are more important. Instead, bargaining power shocks have a strong positive impact
on vacancies in Germany.
The outward shift in the U.S. Beveridge curve is explained by negative matching efficiency
shocks that keep vacancies high relative to unemployment. The shift inward of the German
Beveridge curve is instead explained by positive matching efficiency shocks that keep unemployment down relative to vacancies. This is due to the relatively low value of the elasticity
of hiring costs to the job filling probability, η q , in the U.S. and to its relatively high value in
Germany.

22

4.3.5

Wages

Finally, Figure 11 shows the decomposition of the real wage since 2007. (The figures show the
cumulated change in the real wage since 2007Q1.) For the real wage we also add the effects
of measurement errors. Thus, we report both the actual level of wages and the model-implied
level of wages, net of the measurement error (the dashed lines).
For the U.S., risk premium and investment shocks reduce wages. In contrast, the bargaining power shock has a large positive impact on wages. This could be interpreted as
(downward) wage rigidity in addition to that delivered by the model and needed to explain
why wages have not fallen as much as implied by the high level of unemployment. An alternative and more direct interpretation of the bargaining power shock is that it captures
firm deleveraging that placed workers in a more favorable position in wage bargaining, as
proposed by Monacelli, Quadrini, and Trigari (2011).
Bargaining power shocks have a negative impact on wages in Germany, consistent with
the wage moderation interpretation mentioned when discussing unemployment.
For the U.K. and Sweden, labor market shocks are not very important for real wages.
Instead, technology shocks have a negative impact on wages while investment shocks, price
markup shocks and monetary policy shocks have a positive impact.
The measurement errors are sizable in the U.S. and Germany, but more modest in the
U.K. and Sweden. We obtain a negative measurement error on wages in the U.S. and a
positive error in Germany. While this is hard to reconcile with the effect of the bargaining
power shock, one interpretation is that this captures the moderate growth of wages relative
to productivity in the U.S. and the excessive growth of wages relative to productivity in
Germany.
4.3.6

Okun’s law

Figures 12–15 show decompositions of the Okun’s law relationship in the four countries,
that is relationships conditional on one shock at a time. As in Figure 2, the blue sections
correspond to the period from 1995 to 2006 and the green sections to 2007–2011.
In the U.S., the large movements towards the north-west are mainly due to risk premium
shocks, that increased unemployment and reduced GDP growth. It is however not obvious
which combination of shocks caused the steepening of the relationship after 2007.
For the U.K., risk premium shocks were also important to increase unemployment and
reduce GDP growth, but the flattening of the Okun’s law relationship seems entirely due to
technology shocks, that reduced GDP growth but had a smaller impact on unemployment.
The same pattern is visible in Sweden.
In Germany, finally, the Okun’s law relationship is essentially flat since 2007, and seems
largely due to shocks to technology and investment that have reduced GDP growth with no
impact on unemployment. These shocks do not transmit to unemployment mainly because
the German labor market is highly sclerotic, that is, it is characterized by relatively low job
finding and job separation probabilities. Matching efficiency shocks do not create any clear
pattern in the Okun’s law relationship.

23

4.3.7

The Beveridge curve

Figures 16–19 show similar decompositions of the Beveridge curve.
For the U.S., the figure confirms that the outward shift in the Beveridge curve since
2009 was driven by shocks to the matching efficiency which generate a positive comovement
between unemployment and vacancies. All other shocks instead move the economy along a
stable Beveridge Curve. As noted earlier, monetary shocks and risk premium shocks were
unusually large during the Great Recession compared with the period before 2007.
Most shocks generate movements with typical counter-clockwise loops in the unemploymentvacancies space that are due to the different dynamics and timing of unemployment and vacancies: in recessionary phases and subsequent recoveries, vacancies tend to move first, with
unemployment reacting with a lag. As in the unconditional Beveridge curve, some of the
shocks have not concluded the movement along the loop.
For the U.K., we do not observe any shifts in the Beveridge curve after 2007, but movements along the curve were unusually large after 2007. This is mainly generated by shocks to
technology and the risk premium, which both tended to increase unemployment and reduce
vacancies.
The shift in the Swedish Beveridge curve is mainly due to an increase in vacancies for a
given level of unemployment. The decomposition shows that this is largely due to matching
efficiency shocks, which have a large impact on vacancies but little on unemployment.
And for Germany, shocks to the matching efficiency and the bargaining power are the only
ones to have an impact on the Beveridge curve. Improved matching efficiency have tended
to reduce unemployment for a given level of vacancies, shifting the Beveridge curve inwards,
while bargaining power shocks have led to large movements along the Beveridge curve.

4.4

Counterfactual experiments

Some of the structural shocks, in particular shocks to technology and matching efficiency,
may be capturing missing factors in the model. This caveat notwithstanding, under the
assumption that the model and the shocks are truly structural, we can run counterfactual
experiments to answer questions such as: What would unemployment in Germany have been
if the labor market structure had been more similar to that in the U.S.?
The first column of Figure 20 plots actual unemployment and output in Germany since
2007 together with counterfactual unemployment and output when we set all labor market
parameters—specifically η, σ, ρ, s, eb, η , λw , and γ —to the U.S. values, keeping everything
q

w

else unchanged. In particular, we keep the estimated shocks series for Germany. The figure
shows that while output would have displayed similar dynamics in Germany if the labor
market structure had been similar to that in the U.S., the unemployment rate would have
behaved very differently: unemployment would have increased substantially in Germany
during the Great Recession, more in line with the U.S. experience. These effects are largely
explained by the U.S. labor market being less sclerotic than the German labor market. The
second column of Figure 20 plots, together with German output and unemployment, the
counterfactual output and unemployment when we only change the average job finding rate,
s, and the average job separation rate, 1 − ρ, to the U.S. values. The figures show that a less

24

sclerotic labor market in the counterfactual experiment for Germany—a higher s and a lower
ρ—is responsible for almost all of the effect displayed in the first column. It is important
to note, however, that if the German labor market had been more similar to that in the
U.S., then it would have entered the Great Recession with a higher unemployment rate than
in the U.S. Less sclerotic labor markets may deliver better labor market outcomes in good
times, but insulates the labor markets from the adverse effects of large recessionary episodes
or crises.

5

Conclusions and final remarks

In this paper we try to shed light on why different industrialized economies have had very
different labor market experiences during the Great Recession and the subsequent recovery.
To this purpose, we estimate a version of the model developed by Gertler, Sala, and Trigari
(2008) to study labor market dynamics in four different countries: the U.S., the U.K., Sweden, and Germany. We focus on the relative importance of structural and cyclical forces in
determining economic outcomes. We find that while different shocks explain the recession
and the labor market experience in the four countries, structural differences in the labor
market also played a role.
Our study comes with a number of caveats. Using a unified framework for all countries
simplifies comparison across countries. The disadvantage is that this framework is unable
to capture all country-specific factors and labor market institutions that were important
in determining labor market outcomes. An important area for future research is to better
adapt the model to such factors. This is particularly true for Germany where a number of
institutional changes and reforms have taken place in the labor market since reunification.
Accordingly, the model and our approach can be extended in a number of directions. In
general, it would be useful to extend the model to include an intensive margin, endogenous
separation, and an external sector, as in Christiano, Trabandt, and Walentin (2011). Another
useful extension would be to develop further the labor market specification to look into
the microfoundations of time-varying matching efficiency. It would also be desirable to use
additional data on flows as in Justiniano and Michelacci (2012) and, more generally, to spend
more resources on data collection.
Finally, we plan to further investigate the different role played by wage markup shocks in
Galı́, Smets, and Wouters (2012) and bargaining power shocks in Gertler, Sala, and Trigari
(2008) and study the consequences of these differences for natural and potential output along
the lines of Sala, Söderström, and Trigari (2010).

25

A

Model appendix

A.1

Steady state calculation

Let ȳ denote yt /zt evaluated at steady state for any variable yt .
• Consumption and savings
1 = εb r (β/γ z )

(A1)

• Physical capital


1 = (β/γ z ) 1 − δ + rk

(A2)

• Capital/employment ratio
rk = αpw k̄/n

−(1−α)

(A3)

• Marginal product of labor
α
ā = (1 − α) k̄/n

(A4)

• Investment
qk = 1

(A5)

x=1−ρ

(A6)

• Rates

• Flows
xn = su

(A7)

• Unemployment
u=1−n

(A8)

• Matching
su = εσ uσ v 1−σ

(A9)

• Hiring
κ̄
κ̄x = pw ā − w̄ + β x2 + βρκ̄x
2

(A10)

26

• Wages


κ̄
w̄ = χ pw ā + β x2 + βκ̄sx + (1 − χ) b̄
2

(A11)

where
χ=

η
,
η + (1 − η) µ/

µ=

1
,
1 − λβ

=

1
1 − ρλβ

• Hiring and vacancy costs
κ̄ = κq −ηq

(A12)

• Resource constraint
1=

ı̄
κ̄ n
c̄ ḡ
+ + + x2
ȳ ȳ ȳ
2 ȳ

(A13)

where
−α
n/ȳ = k̄/n

A.2


ı̄/ȳ =

1−δ
1−
γz


γ z k̄/n

(1−α)

Log-linear model

• Technology
ybt = αb
kt + (1 − α) n
bt

(A14)

• Resource constraint
ybt = yc b
ct + yibit + yg gbt + yν νbt + yx (b
κt + 2b
xt + n
bt−1 )

(A15)

where
yc = c̄/ȳ,

yi = ı̄/ȳ,

yg = g/ȳ,

yν = rk k̄/ȳ,

yx = (κ̄/2) x2 n/ȳ



• Matching
m
bt = b
εσt + σb
ut + (1 − σ) vbt

(A16)

• Employment dynamics
n
bt = n
bt−1 + (1 − ρ) x
bt

(A17)

27

• Transition probabilities
qbt = m
b t − vbt

(A18)

sbt = m
bt − u
bt

(A19)

• Unemployment
u
bt = − (n/u) n
bt−1

(A20)

• Effective capital
p
b
kt + b
εzt = νbt + b
kt−1

(A21)

• Physical capital dynamics




p
b
ktp = ξ b
kt−1
−b
εzt + (1 − ξ) bit + b
εit

(A22)

where
ξ=

1−δ
γz

• Aggregate vacancies
x
bt = qbt + vbt − n
bt−1

(A23)

• Consumption and saving


b t,t+1 + b
0 = Et Λ
εbt + rbt − Et π
bt+1 − Etb
εzt+1

(A24)

• Marginal utility







z
2
e
e
b
e
e
1 − h 1 − β h λt = h (b
ct−1 − b
εt ) − 1 + β h b
ct + β e
hEt b
ct+1 + b
εzt+1

(A25)

where
e
h = h/γ z
• Capital utilization
νbt = η ν rbtk

(A26)

where
η ν = A0 (1) /A00 (1) =

1 − ψν
ψν

28

• Investment

 1/ η γ 2  



1
β
k z
z
bit =
bit−1 − b
εt +
qbtk + b
εit +
Et bit+1 + b
εzt+1
1+β
1+β
1+β

(A27)

where
η k = S 00 (γ z )
• Capital renting
pbw
bt − b
kt = rbtk
t +y

(A28)

• Tobin’s q
h
i


b
e (1 − δ) Et qbk + 1 − β
e (1 − δ) Et rbk − b
qbtk = β
ε
+
r
b
−
E
π
b
t
t
t+1
t+1
t+1
t

(A29)

where
e = β/γ
β
z
• Aggregate hiring rate
b t,t+1 + βEt (b
(b
κt + x
bt ) = κa (b
pw
at ) − κw w
bt + κλ Et Λ
κt+1 + x
bt+1 )
t +b

(A30)

where
κ = (κ̄x)−1 ,

κa = κpw ā, κw = κ w̄, κλ = β (1 + ρ) /2

• Hiring-vacancy cost
κ
bt = −η q qbt

(A31)

where
ηq =

2ϕ/q̄
ϕ/q̄ + (1 − ϕ)

• Marginal product of labor
b
at = ybt − n
bt

(A32)

• Weight in Nash bargaining
χ
b t = − (1 − χ) (b
µt − bt )

(A33)

29

with


b t,t+1 − π
bt+1 + γb
π t + bt+1 − b
εzt+1
bt = (ρλβ) Et Λ
µ
bt = (xλβ) Et x
bt+1 − (xλβ) (κw µ) µEt w
bt + γb
πt − π
bt+1 − b
εzt+1 − w
bt+1


z
b t,t+1 + γb
+ (λβ) Et µ
bt+1 + Λ
πt − π
bt+1 − b
εt+1



• Spillover-free target wage
w
bto = ϕa (b
pw
at ) + (ϕs + ϕx ) Et x
bt+1 + ϕs Et sbt+1 + ϕbbbt
t +b



b t,t+1 + ϕχ χ
+ (ϕs + ϕx /2) Et κ
bt+1 + Λ
b t − (ρ − s) βb
χt+1 + b
εw
t

(A34)

where
ϕa = χpw āw̄−1 ,

ϕx = χβκ̄x2 w̄−1 ,

ϕs = (1 − χ) sβ H̄ w̄−1 ,

ϕb = (1 − χ) b̄w̄−1

ϕχ = χ (1 − χ)−1 κ̄xw̄−1

η η
b
εw
εt ,
t = ϕη [1 − (ρ − s) βρ ] b

ϕη = ϕχ (1 − χ) (1 − η)−1

• Aggregate wage
bt−1 − π
bt + γb
π t−1 − b
εzt ) + γ o w
bto + γ f Et w
bt+1 + π
bt+1 − γb
πt + b
εzt+1
w
bt = γ b (w



(A35)

where
γ b = (1 + τ 2 ) φ−1 ,

γ o = ςφ−1 ,


γ f = τ λ−1 − τ 1 φ−1


φ = (1 + τ 2 ) + ς + τ λ−1 − τ 1 , ς = (1 − λ) (1 − τ ) λ−1


τ 1 = κw µϕx + ϕχ (1 − χ) (xβλ) (κw µ) µ (ρβ) + ϕs Γ (1 − τ )
τ 2 = − (κw µ) ϕχ (1 − χ) (xβλ) µ (1 − τ )
Γ = (1 − ηxβλµ) η −1 µκw
• Phillips curve
π
b t = ιb π
bt−1 + ιo (b
pw
εpt ) + ιf Et π
bt+1
t +b

(A36)

where
ιb = γ p (φp )−1 ,
φp = 1 + βγ p ,

ιo = (ς p /τ p ) (φp )−1 ,

ιf = β (φp )−1

ς p = (1 − λp ) (1 − λp β) (λp )−1 ,

30

τ p = 1 + (εp − 1) ξ

• Monetary policy rule
rbt = ρs rbt−1 + (1 − ρs ) [rπ π
bt + ry (b
yt − ybnt )] + b
εrt

(A37)

• Government spending
gbt = ybt +

1 − yg g
b
εt
yg

(A38)

• Market tightness
b
θt = vbt − u
bt

(A39)

• Benefits
bbt = b
ktp

(A40)

31

B
B.1

Data appendix
United States

GDP Real Gross Domestic Product in billions of chained 2005 dollars. Source: FRED
database, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Divided by population to obtain real per
capita GDP.
Investment Fixed Private Investment + Personal Consumption Expenditures: Durable
Goods. Source: FRED database, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Deflated by
the GDP price deflator and divided by population to obtain real per capita Investment.
Consumption Personal Consumption Expenditures: Nondurable Goods + Services. Source:
FRED database, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Deflated by the GDP price deflator
and divided by population to obtain real per capita Consumption.
Wages Hourly compensation in the Nonfarm Business Sector. Seasonally adjusted. Source:
FRED database, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Divided by the GDP price deflator
to obtain an hourly real wage.
Price level Implicit Price Deflator, index numbers, 2005=100. Seasonally adjusted. Source:
FRED database, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Expressed in quarter to quarter
growth rates.
Interest Rate Effective Federal Funds Rate. Source: FRED Database, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis.
Unemployment Number of unemployed persons. Source: FRED Database, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis.
Unemployment Rate Civilian unemployment rate. Source: FRED Database, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Vacancies Quarterly average of the monthly composite Help-Wanted index. Source: Barnichon (2010).
Population Civilian Noninstitutional Population. Average of monthly figures. Source:
Source: FRED Database, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

32

B.2

United Kingdom

GDP Real Gross Domestic Product in billions of chained 2005 pounds. Seasonally adjusted.
Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012. Divided by population
to obtain real per capita GDP.
Investment Real Gross Fixed Capital Formation in billions of chained 2005 pounds. Seasonally adjusted. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012. Divided
by population to obtain real per capita investment.
Consumption Real Private Consumption Expenditure in billions of chained 2005 pounds.
Seasonally adjusted. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012.
Divided by population to obtain real per capita consumption.
Wages Wages and Salaries divided by Total actual weekly hours worked. Source: Office for
National Statistics (ONS). Deflated by the price level to obtain real hourly compensation.
Price level Implicit Price Deflator, index numbers, 2005=100. Seasonally adjusted. Source:
OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012.
Interest Rate Three month interbank offer rate. Quarterly data are averages of monthly
figures. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012
Unemployment Harmonised Unemployment Level. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012.
Unemployment Rate Harmonized Unemployment Rate. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly
Economic Indicators, April 2012
Vacancies Data refer to job opportunities notified by an employer to a Jobcentre or Careers
Office (including self-employed opportunities created by employers) which remained
unfilled on the day of the count. The vacancy figures do not represent the total number
of vacancies in the economy. Recent estimates suggest that nationally about one third
of all vacancies are notified to jobcentres. The suspension of the series in April 1999
was initially due to the discontinuity of vacancy figures for Northern Ireland identified
during the introduction of major new computer system. Figures should be available
anew from October 2001 but are still provisional and subject to future adjustment.
Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012. Due to the presence
of a break in the mean of the series in 2001Q1, we have mean corrected the series by
assuming that there were no changes in vacancies between 2001Q1 and 2001Q2.
Population Thousands of population between age 15 to 64. Data refer to annual average
estimates. Source: OECD.Stat Annual Labour Force Statistics. Annual values are
taken as second quarter values and quarterly data are interpolated linearly until 2010.
After the second quarter of 2010, data are extrapolated.

33

B.3

Sweden

GDP Real Gross Domestic Product, constant prices. Seasonally adjusted. Source: Statistics
Sweden. Divided by population to obtain real per capita GDP.
Investment Real Gross Fixed Capital Formation, constant prices. Seasonally adjusted.
Source: Statistics Sweden. Divided by population to obtain real per capita investment.
Consumption Final Private Consumption Expenditure, constant prices. Seasonally adjusted. Source: Statistics Sweden. Divided by population to obtain real per capita
consumption.
Wages Hourly compensation.

Seasonally adjusted, not working day adjusted.

Source:

Statistics Sweden.
Price level Consumer Price Index with Fixed Interest Rate (CPIF). Quarterly averages.
Seasonally adjusted. Source: Statistics Sweden.
Interest Rate Repo rate. Quarterly averages. Source: Sveriges Riksbank.
Unemployment Number of unemployed. Quarterly averages. Seasonally adjusted. Source:
Statistics Sweden.
Unemployment Rate Quarterly averages. Seasonally adjusted. Source: Statistics Sweden.
Vacancies Quarterly averages. Seasonally adjusted. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012
Population Population between age 16 to 64. Source: Statistics Sweden.

34

B.4

Germany

GDP Real Gross Domestic Product in billions of chained 2005 euros. Seasonally adjusted.
Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012. Divided by population
to obtain real per capita GDP.
Investment Real Gross Fixed Capital Formation in billions of chained 2005 euros. Seasonally adjusted. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012. Divided
by population to obtain real per capita investment.
Consumption Real Private Consumption Expenditure in billions of chained 2005 euros.
Seasonally adjusted. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012.
Divided by population to obtain real per capita consumption.
Wages Hourly compensation. Seasonally adjusted, not working day adjusted. Source: European Central Bank.
Price level Implicit Price Deflator, index numbers, 2005=100. Seasonally adjusted. Source:
OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012.
Interest Rate Three month interbank offer rate. Data refer to unified Germany from July
1990 and western Germany prior to this date. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic
Indicators, April 2012
Unemployment Number of unemployed. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012.
Unemployment Rate From 2005, data are supplied by Eurostat and seasonally adjusted
by OECD. Prior to 2005, the source for original data is the Federal Statistical Office
of Germany and the Federal Bank of Germany for seasonally adjusted series. Source:
OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012
Vacancies Data refer to vacancies for jobs of 7 days’ duration or more reported by employers
to employment agencies to be filled within 3 months and remaining unfilled at the end
of the month. Source: OECD.Stat, Monthly Economic Indicators, April 2012
Population Thousands of population between age 15 to 64. Data refer to annual average
estimates. Source: OECD.Stat Annual Labour Force Statistics. Annual values are
taken as second quarter values and quarterly data are interpolated linearly until 2010.
After the second quarter of 2010, data are extrapolated.

35

References
An, Sungbae and Frank Schorfheide (2007), “Bayesian analysis of DSGE models,” Econometric Reviews 26 (2–4), 113–172.
Barnichon, Regis (2010), “Building a composite help-wanted index,” Economics Letters 109,
175–178.
Barnichon, Regis and Andrew Figura (2012), “The determinants of the cycles and trends in
U.S. unemployment,” Unpublished manuscript, CREI.
Barnichon, Regis and Andrew Figura (2011), “Labor market heterogeneities, matching efficiency and the cyclical behavior of the job finding rate,” Unpublished manuscript,
CREI.
Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999), “The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by
John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, Elsevier Science.
Burda, Michael C. and Jennifer Hunt (2011), “What explains the German labor market
miracle in the Great Recession?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2011,
273–319.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983), “Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 12 (3), 383–398.
Canova, Fabio and Luca Sala (2009), “Back to square one: identification issues in DSGE
models,” Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (4), 431–449.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (2005), “Nominal rigidities and the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy,” Journal of Political Economy 113 (1), 1–45.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno (2003), “The great depression and the Friedman-Schwartz hypothesis,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
35 (6, Part 2), 1119–1198.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno (2008), “Shocks, structures
or monetary policies? The euro area and US after 2001,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control 32 (8), 2476–2506.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Matthias Trabandt and Karl Walentin (2011), “Introducing financial frictions and unemployment into a small open economy model,” Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 35 (12), 1999–2041.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger (2012), “Recruiting intensity
during and after the Great Recession: National and industry evidence,” Working Paper
No. 17782, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta (2012), “A search and
matching approach to labor markets: Did the natural rate of unemployment rise?,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 26 (3), 3–26.
Elsby, Michael, Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin (2012), “Unemployment dynamics in the
OECD,” Forthcoming, Review of Economics and Statistics.

36

Fahr, René and Uwe Sunde (2009), “Did the Hartz reforms speed-up the matching process?
A macro-evaluation using empirical matching functions,” German Economic Review
10 (3), 284–316.
Furlanetto, Francesco and Nicolas Groshenny (2012a), “Matching efficiency and business
cycle fluctuations,” Working Paper No. 34/2012, Centre for Applied Macroeconomic
Analysis, The Australian National University.
Furlanetto, Francesco and Nicolas Groshenny (2012b), “Mismatch shocks and unemployment during the Great Recession,” Unpublished manuscript, Norges Bank.
Galı́, Jordi, Frank Smets, and Raf Wouters (2011), “Unemployment in an estimated New
Keynesian model,” Forthcoming, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2011.
Galı́, Jordi, Frank Smets, and Raf Wouters (2012), “Slow recoveries: A structural interpretation,” Unpublished manuscript, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Gertler, Mark, Luca Sala, and Antonella Trigari (2008), “An estimated monetary DSGE
model with unemployment and staggered nominal wage bargaining,” Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking 40 (8), 1713–1764.
Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari (2009), “Unemployment fluctuations with staggered
Nash wage bargaining,” Journal of Political Economy 117 (1), 38–86.
Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni (2011) “Credit crises, precautionary savings, and
the liquidity trap,” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago and MIT.
Hall, Robert E. (2012), “Quantifying the forces leading to the collapse of GDP after the
financial crisis,” Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University.
International Monetary Fund (2010), “Unemployment dynamics during recessions and recoveries: Okun’s law and beyond,” World Economic Outlook: Rebalancing Growth,
Ch. 3.
Justiniano, Alejandro and Claudio Michelacci (2012), “The cyclical behavior of equilibrium
unemployment and vacancies in the United States and Europe,” in Frankel, Jeffrey, and
Christopher Pissarides (eds.), NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2011 .
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti (2010), “Investment
shocks and business cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (2), 132–145.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti (2012), “Is there a
trade-off between inflation and output stabilization?,” Unpublished manuscript, Northwestern University.
Kimball, Miles S. (1995), “The quantitative analytics of the basic neomonetarist model,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27 (4), 1241–1277.
Kocherlakota, Narayana (2010), “Inside the FOMC,” Speech in Marquette, Michigan, August 17, 2010, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Krause, Michael U. and Harald Uhlig (2012), “Transitions in the German labor market:
Structure and crisis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 59 (1), 64–79.
Kuang, Katherine and Rob Valletta (2010), “Extended unemployment and UI benefits,”
Economic Letter 2010-12, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

37

Merz, Monika (1995), “Search in the labor market and the real business cycle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 36 (2), 269–300.
Monacelli, Tommaso, Vincenzo Quadrini, and Antonella Trigari (2011), “Financial markets
and unemployment,” Unpublished manuscript, Università Bocconi.
Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides (1994), “Job creation and job destruction
in the theory of unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61 (3), 397–415.
Petrongolo, Barbara and Christopher A. Pissarides (2001), “Looking into the black box: A
survey of the matching function,” Journal of Economic Literature 39 (2), 390–431.
Şahin, Ayşegül, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante (2011) “Measuring
mismatch in the U.S. labor market,” Unpublished manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York.
Sala, Luca, Ulf Söderström, and Antonella Trigari (2008), “Monetary policy under uncertainty in an estimated model with labor market frictions,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 55 (5), 983–1006.
Sala, Luca, Ulf Söderström, and Antonella Trigari (2010), “The output gap, the labor wedge,
and the dynamic behaviour of hours,” Discussion Paper No. 8005, Centre for Economic
Policy Research.
Silva, José I. and Manuel Toledo (2009), “Labor turnover costs and the cyclical behavior of
vacancies and unemployment,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 13 (S1), 76–96.
Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters (2003), “An estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model of the Euro area,” Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (5),
1123–1175.
Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters (2007), “Shocks and frictions in U.S. business cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE approach,” American Economic Review 97 (3), 586–606.
Sterk, Vincent (2011), “Home Equity, Mobility and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Unpublished manuscript, UCL.
Yashiv, Eran (2000), “The determinants of equilibrium unemployment,” American Economic Review 90 (5), 1297–1322.

38

Table 1: Calibrated parameters

Discount factor
Capital depreciation rate
Capital share
Government spending to output ratio
Steady-state growth rate
Job survival probability
Job finding probability
Matching function elasticity
Price indexing

β
δ
α
G/Y
γz
ρ
s
σ
γp

U.S.

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

0.99
0.025
0.33
0.20
1.0048
0.897
0.625
0.5
0

0.99
0.025
0.33
0.20
1.0064
0.97
0.283
0.5
0

0.99
0.025
0.33
0.30
1.0068
0.95
0.392
0.5
0

0.99
0.025
0.33
0.19
1.0036
0.984
0.146
0.5
0

This table reports the calibrated parameters in the estimated models.

39

Table 2: Prior distribution and estimated posterior distribution, structural parameters

Utilization rate elasticity

ψν

Capital adjustment cost elasticity η k
Habit parameter
Steady-state bargaining power
Rel. flow value of unemployment

h
η
e
b

B(0.5,0.1)
N(4,1.5)
B(0.5,0.1)
B(0.5,0.1)
B(0.5,0.1)

Weight on hiring costs

ηq

G(0.145,0.1)

Calvo wage parameter

λw

B(0.75,0.1)

Calvo price parameter

λp

B(0.66,0.1)

Wage indexing parameter

γw

U(0,1)

Steady-state price markup
Mon. pol. response to inflation

εp
rπ

Mon. pol. response to output gap ry
Mon. pol. inertia

ρs

N(1.15,0.05)
N(1.7,0.3)
G(0.125,0.1)
B(0.75,0.1)

U.S.

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

0.85

0.78

0.78

0.45

[0.76, 0.91]

[0.68, 0.87]

[0.67, 0.87]

[0.33, 0.57]

4.02

3.35

4.43

2.19

[2.33, 5.80]

[0.96, 5.61]

[2.65, 6.39]

[0.99, 4.01]

0.58

0.32

0.45

0.14

[0.51, 0.65]

[0.22, 0.42]

[0.33, 0.57]

[0.08, 0.22]

0.90

0.78

0.79

0.76

[0.85, 0.94]

[0.65, 0.89]

[0.67, 0.89]

[0.67, 0.83]

0.73

0.90

0.86

0.54

[0.63, 0.81]

[0.81, 0.94]

[0.76, 0.92]

[0.38, 0.67]

0.49

0.16

0.10

1.18

[0.20, 0.86]

[0.03, 0.36]

[0.02, 0.26]

[1.10, 1.27]

0.68

0.66

0.70

0.74

[0.58, 0.78]

[0.55, 0.78]

[0.60, 0.80]

[0.67, 0.79]

0.82

0.63

0.75

0.74

[0.75, 0.88]

[0.51, 0.75]

[0.60, 0.87]

[0.66, 0.80]

0.15

0.13

0.11

0.13

[0.01, 0.49]

[0.01, 0.36]

[0.01, 0.32]

[0.01, 0.44]

1.30

1.26

1.26

1.49

[1.24, 1.36]

[1.18, 1.33]

[1.18, 1.34]

[1.43, 1.55]

1.76

1.57

1.54

1.88

[1.25, 2.25]

[1.06, 2.06]

[1.00, 2.05]

[1.55, 2.30]

0.31

0.51

0.39

0.27

[0.22, 0.44]

[0.29, 0.82]

[0.22, 0.65]

[0.16, 0.48]

0.73

0.73

0.85

0.70

[0.61, 0.80]

[0.61, 0.82]

[0.75, 0.91]

[0.60, 0.79]

This table reports the prior distribution and the median and the 5th and 95th percentiles (within square
brackets) of the estimated posterior distribution of the structural parameters. For the prior, the two numbers
in parentheses are the mean and the standard deviation of the distribution, except for the uniform distribution,
where the numbers are the lower and upper bounds of the distribution.

40

Table 3: Prior distribution and estimated posterior distribution, shock parameters
U.S.
(a) Autoregressive parameters
Risk premium
ρb
B(0.5.0.15)
Monetary policy
Investment

ρr

B(0.5.0.15)

ρi

B(0.5.0.15)

Govt & net exports ρg

B(0.5.0.15)

Technology

ρz

B(0.5.0.15)

Price markup

ρp

B(0.5.0.15)

Bargaining power

ρη

Matching efficiency ρm

B(0.5.0.15)
B(0.5.0.15)

(b) Standard deviations of innovations
Risk premium
σb
IG(0.15.0.15)
Monetary policy
Investment

σr

IG(0.15.0.15)

σi

IG(0.15.0.15)

Govt & net exports σ g

IG(0.15.0.15)

Technology
Price markup
Bargaining power

σz
σp
ση

Matching efficiency σ m

IG(0.15.0.15)
IG(0.15.0.15)
IG(0.15.0.15)
IG(0.15.0.15)

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

0.88

0.76

0.82

0.94

[ 0.82, 0.93 ]

[ 0.63, 0.87 ]

[ 0.68, 0.91 ]

[ 0.88, 0.97 ]

0.45

0.67

0.68

0.62

[ 0.30, 0.68 ]

[ 0.49, 0.83 ]

[ 0.51, 0.81 ]

[ 0.28, 0.86 ]

0.82

0.68

0.62

0.15

[ 0.74, 0.89 ]

[ 0.52, 0.85 ]

[ 0.39, 0.82 ]

[ 0.08, 0.25 ]

0.99

0.99

0.87

0.97

[ 0.98, 0.99 ]

[ 0.97, 0.99 ]

[ 0.76, 0.95 ]

[ 0.92, 0.98 ]

0.15

0.21

0.18

0.19

[ 0.08, 0.24 ]

[ 0.11, 0.33 ]

[ 0.09, 0.31 ]

[ 0.10, 0.29 ]

0.21

0.13

0.14

0.06

[ 0.10, 0.36 ]

[ 0.06, 0.23 ]

[ 0.06, 0.29 ]

[ 0.03, 0.13 ]

0.50

0.50

0.48

0.93

[ 0.26, 0.78 ]

[ 0.25, 0.73 ]

[ 0.24, 0.74 ]

[ 0.87, 0.96 ]

0.73

0.54

0.46

0.42

[ 0.61, 0.83 ]

[ 0.38, 0.69 ]

[ 0.30, 0.63 ]

[ 0.29, 0.56 ]

0.28

0.23

0.46

0.14

[ 0.21, 0.42 ]

[ 0.14, 0.35 ]

[ 0.28, 0.97 ]

[ 0.10, 0.19 ]

0.13

0.09

0.09

0.07

[ 0.11, 0.15 ]

[ 0.07, 0.12 ]

[ 0.07, 0.11 ]

[ 0.05, 0.10 ]

0.13

0.14

0.19

0.15

[ 0.09, 0.19 ]

[ 0.05, 0.22 ]

[ 0.11, 0.31 ]

[ 0.08, 0.26 ]

0.34

0.60

0.56

0.60

[ 0.30, 0.38 ]

[ 0.51, 0.71 ]

[ 0.47, 0.66 ]

[ 0.45, 0.75 ]

0.89

0.56

1.00

0.99

[ 0.79, 1.00 ]

[ 0.47, 0.67 ]

[ 0.85, 1.19 ]

[ 0.72, 1.36 ]

0.14

0.53

0.48

0.33

[ 0.12, 0.17 ]

[ 0.44, 0.64 ]

[ 0.40, 0.59 ]

[ 0.28, 0.40 ]

0.22

0.09

0.09

0.09

[ 0.12, 0.35 ]

[ 0.05, 0.15 ]

[ 0.05, 0.18 ]

[ 0.06, 0.15 ]

4.60

6.63

7.74

17.76

[ 4.12, 5.19 ]

[ 5.79, 7.62 ]

[ 6.64, 9.01 ]

[ 16.80, 19.16 ]

(c) Standard deviation of measurement error on real wage growth
U.S.
B(0.205,0.0649)
0.47
[ 0.34, 0.55 ]

U.K.

B(0.296,0.0937)

0.65
[ 0.57, 0.73 ]

Sweden

B(0.257,0.0813)

0.54
[ 0.46, 0.62 ]

Germany

B(0.237,0.0735)

0.63
[ 0.56, 0.71 ]

This table reports the prior distribution and the median and the 5th and 95th percentiles (within square
brackets) of the estimated posterior distribution of the shock parameters and the measurement error. For the
prior, the two numbers in parentheses are the mean and the standard deviation of the distribution.

41

Table 4: Variance decompositions
Shock

Unemployment

Vacancies

0.24
0.06
0.19
0.11
0.39
0.00
0.00
0.01

0.30
0.05
0.41
0.02
0.19
0.00
0.02
0.02

0.27
0.05
0.32
0.04
0.18
0.00
0.01
0.13

(b) U.K.
Risk premium
Monetary policy
Investment
Govt & net exports
Technology
Price markup
Bargaining power
Matching efficiency

0.21
0.12
0.08
0.37
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.08
0.10
0.45
0.09
0.27
0.00
0.01
0.01

0.22
0.16
0.21
0.24
0.09
0.00
0.01
0.07

(c) Sweden
Risk premium
Monetary policy
Investment
Govt & net exports
Technology
Price markup
Bargaining power
Matching efficiency

0.32
0.08
0.13
0.27
0.19
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.27
0.14
0.23
0.05
0.31
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.33
0.11
0.18
0.17
0.15
0.00
0.00
0.06

(d ) Germany
Risk premium
Monetary policy
Investment
Govt & net exports
Technology
Price markup
Bargaining power
Matching efficiency

0.22
0.09
0.35
0.18
0.11
0.00
0.00
0.04

0.03
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.40
0.52

0.17
0.08
0.11
0.04
0.05
0.00
0.53
0.02

(a) U.S.
Risk premium
Monetary policy
Investment
Govt & net exports
Technology
Price markup
Bargaining power
Matching efficiency

Output growth

This table shows the contribution of different shocks to the long-run variance of GDP growth, unemployment,
and vacancies in the estimated models.

42

Figure 1: Output, unemployment, labor productivity, and labor share in four countries,
2005–2011

This figure shows the level of GDP, the rate of unemployment, labor productivity (output per worker), and
the labor share from 2005Q1 to 2011Q4. All variables are indexed to 1 in 2007Q1.

43

Figure 2: Okun’s law relationships in four countries, 1995–2011

This figure plots the four-quarter growth rate of GDP against the yearly change in the unemployment rate
in the period from 1995Q1 until 2011Q4. The blue (dark) sections refer to the period 1995–2006, the green
(light) sections to 2007–2011. The black and red lines are regression lines for the two subsamples.

44

Figure 3: Beveridge curves in four countries, 1995–2011

This figure plots the rate of unemployment against the level of vacancies in the period from 1995Q1 until
2011Q4. Vacancies are indexed to 100 in 2008Q4. The blue (dark) sections refer to the period 1995–2006, the
green (light) sections to 2007–2011.

45

Figure 4: Estimated shocks, U.S.

This figure shows the estimated time-series processes for the structural shocks in the U.S. The vertical line
corresponds to 2007Q1, the last period in the sample used for estimation.

46

Figure 5: Estimated shocks, U.K.

This figure shows the estimated time-series processes for the structural shocks in the U.K. The vertical line
corresponds to 2007Q1, the last period in the sample used for estimation.

47

Figure 6: Estimated shocks, Sweden

This figure shows the estimated time-series processes for the structural shocks in Sweden. The vertical line
corresponds to 2007Q1, the last period in the sample used for estimation.

48

Figure 7: Estimated shocks, Germany

This figure shows the estimated time-series processes for the structural shocks in Germany. The vertical line
corresponds to 2007Q1, the last period in the sample used for estimation.

49

Figure 8: Decomposing GDP, 2007–2011

This figure shows decompositions of GDP in the period from 2007Q1 to 2011Q3 using the estimated models. The black line is cumulated GDP growth since 2007Q1 (read off the right-hand axis), the colored bars
correspond to the contribution of each structural shock (read off the left-hand axis).

50

Figure 9: Decomposing the unemployment rate, 2007–2011

This figure shows decompositions of the rate of unemployment in the period from 2007Q1 to 2011Q3 using
the estimated models. The black line is the rate of unemployment (read off the right-hand axis), the colored
bars correspond to the contribution of each structural shock (read off the left-hand axis, expressed in percent
deviation from steady state).

51

Figure 10: Decomposing vacancies, 2007–2011

This figure shows decompositions of the level of vacancies in the period from 2007Q1 to 2011Q3 using the
estimated models. The black line is the level of vacancies (read off the right-hand axis), the colored bars
correspond to the contribution of each structural shock (read off the left-hand axis, expressed in percent
deviation from steady state).

52

Figure 11: Decomposing real wages, 2007–2011

This figure shows decompositions of the cumulated real wage growth in the period from 2007Q1 to 2011Q3
using the estimated models. The black line is the cumulated real wage growth since 2007Q1 (read off the
right-hand axis), the black dashed line is the cumulated real wage growth net of the measurement error, the
colored bars correspond to the contribution of each structural shock (read off the left-hand axis).

53

Figure 12: Decomposing the Okun’s law relationship, U.S.

This figure shows a decomposition of the Okun’s law relationship in the U.S. (the four-quarter growth rate
of GDP against the four-quarter change in the unemployment rate) in the period from 1995Q1 until 2011Q4.
The blue sections refer to the period 1995–2006, the green sections to 2007–2011.

54

Figure 13: Decomposing the Okun’s law relationship, U.K.

This figure shows a decomposition of the Okun’s law relationship in the U.K. (the four-quarter growth rate
of GDP against the four-quarter change in the unemployment rate) in the period from 1995Q1 until 2011Q4.
The blue sections refer to the period 1995–2006, the green sections to 2007–2011.

55

Figure 14: Decomposing the Okun’s law relationship, Sweden

This figure shows a decomposition of the Okun’s law relationship in Sweden (the four-quarter growth rate of
GDP against the four-quarter change in the unemployment rate) in the period from 1995Q1 until 2011Q4.
The blue sections refer to the period 1995–2006, the green sections to 2007–2011.

56

Figure 15: Decomposing the Okun’s law relationship, Germany

This figure shows a decomposition of the Okun’s law relationship in Germany (the four-quarter growth rate
of GDP against the four-quarter change in the unemployment rate) in the period from 1995Q1 until 2011Q4.
The blue sections refer to the period 1995–2006, the green sections to 2007–2011.

57

Figure 16: Decomposing the Beveridge curve, U.S.

This figure shows a decomposition of the Beveridge curve in the U.S. (the rate of unemployment against the
percent deviation of vacancies from the sample mean) in the period from 1995Q1 until 2011Q4. The blue
sections refer to the period 1995–2006, the green sections to 2007–2011.

58

Figure 17: Decomposing the Beveridge curve, U.K.

This figure shows a decomposition of the Beveridge curve in the U.K. (the rate of unemployment against the
percent deviation of vacancies from the sample mean) in the period from 1995Q1 until 2011Q4. The blue
sections refer to the period 1995–2006, the green sections to 2007–2011.

59

Figure 18: Decomposing the Beveridge curve, Sweden

This figure shows a decomposition of the Beveridge curve in Sweden (the rate of unemployment against the
percent deviation of vacancies from the sample mean) in the period from 1995Q1 until 2011Q4. The blue
sections refer to the period 1995–2006, the green sections to 2007–2011.

60

Figure 19: Decomposing the Beveridge curve, Germany

This figure shows a decomposition of the Beveridge curve in Germany (the rate of unemployment against the
percent deviation of vacancies from the sample mean) in the period from 1995Q1 until 2011Q4. The blue
sections refer to the period 1995–2006, the green sections to 2007–2011.

61

Figure 20: Counterfactual developments of output and unemployment in Germany

This figure shows the counterfactual development of output and unemployment in Germany with labor market
parameters from the U.S.

62

