                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         TRADE AND GEOGRAPHY IN THE ORIGINS AND SPREAD OF ISLAM

                                     Stelios Michalopoulos
                                        Alireza Naghavi
                                       Giovanni Prarolo

                                      Working Paper 18438
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w18438


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            October 2012, Revised June 2017




We would like to thank the Editor and three anonymous referees for their valuable comments. We
have also benefited from discussions with several colleagues and comments from numerous
seminars and conferences. Stelios Michalopoulos was a visiting Fellow at Collegio Carlo Alberto
while this project was written and gratefully acknowledges their hospitality. Funding from
Faculty Research Awards Committee at Tufts University is also acknowledged. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2012 by Stelios Michalopoulos, Alireza Naghavi, and Giovanni Prarolo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade and Geography in the Origins and Spread of Islam
Stelios Michalopoulos, Alireza Naghavi, and Giovanni Prarolo
NBER Working Paper No. 18438
October 2012, Revised June 2017
JEL No. N0,N27,N3,O0,O1,O43,Z0,Z1,Z12

                                          ABSTRACT

In this study we explore the historical determinants of contemporary Muslim representation.
Motivated by a plethora of case studies and historical accounts among Islamicists stressing the
role of trade for the adoption of Islam, we construct detailed data on pre-Islamic trade routes,
harbors, and ports to determine the empirical regularity of this argument. Our analysis—
conducted across countries and across ethnic groups within countries—establishes that proximity
to the pre-600 CE trade network is a robust predictor of today's Muslim adherence in the Old
World. We also show that Islam spread successfully in regions that are ecologically similar to the
birthplace of the religion, the Arabian Peninsula. Namely, territories characterized by a large
share of arid and semi- arid regions dotted with few pockets of fertile land are more likely to host
Muslim communities. We discuss the various mechanisms that may give rise to the observed
pattern.

Stelios Michalopoulos                            Giovanni Prarolo
Brown University                                 University of Bologna
Department of Economics                          Piazza Scaravilli 2
64 Waterman Street                               40125 Bologna
Providence, RI 02912                             ITALY
and NBER                                         giovanni.prarolo@unibo.it
smichalo@brown.edu

Alireza Naghavi
Department of Economics
University of Bologna
Piazza Scaravilli 2
Bologna 40126
Italy
alireza.naghavi@unibo.it
        " O you who believe! Eat not up your property among yourselves unjustly
        except it be a trade amongst you, by mutual consent.
        And do not kill yourselves (nor kill one another).
        Surely, Allah is Most Merciful to you."
        The Noble Qur’an (Hilali-Khan translation), Surah An-Nisa’, 4:29            1



1       Introduction
Religion is signi…cantly correlated with a range of economic and political outcomes both within and
across countries.2 This can, perhaps, be linked to the fact that religious people tend to be more
trusting in general (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2003). Given the importance of religion in society,
a natural question to ask is what factors contributed to the distribution of religions around the globe
that we see today.
        In this study, we focus on the spread of one religion –Islam. There has been growing interest in
Muslim societies in recent years amongst economists and political scientists, see for example, Blydes
(2014), Campante and Yanagizawa-Drott (2015), Clingingsmith, Khwaja, and Kremer (2009), Jha
(2013), and Kuran (2004). Our analysis investigates the role that ancient trade routes have played
in facilitating the spread of Islam. Motivated by numerous case studies on the historical relationship
between trade and Islam, we construct detailed data on pre-Islamic trade routes, ports, and harbors.
Proximity to the pre-600 CE trade network is a robust predictor of today’s Muslim adherence in the
Old World. We also show that Islam spread successfully in regions that are ecologically similar to
the birthplace of the religion, the Arabian Peninsula.
        The empirical analysis establishes that countries located closer to historical trade routes are
more likely to be Muslim. We then investigate whether this empirical regularity holds at the more
disaggregated level of ethnic homelands within countries. Exploiting within-country variation has
straightforward advantages. First, it allows us to test in a sharper manner whether di¤erences in
proximity to pre-Islamic trade routes are meaningful predictors of local adherence to Islam. Second,
leveraging within contemporary-state variation in Muslim representation mitigates concerns related
to the endogeneity of current political boundaries. Modern states, arguably, have a¤ected religious
a¢ liation in a multitude of ways including state-sponsored religion. As such, it is crucial to account
for these nationwide histories.
        These …ndings are in line with a rich body of earlier work by prominent Islamicists including
Lapidus (2002), Berkey (2003), and Lewis (1993), who have extensively discussed the role of long-
distance trade, noting both the di¤usion of Muslims along trade routes (Geertz, 1968; Lewis, 1980;
Trimingham, 1962) and the importance that Islamic scriptures confer on trade-related matters (Co-
hen, 1971; Hiskett, 1984; Last, 1979). An innovation of Islam was the practice of direct trade, where
    1
    Traslation by Dr. Muhammad Taqi-ud-Din Al-Hilali and Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan in 1999.
    2
    See Barro and McCleary (2006a, 2006b) for an overview and Barro and McCleary (2003), La Porta et al. (1997),
Martin, Doppelhofer, and Miller (2004), and Pryor (2007), among others for mixed evidence of the impact of religion
on economic indicators.



                                                        1
Muslim merchants personally carried goods over long distances along the trade routes rather than
relying on intermediaries. For example, the acceptance of Islam in most of Inner Asia, Southeast
Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa is known to have occurred primarily through contacts with Muslim
merchants (Insoll, 2003; Lapidus, 2002; Levtzion, 1979). In addition, the highly personal practice
of exchange created preference for Muslims to conduct trade with co-religionists (Chaudhuri, 1995;
Kuran and Lustig, 2012). Therefore, merchants converting to Islam enjoyed substantial externalities
like access to the Muslim trade network, steady trade ‡ows, and a reduction in transaction costs.
In Section 2 we provide a brief overview illustrating the role of trade in the Islamization process in
various parts of the Old World.
      Although the primary contribution of this study is to establish how proximity to pre-Islamic
trade routes has in‡uenced the distribution of Muslim communities in the Old World, we also explore
whether the ecological similarity to the Arabian peninsula of a given region predicts the presence
of Muslim communities. But which are the salient geographic features of the cradle of Islam? The
Arabian peninsula has a distinct geography, mainly consisting of desert and semi-arid landscapes with
a few regions of moderate fertility such as today’s Yemen and other scattered oases in the interior.
On the eve of Islam, frankincense, myrrh, vine, dyes, and dates were produced in these fertile pockets
(Ibrahim, 1990). To capture this distinct landscape, we construct for each country/ethnic homeland
the Gini coe¢ cient of land suitability for agriculture and show that ecological similarity to the Arabian
Peninsula (re‡ected in the degree of inequality in the potential for farming across regions) increases
Muslim representation.
      We discuss various explanations consistent with this less-well-known fact and show that groups
residing along geographically unequal territories have a particular production structure (both histori-
cally and today) with pasture dominating the semi-arid landscape and farming taking place in the few
relatively fertile regions. These di¤erences in the underlying productive endowments may generate
gains from specialization and provide a basis for trade as a means of subsistence. This is indeed the
case for a cross-section of ethnographic societies we examine. So, to the extent that trade is likely
to ‡ourish when the parties involved adhere to a common code of exchange, the trade-promoting
institutional framework of Islam would …nd likely converts across such territories.
      A complementary interpretation links geographic inequality to social inequality and preda-
tion and echoes Ibn Khaldun (1377), one of the greatest philosophers of the Muslim world, who
observed that a crucial factor for understanding Muslim history is the central social con‡ict between
the primitive Bedouin and the urban society ("town" versus "desert"). The argument is that long-
distance trade opportunities confer di¤erential gains to populations residing in the relatively more
fertile regions, fostering predatory behavior from the poorly endowed ones. Along the same lines,
contemporary scholars have noted that when farmers and herders coexisted in absence of an insti-
tutional framework coordinating their activities, their interactions were often con‡ictual, disrupting
trade ‡ows across these territories (Richerson, 1996). We conjecture that Islam with its redistributive
economic principles was a unifying force aimed at reining in the underlying inequality in exchange
for security for the trading caravans (Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and Prarolo, 2016). The premise that


                                                    2
geographic inequality becomes more salient when long-distance trade opportunities arise generates
an auxiliary prediction. Namely, the intensity of adoption of Islam across unequally endowed regions
should increase with proximity to trade routes. This prediction is borne out in the data.
      Our study belongs to a wider literature in economics that explores the interplay between the
economic and political environment and (religious) beliefs and rules. Contributions include works
by Greif (1994), Benabou and Tirole (2001), Botticini and Eckstein (2005, 2007), Cervellati and
Sunde (2017), Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2016), Platteau (2008, 2011), Rubin (2009), Becker
and Woessmann (2009), and Greif and Tabellini (2010). Moreover, by focusing on the spread of a
particular religion, our work is closely related to that of Cantoni (2012) who explores how proximity to
Wittemberg, the birthplace of Martin Luther, in‡uenced the di¤usion of Protestantism. The evidence
provided on the consistent geographic pattern followed by the Muslim world also makes contact with
the studies by Engerman and Sokolo¤ (1997, 2002) and Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001,
2002), among others, that stress the role of geography in shaping institutional outcomes.
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide a historical narrative of
the signi…cance of trade for the spread of Islam. In Section 3, we discuss the data and present the
empirical analysis conducted across countries and ethnic groups. In Section 4, we dig deeper into what
distance to trade routes and geographic inequality re‡ect and outline possible explanations consistent
with the uncovered evidence. Section 5 summarizes and discusses avenues for future research.


2    The Spread of Islam along Historical Trade Routes
Islam has spread at a breathless pace since the time of Muhammad. Nevertheless, the mode of
expansion has di¤ered across time and space ranging from conquests, to trade, to proselytization and
migrations. During the early phase, Islam expanded mainly through conquests within a certain radius
around Mecca. The initial military conquests, even if they did not entail forced conversion, eventually
resulted in Muslim-majority populations occupying large swaths of land. These areas overlap with
contemporary countries close to Mecca including the entire Arab World in the Middle East and North
Africa, Iran, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, and slightly further away in Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.
The territories featured important trade hubs during the pre-Islamic era, particularly those along the
Silk Road in Asia and the Red Sea in North Africa. Most of these lands were part of the Persian
Empire, which was the largest and most important empire of the time to be conquered and concede
to Islam. Famous trade hubs along the routes of the Persian Empire were Rey (in Iran), Samarkand
and Bukhara (in Uzbekistan), and Merv (in Turkmenistan).
      The process of Islamization farther away from the birthplace of Islam was intimately linked
to trade. The Islamic world came to dominate the network of the most lucrative international trade
routes that connected Asia to Europe (and by sea to North Africa). With full Muslim control of the
western half of the Silk Road by mid-8th century, any long-distance exchange had to traverse Muslim
lands, giving trade a central role in the further propagation of the religion. Muslim merchants carried
the message of Islam wherever they traveled. This was possible because of the Muslim practise of
"direct" trade, one of the most remarkable innovations of Islam. Prior to Muslim conquests, trade

                                                   3
was conducted by a network of local merchants who traded exclusively in their homelands. In other
words, they played the role of intermediary agents with goods (often spices) being transported from
one carrier to another by short journeys, creating a trade-relay. Muslims instead did not rely on
intermediaries and personally travelled the entire length of the journey, crucial for the di¤usion of
the religion along the trade routes and at the destination. The spread of Islam was hence greatly
enhanced by social contact as a consequence of trade (Miller, 1969; Wood, 2003).
      On the receiving end, the new religion appealed to the local merchants because it legitimized
their economic base more than most belief systems present at that time. Merchants converting to
Islam had clear advantages including (i) cooperation within the Muslim trading network, (ii) valuable
contacts to expand their trade, and (iii) rules governing commercial activities naturally favoring
Muslims over non-Muslims (Sinor, 1990; Foltz, 1999).
      Proselytization was a third factor that in‡uenced the spread of Islam across locations most
distant to Mecca. Trade routes were also important in this process as the charismatic Su… preachers
travelled along these routes to perform missionary activities. Finally, migration of Muslims (again
through trade routes) and their inter-marriages at the destination also contributed to the spread of
Islam along the trade routes distant from Mecca.

2.1   The Adoption of Islam by Ethnic Groups in the Vicinity of Trade Routes
The historical accounts linking trade routes and Muslim adherence across countries are indicative of
their importance for the spread of Islam. Nevertheless, given the power of the state to in‡uence its
religious composition, one may wonder whether a similar nexus between proximity to trade hubs and
Muslim representation exists within countries that are not religiously homogeneous. In what follows,
we review the historical record on the emergence of Islam for speci…c countries with varying religious
diversity including China, Tanzania, Mali (the location of the former Ghana Empire), Indonesia, and
India. A systematic empirical analysis at the ethnic group level for each of these countries is relegated
to Section 33.
      Figures 1, 1, 1, 1, and 1 provide snapshots of pre-Islamic trade routes along with con-
temporary Muslim representation for groups located in these …ve regions making apparent the link
between the two (see Section 31 below for a description of the underlying data).

2.2   Inner Asia
By the 8th century, Islam was no longer the religion of only the Arab world and had expanded
geographical borders along the Silk Road. Conversions were often a result of economic considerations
and the …nancial bene…ts a¤orded to those joining the Ummah. Even among the conquered people
in Central Asia, Islam continued to gain a hearing without coercion as merchants spread the religion.
Muslim traders traveled as far as the capital of the Tang dynasty, Chang’an, in the Chinese Empire.
The 9th century saw the rise of Islamic kingdoms in Central Asia, especially the Samanid Empire,
the …rst Persian dynasty after the Arab conquests. The Islamization of the nomadic Turkic peoples
of Central and Inner Asia occurred during the 10th century along the trade routes. This process has


                                                   4
been linked mainly to their participation in the oasis-based Silk Road trade and was accelerated by the
conversion and the expansion of three Turkic Muslim dynasties of the Karakhanids, the Ghaznavids,
and the Seljuks (Meri and Bacharach, 2006).
      The major ethnic groups close to trade routes with a substantial Muslim representation in this
region are the Uyghurs, the Hui, the Kazakhs, the Kyrgyz, and the Tajiks. These ethnic groups also
exist within China today and comprise the Muslim minority in the country. They are all located
around Xianjiang, a vast region of deserts and mountains along the Silk Road in Northwest China.
      The Uyghurs are one of the largest ethnic groups in Inner Asia, and their Islamization dates
back to the Karakhanids in early 10th century, the …rst Turkic dynasty to convert to the new religion.
The core of the Uyghurs’homeland was Kashgar, an oasis city located in the West of China near the
current-day border of Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, which historically served as a strategic trade hub
between China, the Middle East, and Europe (Roemer, 2000). The Hui people are another Muslim
Chinese minority historically connected to Muslim merchants travelling along the Silk Road. Besides
Xianjiang, they also live farther east in Central China. A cluster of this group can be found today
in Xi’an, where they form the majority of a large Muslim community (the dark spot in the center of
China in Figure 1). Xi’an was the …rst city in China where Islam was introduced. (Soucek, 2000).
The longest segment of the Silk Road runs across the Central Asia and Kazakhstan. The religion
practiced by the majority of Kazakhs is Islam since its introduction in the region by the Arabs during
the 9th century. The Kyrgyz tribes also adopted Islam as Muslim traders and then Su… missionaries
began to move out from scattered towns to the nomadic steppes, spreading Islam among the tribal
groups. They are known to have adopted Islam between the 8th and 12th centuries. The Tajiks on
the other hand, started converting to Islam in the late 11th century (Minahan, 2014).

2.3   East and West Africa
Islam spread through the well-established trade routes of the east coast of Africa via merchants. The
earliest records for trade in East Africa indicate Greco-Roman trade down the Red Sea and along
the Somali coast to the Tanzanian coast. This was followed by the trade of frankincense, myrrh,
and spices with the Persian Gulf from the 2nd to the 5th century CE. Soon Zanzibar Island also
became a trade hub and remained so until the 9th century CE, when Bantu traders settled on the
Kenyan-Tanzanian coast and joined the Indian Ocean trade networks interacting with the Somali
and Arab proselytizers. Shanga, an early Swahili town on Pate Island in the Lamu Archipelago, is a
good example of early in‡uence through Muslim traders as they built the …rst small wooden mosque
in the region around 850 CE (Shillington, 2005). Islam was established on the Southeast coast soon
after, and eventually a full-scale prosperous Muslim dynasty known for trading gold and slaves was
established at Kilwa on the coast of modern Tanzania. By the 11th century CE, several settlements
down the east coast were equipped with mosques, and Islam emerged as a unifying force on the coast
to form a distinct Swahili identity (Trimingham, 1964).
      Historical accounts suggest that the early penetration of Islam was even more e¤ective along the
caravan routes of West Africa. Trans-Saharan trade started on a regular basis during the 4th century


                                                  5
and presents a clear example of subsistence from trade between the people of the Sahara, forest,
Sahel, and savanna (Boahen, Ajayi, and Tidy, 1966). While present since 500 CE, the signi…cance of
the trans-Saharan trade routes rose and declined over time depending on the empire in power and the
security that could be maintained along the routes (Devisse, 1988). Islam was introduced through
Muslim traders along several major trade routes that connected Africa below the Sahara with the
Mediterranean Middle East, such as Sijilmasa to Awdaghust and Ghadames to Gao. Muslims crossed
the Sahara into West Africa trading salt, horses, dates, and camels for gold, timber, and foodstu¤
from the ancient Ghana empire. The trade-friendly elements of Islam, such as credit or contract law,
together with the information networks it helped create, facilitated long-distance trade. By the 10th
century, merchants to the south of the trade routes had converted to Islam. In the 11th century CE
the rulers began to convert. The …rst Muslim ruler in the region was the king of Gao, around the
year 1000 CE. The Kanem empire (the Kanuri people), located at the southern end of the trans-
Saharan trade route between Tripoli and the region of Lake Chad, followed after being exposed to
Islam through North African traders, Berbers, and Arabs (Trimingham, 1962; Levtzion and Pouwels,
2000; Robinson, 2004).

2.4   South and Southeast Asia
There is ample historical evidence indicating that Arabs and Muslims interacted with India from the
very early days of Islam, although trade relations had existed since ancient times. Malabar and Kochi
were two important princely states on the western coast of India where Arabs and Persians found
fertile ground for their trade activities. The trade on the Malabar coast prospered due to the local
production of pepper and other spices. Islam was …rst introduced to India by the newly converted
Arab traders reaching the western coast of India (Malabar and the Konkan-Gujarat region) during
the 7th century CE (Elliot and Dowson, 1867; Makhdum, 2006; Rawlinson, 2003).
      Cheraman Juma Masjid in Kerala is thought to be the …rst mosque in India. It was built
towards the end of Muhammad’s lifetime during the reign of the last ruler of the Chera dynasty, who
converted to Islam and facilitated the proliferation of Islam in Malabar. The 8th century CE marked
the start of a period of expansion of Muslim commerce along all major routes in the Indian Ocean,
suggesting that the Islamic in‡uence during this period was essentially one of commercial nature.
Initially settling in Konkan and Gujarat, the Persians and Arabs extended their trading bases and
settlements to southern India and Sri Lanka by the 8th century CE, and to the Coromandel coast in
the 9th century CE. These ports helped develop maritime trade links between the Middle East and
Southeast Asia during the 10th century CE (Wink, 1990).
      The people of the Malay world have been active participants in trade and maritime activities for
over a thousand years. Their settlements along major rivers and coastal areas were important means
of contact with traders from the rest of the world. The strategic location of the Malay Archipelago at
the crossroad between the Indian Ocean and East Asia, and in the middle of the China-India trade
route, aided the rapid development of trade in the region (Wade, 2009). In particular, the Srivijaya
kingdom (7th -13th century CE) on the straits of Malacca attracted ships from China, India, and


                                                  6
Arabia plying the China-India trade routes by ensuring safe passage through the Straits of Malacca
(Andaya and Andaya, 1982).
        Similar to those in Africa, rulers in Southeast Asia often converted to Islam through the in‡u-
ence of Muslim merchants who set up or conducted business there. While the landed Hindu-Buddhists
were content to let the trade come to them, the Muslim merchants, lacking a …xed land base, made
their pro…ts from trade at the location of exchange. Consequently, the people of Southeast Asia
began to accept Islam and create Muslim towns and kingdoms. By the late 13th century CE, the
kingdom of Pasai in northern Sumatra had converted to Islam. At the same time, the collapse of Sriv-
ijayan power at the end of the 13th century CE drew foreign traders to the harbors on the northern
Sumatran shores of the Bay of Bengal, safe from the pirate lairs at the southern end of the Strait of
Malacca (Houben, 2003; Ricklefs, 1991). Around 1400 CE, a new kingdom was established in Malacca
(on the north shore of the Malacca Strait). The rulers of Malacca soon accepted Islam in order to
attract Muslim and Javanese traders to their port by providing a common culture and o¤ering legal
security under Islamic law (Holt, Lambton, and Lewis, 1970; Esposito, 1999). Finally, the Bugis, an
ethnic group along Java’s northern coast adopted Islam later in the 16th century CE when Muslim
proselytizers from West Sumatra came in contact with the people of this region who conducted trade
(Mattulada, 1983).


3       Empirical section
3.1     The Data Sources
The historical overview vividly illustrates the importance of pre-existing trade routes for the di¤usion
of Islam but also suggests the bene…cial impact of Islam on the further expansion of the trade network.
To make sure we capture the …rst part of this two-way relationship, we construct our main explanatory
variable by measuring the distance between the relevant unit of analysis (a country or an ethnic
homeland) and the closest historical trade route or port before 600 CE, re‡ecting the structure of
trade ‡ows already present in the Old World in the eve of Islam.3
        The location of trade routes is outlined in Brice and Kennedy (2001) whereas the location of
ancient ports and harbors is taken from the work of De Graauw, Maione-Downing, and McCormick
(2014) who collected and identi…ed their precise locations. The result is an impressive list of approx-
imately 2 900 ancient ports and harbors mentioned in the writings of 66 ancient authors and a few
modern authors, including the Barrington Atlas. We complement the pre-600 CE routes mapped in
Brice and Kennedy (2001) with information on the Roman roads identi…ed in the Barrington Atlas
(McCormick, et al., 2013). Finally, we also extend the trade network up to 1800 CE, digitizing the rel-
evant information from Brice and Kennedy (2001), and supplementing it with routes within Europe,
    3
    All distance measures are constructed in the following manner. We generate a grid of 05 by 05 decimal degrees
and intersect the resulting cells with the country and homeland boundaries. We then calculate the distance from the
centroid of each cell within the country/homeland to the nearest feature. To arrive at a single distance term for each
unit of aggregation, we take the mean value of the distances across the cells that fall within the country/ethnic homeland
borders. This procedure is more accurate than using only the country’s or homeland’s centroid. Moreover, using the
minimum or the maximum distance instead of the mean distance to the attributes of interest delivers noisier coe¢ cients.


                                                            7
Southeast Asia, West Africa, and China mapped in O’Brien (1999) during the same time period. We
expect these data to be useful to other researchers. See Figures 2 and 2 for the reconstruction of
the pre-Islamic and pre-1800 CE trade network, respectively.
       In the cross-country analysis, the dependent variable employed is the fraction of Muslims in
the population as early as 1900 CE reported by Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001). For the ethnic
group analysis, the dependent variable is the fraction of Muslims and of other religious denominations
in 2005 from the World Religion Database (WRD).4 These estimates are extracted from the World
Christian Database and are subsequently adjusted based on three sources of religious a¢ liation:
census data, demographic and health surveys, and population survey data.5 In absence of historical
estimates of Muslim representation at an ethnic group level, we are constrained in using contemporary
data. Reassuringly, country-level Muslim representation derived from the group-speci…c estimates of
the WRD are highly correlated (093) with the respective country statistics on Muslim adherence in
1900 CE.
       Information on the location of ethnic groups’homelands is available from the World Language
Mapping System (WLMS) database. This dataset maps the locations of the language groups covered
in the 15th edition of the Ethnologue (2005) database. The location of each ethnic group is identi-
…ed by a polygon. Each of these polygons delineates the traditional homeland of an ethnic group;
populations away from their homelands (e.g., in cities, refugee populations, etc.) are not mapped.
Also, the WLMS (2006) does not attempt to map immigrant languages. Finally, ethnic groups of
unknown location, widespread ethnicities (i.e., groups whose boundaries coincide with a country’s
boundaries) and extinct languages are not mapped and, thus, not considered in the empirical analy-
sis. The matching between the WLMS (2006) and the WRD is done using the unique Ethnologue
identi…er for each ethnic group within a country.6
       To capture how similar the ecology of a given region is to that of the Arabian Peninsula, we
construct the distribution of land quality and, in turn, the Gini coe¢ cient of regional land potential
for agriculture across countries and homelands. Under the assumption that land quality dictates the
productive capabilities of a given region, populations on fertile areas would engage in farming whereas
pastoralism would be the norm in poorly endowed regions (see more on this in Section 4). In the
absence of historical data on land quality, we use contemporary disaggregated data on the suitability
of land for agriculture to proxy for regional productive endowments. The global data on current land
quality for agriculture were assembled by Ramankutty et al. (2002) to investigate the e¤ect of future
climate change on contemporary agricultural suitability and have been used extensively in the recent
    4
      WRD classi…es as Muslims the followers of Islam in its two main branches (with schools of law, rites or sects):
Sunnis or Sunnites (Hana…te, Hanbalite, Malikite, Sha…ite) and Shias or Shiites (Ithna Ashari, Ismaili, Alawite, and
Zaydi); also Kharijite and other orthodox sects; reform movements (Wahhabi, Sanusi, Mahdiya); also heterodox sects
(Ahmadiya, Druzes, Yazidis); but excludes syncretistic religions with Muslim elements and partially Islamized tribal
religionists.
    5
      Hsu et al. (2008) show that the country level estimates for Muslim representation in WRD are highly correlated
(above 0.97) with similar statistics available from World Values Survey, Pew Global Assessment Project, CIA World
Factbook, and the U.S. Department of State. At the ethnic group level, there are no comparable statistics.
    6
      For some language groups in WLMS (2006) the WRD o¤ers information at the subgroup level. In this case the
religious a¢ liation is the average across the subgroups.



                                                         8
literature in historical comparative development. Each observation takes a value between 0 and 1
and represents the probability that a particular grid cell may be cultivated.7
       Finally, we combine anthropological information on ethnic groups from Murdock (1967) with
the Ethnologue (2005), enabling us to examine the pre-colonial societal and economic traits of Muslim
groups. We discuss these two datasets in more detail as we introduce them to our analysis.

3.2    Cross-Country Analysis
We start by investigating the relationship between distance to trade routes in the Old World and
Muslim adherence across modern-day countries. The cross-country summary statistics and the cor-
responding correlation matrix of the variables of interest are reported in Appendix Table 1.
       To estimate how proximity to trade routes shapes Muslim adherence we adopt the following
OLS speci…cation:


                    % Muslim 1900 =         0   +   1 Distance   to Trade Routes +     2 X   +                  (1)

where % Muslim 1900 is the fraction of the population in country  adhering to Islam in 1900 CE.8
       In Column 1 of Table 1, we report the univariate relationship between distance from trade
routes and Muslim adherence. The coe¢ cient is economically and statistically signi…cant. Across
modern-day countries variation in the distance to pre-Islamic trade routes accounts for roughly 9%
of the observed variation in Muslim representation. The magnitude of the estimated coe¢ cient,
moreover, suggests that a country located 1 000 kilometers farther from the 600 CE trade routes
has 15% lower Muslim representation. Naturally, one may wonder whether this association remains
robust to other possible determinants of Muslim adherence that may be correlated to distance to
trade routes. In Column 2, we add a series of distance terms that may be potential confounders.
The literature reviewed in Section 2 unequivocally suggests that proximity to Mecca is likely to be
a strong predictor for the spread of Islam, and this is indeed what we …nd. The precisely estimated
coe¢ cient on distance to Mecca suggests that countries that are 1 000 kilometers closer to Mecca
see a 7% increase in their Muslim share, and countries further away from the equator are less likely
to be Muslim. Distance to the coast by itself does not signi…cantly a¤ect Muslim representation.
These three additional location attributes signi…cantly increase the predictive power of the empirical
model, the 2 jumps to 23%; nevertheless, the coe¢ cient of interest only slightly declines and remains
precisely estimated.
       In the rest of the Columns of Table 1, we add additional geographic variables. The goal is
twofold. First, to make sure that the uncovered relationship between distance to trade routes and
Muslim adherence is not driven by some other geographic factor, and second, and perhaps more
   7
      In the online Appendix, we discuss in detail the components of the land quality index and present the sources of
the data used in the empirical analysis.
    8
      We focus on countries with at least three regional observations of land quality to ensure that our …ndings are not
driven by countries with limited regional coverage. Using the Muslim representation in 2000 as the dependent variable,
the coe¢ cients of interest are larger and more precisely estimated. Presumably this is because earlier estimates of
religious a¢ liation are noisier.



                                                           9
importantly, in doing so, we attempt to shed light on the geographic covariates of Islam. Given the
recent interest among growth economists on the environmental determinants of comparative devel-
opment, the list of potential geographic candidates is long. So, our choice of variables is disciplined
in the following manner. Since we are interested in exploring whether a given region’s ecological
similarity to the Arabian peninsula predicts the presence of Muslim communities, we construct the
Gini coe¢ cient of land suitability for agriculture using the data from Ramankutty et al. (2002).
       The following example may help illustrate the type of geographies that this measure re‡ects.
Uzbekistan and Poland are both equally close to pre-Islamic trade routes (approximately 190 kilome-
ters) but have very di¤erent ecologies. On the one hand, less than 10% of Uzbekistan’s territory lies
in river valleys and oases that serve as cultivable land, whereas the rest of the country is dominated
by the Kyzyl Kum desert and mountains. In our data, the Gini coe¢ cient of land quality is estimated
to be 059 (82nd percentile) with an average land quality of 025. On the other hand, Poland has
a much more homogeneous geography in terms of farming potential with a Gini coe¢ cient of 016
(30th percentile) and an average land suitability of 056 As of 1900 CE, Uzbekistan was 98% Muslim
whereas there were no Muslims in Poland. These stark geographic di¤erences across Muslim and non-
Muslim countries are readily visible in the our sample. Out of the 127 countries in the Old World,
those 35 (92) that have a Muslim absolute majority (minority) have median land quality equal to
022 (050) and median Gini coe¢ cient in land quality of 054 (020). In Column 4 of Table 1, we add
both of these geographic indexes in logs to our benchmark speci…cation. The estimated coe¢ cient on
proximity to pre-Islamic trade routes remains qualitatively and quantitatively intact. Moreover, the
estimates suggest that low land suitability for agriculture and high inequality in the spatial distribu-
tion of this scarce factor are strongly predictive of the presence of Muslims across countries. Adding
these two features in the regression increases the 2 by 25 percentage points revealing the importance
of geographic features in the spread of Islam. One may naturally wonder what potential mechanisms
are behind this strong associations. We will return to this question in Section 4.
       In the rest of the columns in Table 1, we check the robustness of our …ndings. Speci…cally,
in Column 4, we add four more geographic traits. The log area of each country, the log of terrain
ruggedness, an indicator re‡ecting the presence of a desert, and an indicator re‡ecting whether a
country has any irrigation potential.9 These geographic variables are chosen for the following reasons.
First, Bulliet (1975) observed that Arab armies had a comparative advantage over desert terrain. In
our sample of 127 countries, 38 feature some desert. Moreover, Bentzen, Kaarsen, and Wingender
(2016) show that Muslim countries have higher irrigation potential and the latter may be correlated
both with proximity to trade routes and inequality in the spatial distribution of land quality across
cells within a country. Finally, ruggedness is controlled for as it is likely that more rugged countries
limit the ability of foreign powers to penetrate them, and it also seems plausible that ruggedness is
associated with the quality of land and trade routes (Chaney and Hornbeck, 2016). Adding these
controls neither changes the magnitude nor the precision of the estimates of our main explanatory
   9
    We follow Bentzen, Kaarsen, and Wingender (2016) and de…ne the irrigation potential of an area as land that is
classi…ed in irrigation Impact Class 5. Impact Class 5 are those cells where irrigation can more than double agricultural
yields. Out of the 127 countries, 72% have some irrigation potential whereas 28% of countries feature no such cells.


                                                           10
variables. Among these new covariates, the only consistent predictor of Muslim representation is the
potential for irrigation in line with Bentzen, Kaarsen, and Wingender (2016). Finally, in Column 5 we
add continental …xed e¤ects to account for the broad geographic and historical di¤erences between
the continental masses …nding similar results. Figure 3 plots non-parametrically the relationship
between Muslim representation and distance to the pre-Islamic trade network after partialling out
the covariates included in Column 5.10

3.3      Cross-Ethnic-Group Analysis
The evidence so far reveals a strong cross-country association between Muslim representation and
proximity to pre-Islamic trade routes as well as an unequal distribution of land endowments. However,
the spread of Islam is a historical process that predated the emergence of modern nation states.
Moreover, the historical record is replete with examples of current countries actively in‡uencing their
religious composition by promoting or demoting speci…c religious identities. Would the cross-country
patterns survive if we were to account for the idiosyncratic historical legacies of contemporary states?
To answer this we look at the religious a¢ liations of ethnic groups within countries. This allows us
to control for country-speci…c constants and thus produce reliable estimates of the impact of trade
routes on Muslim adherence.
         In Appendix Table 2 Panel A, we report the summary statistics of the main variables employed
in the cross-ethnic-group analysis.11 An average ethnic group in the Old World has 21% of its
population adhering to Islam in 2005, is 5 230 kilometers from Mecca, and 1 345 kilometers from
trade routes before 600 CE. Appendix Table 2 Panel B shows the raw correlations among the main
variables of interest. Ethnic-speci…c Muslim representation is negatively related to distance to Mecca
(¬024) and distance to trade routes in 600 CE (¬022).
         We adopt the following speci…cation:



       % Muslim in 2005 =     0   +   1 Distance   to pre-600CE Trade Routes +         2 X   +      +     (2)

where        represents the country-speci…c …xed e¤ects.12
         Before showing the results for all groups across the Old World, and motivated by the historical
accounts summarized in Section 2, in Table 2 we report bivariate regressions linking distance to
pre-600 CE trade routes to contemporary Muslim adherence across linguistic groups within speci…c
countries. In Columns 1, 2, and 3, we look at the religious composition of language groups in China,
Mali (the location of the ancient Ghana empire), and Tanzania, respectively. Within each of these
countries with varied historical legacies, and as foreshadowed by our early discussion, proximity to
trade routes is a systematic predictor of Muslim communities. In Column 4, we focus on Indonesia,
  10
     We follow Hsiang (2013) to visually display the uncertainty of the regression estimates in Figures 3 and 4.
  11
     Similar to the cross-country regressions, we focus on ethnic groups with at least three regional land quality obser-
vations. Using all ethnic groups irrespective of the underlying geographic coverage does not change the results.
  12
     The results presented here are OLS estimates with the standard errors clustered at the country level. Adjusting for
spatial autocorrelation following Conley (1999) delivers more conservative standard errors.



                                                           11
the country with the largest Muslim population worldwide. Across the 615 linguistic groups mapped
by the Ethnologue, variation in the proximity of these homelands to pre-Islamic trade routes accounts
for almost a quarter (22%) of the observed variation in contemporary Muslim adherence. In Column
5 we show that a similar pattern holds for India, a country where although Muslims are a minority
they nevertheless represent the third-largest Muslim population across countries. In what follows,
instead of showing country-speci…c estimates we use the entire sample of linguistic groups across the
Old World to assess this link.
      To facilitate comparison across the di¤erent levels of analysis, the layout of Table 3 mimics
that of Table 1. The pattern found in the cross-country analysis resurfaces in the cross-ethnicity
sample. The di¤erence between Columns 1 and 2 in Table 3 is that in the latter we include country-
speci…c constants. By doing so, the coe¢ cient on the proximity to pre-Islamic trade routes increases
considerably. Within modern-day countries, ethnic groups whose historical homelands are closer to
the trade routes before 600 CE experience a signi…cant boost in their Muslim representation. Namely,
a 1 000-kilometer increase in the former decreases Muslim representation by 17 percentage points.
Columns 3 to 5 con…rm the pattern obtained in Columns 2 to 4 of Table 1. Regions closer to pre-
Islamic trade routes, characterized by overall low land quality interspersed with pockets of fertile land
are more likely to be populated by Muslim communities today. One noteworthy di¤erence between
the two levels of aggregation is that in the cross-group sample proximity to Mecca is now a reliable
and precisely estimated correlate of Muslim adherence. In Figure 4, we graph non-parametrically the
association between Muslim representation across groups and distance to the pre-Islamic routes after
partialling out all covariates included in Column 5 of Table 3.
      Groups of people coming under the direct rule of a Muslim empire might face incentives for
converting to Islam related to social mobility (Bulliet, 1979), a career within a Muslim bureaucracy
(Eaton, 1996), or lower tax rates (Chaney, 2008). For example, the lower tax rates granted to
Muslims over non-Muslims within Muslim Empires or the status achieved by switching to the ruler’s
religion might di¤erentially a¤ect conversion rates. Likewise, instances of forced conversion, religious
persecution during the Muslim expansion, or Arab migration movements within the Muslim empires
might have shaped the observed religious a¢ liation. Hence, in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3, we
divide the ethnic groups based on whether they have been within a Muslim empire as classi…ed
by Iyigun (2010). An ethnic group is considered to be outside a Muslim empire if the country to
which it belongs today has never been part of a Muslim empire. Both the negative relationship
of Muslim adherence and distance to trade routes and the positive link with geographic inequality
remain signi…cant outside the former Muslim empires.
      It is clear that Europe traded with the Muslim world for centuries without large-scale con-
versions, indicating that there may be other factors at play than just access to the Islamic trade
networks. Considering that monotheism was an attractive ideology compared to polytheism, regions
outside the Muslim empires where monotheism was already present should be less receptive to the
spread of Islam along trade routes. To explore this prediction, in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3,
we focus on ethnic groups outside Muslim empires, further distinguishing between regions that were


                                                   12
already monotheistic by 1050 CE as classi…ed by O’Brien (1999). Column 3 shows that limiting the
sample to polytheistic areas during the di¤usion of Islam, distance to trade routes is more precisely
estimated. On the contrary, in Column 4 among the 172 groups where Christianity and Judaism were
present by 1050 CE, proximity to trade routes negatively impacts Muslim representation suggesting
that regions where monotheism was already in place found adherence to the Islamic institutional
complex and access to the Muslim trade networks less bene…cial.
      The …ndings in Table 3 also raise the question whether the link between trade and religious
adherence is particular to Islam. We tackle this issue by asking whether the identi…ed relationship
between Muslim representation and distance to trade routes systematically holds for other major
religions. To facilitate comparisons in Column 1 of Table 4, we replicate Column 5 of Table 3 where
the dependent variable is the fraction of Muslims. In Columns 2, 3, and 4, we use as a dependent
variable the percentage of people within an ethnic group adhering to three other major religions
i.e., Christianity, Hinduism, and Buddhism, respectively. Lastly in Column 5, we use the fraction
of the population adhering to local animistic, or shamanistic religions, known as Ethnoreligionists.
The spatial distribution of these other religions does not seem to be in‡uenced by the ancient trade
routes. If anything Christians seem to be located further away from the pre-Islamic routes, a pattern
mainly driven by groups in Asia and Africa.
      These …ndings highlight the, until now, neglected crucial role of trade in shaping the di¤erential
adherence to Islam across ethnic groups and shed new light on the geographical origins and spatial
distribution of Muslims within modern-day countries.

      Robustness Checks         In the Appendix, we o¤er a series of sensitivity checks for the main
pattern established in Tables 1 and 3. First, in Columns 1 and 4 of Appendix Table 3, we replicate
the speci…cations reported in Columns 5 of Tables 1 and 3 with the di¤erence being that we
replace the dependent variable with a dummy equal to one for countries/groups where Muslims are
the absolute majority. The estimated coe¢ cients suggest that a 1 000-kilometer increase in the
distance to pre-Islamic trade routes decreases the probability of …nding a country (group within
a country) with a Muslim majority by 16% (12%). Second, in Columns 2 and 5, we explore the
non-linearity of proximity to pre-Islamic trade routes to capture the plausibly diminishing role of
distance for regions further away from the trade hubs. The quadratic term on distance to pre-600
CE trade routes alternates in sign across levels of aggregation and is highly insigni…cant. This can be
rationalized in di¤erent ways. First, this pattern may re‡ect the fact that despite our e¤orts to collect
a comprehensive set of indicators regarding the presence of pre-Islamic regional trade opportunities
(manifested in routes, roads, and ports) we are fully aware that measurement error in the mapping
of ancient routes is non-trivial.
      Second, an alternative interpretation of the non-signi…cance of the quadratic term is that
Muslims starting from the pre-600 CE trade network and continuing over the next 1 000 years until
the beginning of the European colonialism signi…cantly expanded trade routes, adding myriad new
connections and reaching vast areas in Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. This implies that the network



                                                   13
relevant for discerning a diminishing role of the proximity to trade routes on the spread of Islam is
not the pre-600 CE one but the routes on the eve of the colonial era. To explore the empirical validity
of this conjecture, we expanded our trade-routes dataset with information up to 1800 CE. Columns
3 and 6 of Appendix Table 3 clearly show that Muslim representation both across countries and
across-groups within countries has a concave relationship with proximity to trade. Further increasing
distance to pre-industrial trade hubs for regions already far from them has little bearing on their
Muslim adherence. A note of caution is in order. Using data on trade routes after 600 CE implies
that the empirical relationship cannot be unequivocally interpreted as it clearly re‡ects a two-way
interplay from initial trade routes to the spread of Islam and from the latter to the further development
of the trade network.


4        Mechanisms
So far, we have established a strong positive association between proximity to ancient trade routes
and contemporary Muslim adherence and a positive link between geographically unequal regions and
the presence of Muslim communities. In this section, we do two things. First, we investigate whether
a group’s proximity to trade routes predicts its reliance on trade. Second, we open the black box of
what inequality in land quality re‡ects, using contemporary data on land use and historical data on
the subsistence pattern across groups.

         Historical Trade Routes and Historical Dependence on Trade                            Is it the case that
groups closer to trade routes are more likely to engage in trade? Historical data on dependence on
trade are notoriously di¢ cult to come by. To the best of our knowledge, the only dataset that records
the extent of trade at the group level in the pre-industrial era is the Standard Cross Cultural Sample
(SCCS), which reports detailed information for 186 historical societies worldwide.13 The entry we are
interested in is the share of the overall subsistence needs that comes from trade (819). Across the
121 societies in the Old World we compute the distance from their centroids (reported in the SCCS)
to the closest trade routes before 600 CE and in 1800 CE.
         In Table 5, we report the results. The coe¢ cient estimate on distance to the pre-600 CE trade
routes is negative but statistically insigni…cant. The absence of signi…cance is easy to understand.
All but four of the SCCS societies were recorded by ethnographers after 1750 CE, which implies
that their e¤ective exposure to trade was that of the trade network as of 1800 and not the one of
600 CE. Indeed, when we replace the distance to 600 CE trade routes with the one of 1800 CE,
a strong negative relationship emerges. Groups closer to the 1800 CE trade network consistently
derive a larger share of subsistence from trade. Examples include the Javanese in Indonesia and the
Rwala Bedouin, a large Arab tribe of northern Arabia and the Syrian Desert. Both groups are a
mere 70 kilometers away from the trade routes and ports in 1800 CE and derived as much as 25% of
    13
    The SCCS comprises ethnographically well-documented societies, selected by George P. Murdock and Douglas R.
White, published in the journal Ethnology in 1969, and followed by several publications that coded the SCCS societies
for many di¤erent types of societal characteristics.



                                                         14
their subsistence from trade. In Column 3, we drop the four SCCS societies that were documented
by ethnographers before 1750, namely the Babylonians, the Hebrews, the Khmer, and the Romans,
…nding a similar pattern.

       What Does Land Inequality Capture?                       Our motivation for constructing the inequality
in the distribution of agricultural potential across regions is that this statistic re‡ects the ecological
conditions of the Arabian peninsula, the birthplace of Islam. Indeed, across the 36 582 land quality
observations in the Old World among the 1 285 cells that belong to the Arabian Peninsula, the
Gini coe¢ cient of land quality is 087 with an average land quality of 003 whereas the statistics
for the rest of the regions are 057 and 032, respectively.14 In a stage of development when land
quality dictates the productive structure of the economy, one would expect societies along unequally
endowed territories to have a speci…c productive structure with herding dominating the arid and
semi-arid regions and farming taking place in the few fertile ones. This was certainly the economic
landscape of the pre-industrial Arabian peninsula. Below, we verify this link using historical and
contemporary data across groups on the dependence on pastoralism and agriculture.
       The data on land use come from Ramankutty et al. (2008) and provide at the grid level of
0083 by 0083 decimal degrees estimates on the share of land allocated to pasture and agriculture in
2000. We aggregate this information at the homeland level to obtain a measure of how tilted land
allocation is towards pasture. The data on the historical traits across groups come from Murdock
(1967) who produced an Ethnographic Atlas (published in twenty-nine installments in the anthropo-
logical journal Ethnology) that coded around 60 variables, capturing cultural, societal, and economic
characteristics of 1 270 ethnicities around the world. We linked Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas groups
to the Ethnologue’s linguistic homelands in the Old World. These two datasets do not always use
the same name to identify a group. Utilizing several sources and the updated version of Murdock’s
Atlas produced by Gray (1999), we were able to identify the pre-colonial traits as recorded in the
Ethnographic Atlas for 1 210 linguistic homelands in the Ethnologue (2005).15
       In the …rst three columns of Table 6, the dependent variable is the log ratio of pastoral over
agricultural area in 2000 across linguistic homelands.16 All columns include country-speci…c constants.
Within countries, groups residing along poor and unequally endowed regions display a larger land
allocation towards animal husbandry compared to farming. Adding in Column 2 the geographic
variables discussed above does not change the pattern. The only additional …nding is that groups
located in rugged regions are also more dependent on pastoralism than agriculture. In Column 3, we
verify that Muslim groups today live in homelands that display this particular type of land use, i.e.,
a land allocation skewed against agriculture and in favor of pastoral activities.
       Is it the case that groups residing in habitats where farming today is limited and herding
  14
     The Arabian Peninsula consists of the following 9 contemporary countries: Yemen, Oman, Iraq, Jordan, Qatar,
Bahrain, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.
  15
     Unlike the SCCS dataset, Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas does not have information on trade-related traits.
  16
     Note that the number of groups in Columns 1 to 3 is 2 845 instead of the 3 181 covered in Table 3. This is because
for 336 linguistic homelands the allocation of land either towards farming or towards pasture in 2000 is 0 so the log of
their ratio is not well de…ned.



                                                           15
signi…cantly more common had a similar lopsided type of subsistence in the pre-industrial era? This
is what we ask in Column 4 where the dependent variable is the log ratio of the share of subsistence
derived from animal husbandry over agriculture as recorded in the Ethnographic Atlas. Groups that
today allocate more of their land towards pastoralism also used to derive more of their livelihood
from similar activities in the past, suggesting the persistence in the structure of production across
groups.
        In Columns 5 to 7, we replicate the pattern shown in Columns 1 to 3 with the di¤erence being
that on the left hand side of the equation, instead of the contemporary land allocation, we use the
log ratio of the historical subsistence share from animal husbandry relative to agriculture. Groups
residing in homelands of limited potential for agriculture dotted with few pockets of fertile land
also used to obtain more from herding and less from agricultural products in the pre-colonial era.
Adding the geographical covariates in Column 6 reveals that the presence of desert and of regions
with irrigation potential also skew subsistence towards animal husbandry. Finally, in Column 7, we
show that indeed Muslim groups are those that historically were more dependent on pastoralism and
less on farming, corroborating one of the long-standing themes in the environmental history of Islamic
Eurasia and North Africa, namely, the interface between the steppe and the sown (Mikhail, 2012).
        In this environment where each area specializes in its comparative advantage (farmers on the
fertile pockets and herders on the relatively arid ones), a larger geographical Gini coe¢ cient may
correspond to larger potential gains from trade. Richerson (1996), for example, observes that "despite
the emphasis on animals, most herders are dependent on crop staples for part of their caloric intake
... procured by client agricultural families that are often part of the society and the presence of
specialized tradesmen that organize the exchange of agricultural products for animal products." This
suggests that an exchange economy may be more vibrant within a community of many herders and
few farmers. To shed light on this conjecture, we rely on the Standard Cross Cultural Sample (SCCS).
Speci…cally, in Column 8 of Table 6, we ask whether societies relying more on pastoralism relative
to agriculture also derive more of their subsistence needs from trade; across the 186 ethnographic
societies worldwide, this is indeed the case. Overall, the results in Table 6 reveal how the speci…c
geographic endowments of Muslim homelands give rise to a distinct specialization pattern: a pastoral
economy with few farmers where trade is important.

        Why Ecological Similarity to the Arabian Peninsula Matters for the Spread of
Islam     At …rst blush, showing that Muslim regions are ecologically similar to the birthplace of
Islam, i.e., the Arabian peninsula, is consistent with various interpretations.
        First, Michalopoulos (2012) argues that cultural groups have location-speci…c human capital
derived from the type of geography they inhabit. Hence, when members of such groups leave their
group’s homeland they are likely to target regions that are productively similar to their ancestral
territories to ensure transferability of their skills. For example, early farmers and pastoralists moving
out of the Fertile Crescent on the eve of the Neolithic Revolution follow this pattern of dispersal,
i.e., farmers moving to land suitable for agriculture and herders targeting landscapes appropriate for



                                                   16
animal husbandry. One may apply a similar reasoning to the di¤usion of Islam. Since the productive
toolset of early Muslims was …ne-tuned to the arid landscapes of the Arabian Peninsula, seeing
Muslims migrating to lands similar to their ancestral regions can be easily rationalized.
         Second, Bulliet (1975) convincingly argues that one crucial element for understanding the
spread of Muslim empires is the use of the camel that provided the Arab armies a military edge over
their rivals. So, terrains suitable for deploying the camel would be more easily conquered whereas
others would remain beyond the reach of Muslim rulers. Chaney (2012) shows empirically how a
desert ecosystem is indeed predictive of the Arab conquests and Muslim adherence across countries
today.
         Both of these arguments are very relevant for understanding the spread of Islam in places that
experienced either a Muslim conqueror and/or a signi…cant in‡ux of Muslims. Nevertheless, in many
of the cases discussed in the historical section, Islam was often voluntarily adopted by the local rulers
in absence of signi…cant Muslim population movements. What arguments may then rationalize the
voluntary adoption of Islam across geographically unequal regions? Below we o¤er some tentative
explanations.

         Islam, Trade, and Unequal Geography            We o¤er two complementary accounts that high-
light the pro-trade stance of Islam. The …rst derives from the observation that historically within
geographically unequal societies trade is likely to play an important role for subsistence (see Column
8 of Table 6). Hence, to the extent that Islam o¤ered an institutional framework promoting exchange,
groups across geographically unequal territories would have an added incentive to convert. Several
Islamicists have stressed the pro-trade elements of the Muslim institutional complex. According to
Cohen (1971), "[Islam is a] blue-print of a politico-economic organization which has overcome the
many basic technical problems of trade." Trade called for new types of economic organization that
required stronger authority (Davidson, 1969). An important advantage of Islam with respect to previ-
ous arrangements was the fact that it o¤ered a powerful ideology with built-in sanctions that created
non-material interest in holding to the terms of contracts (Ensminger, 1997). This common platform
allegedly generated trust and contributed to the reduction in transaction costs while doing business
with fellow Muslims.
         Second, in our companion paper, Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and Prarolo (2016), we advance
theoretically a related hypothesis where the Islamic economic rules arise to mitigate social tensions
across Arabia’s tribes exposed to long-distance trade opportunities during the 7th century CE. In
a nutshell, we argue that trade diversion over Arabia created new potential economic bene…ts for
the scattered oases by transforming them to trade hubs providing services to the trading community
(Watt, 1961). Caravans, however, for thousands of miles were constantly exposed to raids by the
Bedouins, who made up a considerable fraction of the population at that time (Berkey, 2003). In this
historical backdrop, we hypothesize that Islamic rules were devised in response to the costly nature
of predation between the Bedouins and oasis dwellers, o¤ering a framework whose redistributive




                                                   17
principles safeguarded exchange over numerous and heterogeneous tribal territories (Bogle, 1998).17
         This view of Islam as an institutional package engineered to allow the ‡ourishing of long-
distance trade across unequally endowed regions generates an auxiliary prediction: Islam should be
able to gain a hearing more readily across unequal territories close to trade routes. Empirically, this
can be tested by adding the interaction between distance to trade routes and ports and the degree of
geographic inequality. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 are country-level regressions and Columns 3 and 4
focus on ethnic groups within countries. Across both units of aggregation the interaction term enters
with a negative sign and it is statistically signi…cant.18 The point estimates in Speci…cation 1 suggest
that the e¤ect of land inequality on Muslim adherence across countries becomes insigni…cant for
countries farther than 650 kilometers from the trade routes as of 600 CE, pointing to the di¤erential
incentives to convert to Islam among geographically unequal regions in the vicinity of historical trade
routes.
         Although the decline in the predictive power of inequality in agricultural endowments farther
from trade routes is consistent with the proposed view that Islamic rules were better suited for ge-
ographically unequal communities close to the trade network, it is far from a proof. To establish
that converting to Islam indeed facilitated trade and changed the groups’institutional framework –
increasing redistribution and mitigating con‡ict –one would need data before and after Islamization.
Cross-sectional variation only cannot shed light on whether converting to Islam changed the underly-
ing institutional structure, or if groups that already had traits similar to what the Islamic scriptures
prescribed found it easier to become Muslim. Taking these quali…ers into account in the Appendix
we show that Muslim groups are di¤erent from non-Muslim ones in some of their institutional and
societal arrangements. Speci…cally, in Appendix Table 4 we show that Muslim societies as recorded
by ethnographers in the Old World are more likely to be politically centralized, harbor beliefs in moral
gods, and follow equitable inheritance rules. Moreover, a strong link between an unequal geography
and social strati…cation is present across non-Muslim groups but muted across Muslim ones.


5        Conclusion
In this study we examine the historical roots of Muslim adherence within as well as across countries.
First, we digitize and combine a multitude of historical sources, to construct detailed proxies of
ancient, pre-Islamic trade routes, harbors, and ports and show that regions in the vicinity of such
locations are systematically more likely to be Muslim today. We view this …nding as o¤ering large-scale
econometric support to a widely held conjecture among prominent Islamicists like Lapidus (2002),
Berkey (2003), and Lewis (1993), and complement this empirical regularity with historical accounts
    17
     The link between the structure of production, institutional formation and religion can be readily glimpsed in the
works of Ibn Khaldun (1377) and Marx (1833 [1970]). Ibn Khaldun (1377) notes that "it is the physical environment-
habitat, climate, soil, and food, that explain the di¤erent ways in which people, nomadic or sedentary, satisfy their
needs, and form their customs and institutions," whereas Marx (1833 [1970]) highlights that religion, like any other
social institution, is a by-product of the society’s productive forces.
  18
     Note that when we use the trade network before 1800 CE the direct e¤ect of distance to trade routes also re‡ects
reverse causality. Nevertheless, irrespective of who set up the routes, we may still explore whether it is unequally
endowed regions that are di¤erentially impacted.


                                                         18
illustrating the importance of trade contacts in the process of Islamization of various prominent
locations in Africa and Asia.
      Second, we establish that Muslim communities tend to reside in habitats that are ecologically
similar to those of the Arabian Peninsula, the birthplace of Islam. Speci…cally, we show that Muslim
homelands are dominated by arid and semi-arid lands where animal husbandry is the norm, and dotted
with few niches of fertile land where farming is feasible. Overall, a poor and unequal distribution
of agricultural potential predicts Muslim adherence. We discuss the various mechanisms that may
give rise to this phenomenon and o¤er evidence consistent with the view of Islam as an institutional
package appropriate for societies residing along unequally endowed regions in the vicinity of trade
opportunities.
      The empirical analysis is conducted across countries and across ethnic groups within countries.
Exploring within-country variation is crucial in our context given the intimate relationship between
country formation and religious identity. Across both levels of aggregation, there is a robust link
between proximity to pre-Islamic trade routes, geographic inequality, and Muslim representation. The
identi…ed pattern is unique to the Muslim denomination and it obtains for regions that historically
have not been part of a Muslim empire. Overall, the empirical analysis highlights the prominent role
of history in shaping the contemporary spatial distribution of Muslim societies.
      We view these …ndings as a stepping stone for further research. For example, focusing on
speci…c regions where historical data may be available, one may explore time variation in the speed
at which Islam made inroads to the respective communities. Moreover, one element we do not touch
upon is why religious beliefs – once adopted – persist over time. Insights from the rapidly growing
theoretical and empirical literature on the persistence of beliefs and attitudes may shed light on this
phenomenon (see Bisin and Verdier, 2000; and Voigtlander and Voth, 2012). Finally, having identi…ed
some of the forces behind the formation and spread of Islam, one might examine the economic and
political consequences for the short-run and the long-run development of the Muslim world (see
Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and Prarolo, 2016). We plan to address some of these issues in subsequent
research.




                                                  19
References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2001): “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
 Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91(5), 1369–1401.
        (2002): “Reversal Of Fortune: Geography And Institutions in the Making of the Modern
  World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4), 1231–1294.
Andaya, B., and L. Andaya (1982): A History of Malaysia. Macmillan, London.
Barrett, D. B., G. T. Kurian, and T. M. Johnson (2001): World Christian Encyclopedia, 2nd
 Edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Barro, R., and R. M. McCleary (2003): “Religion and Economic Growth Across Countries,”
 American Sociological Review, 68(5), 760–781.
        (2006a): “Religion and Economy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 49–72.
         (2006b): “Religion and Political Economy in an International Panel,” Journal for the Sci-
  enti…c Study of Religion, 45(2), 149–175.
Becker, S. O., and L. Woessmann (2009): “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of
  Protestant Economic History,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2), 531–596.
Benabou, R., and J. Tirole (2001): “Willpower and Personal Rules,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 112(4), 848–886.
Bentzen, J. S., N. Kaarsen, and A. M. Wingender (2016): “Irrigation and Autocracy,”Journal
  of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.
Berkey, J. P. (2003): The Formation of Islam: Religion and Society in the Near East, 600-1800.
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Bisin, A., and T. Verdier (2000): “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Marriage,
  and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 955–988.
Blydes, L. (2014): “How Does Islamist Local Governance A¤ect the Lives of Women?,”Governance,
  27(3), 489–509.
Boahen, A., J. Ajayi, and M. Tidy (1966): Topics in West African History. Longman, London.
Bogle, E. C. (1998): Islam: Origin and Belief. University of Texas Press, Austin, TX.
Botticini, M., and Z. Eckstein (2005): “Jewish Occupational Selection: Education, Restrictions,
 or Minorities?,” Journal of Economic History, 65, 922–948.
        (2007): “From Farmers to Merchants, Conversions and Diaspora: Human Capital and Jewish
  History,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5, 885–926.
Brice, W. C., and H. Kennedy (2001): An Historical Atlas of Islam. Brill Academic Publishers,
 Leiden.
Bulliet, R. W. (1975): The Camel and the Wheel. Columbia University Press, New York, NY.
        (1979): Conversion to Islam in the Medieval Period: An Essay in Quantitative History.
  Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Campante, F., and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2015): “Does Religion A¤ect Economic Growth and
 Happiness? Evidence from Ramadan,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2), 615–658.



                                               20
Cantoni, D. (2012): “Adopting a New Religion: The Case of Protestantism in 16th Century Ger-
 many,” Economic Journal, 122(560), 502–531.
Cervellati, M., and U. Sunde (2017): “On the Emergence of Religious Norms – Theory and
 Evidence from the Protestant Reformation,” Working Paper, mimeo University of Bologna.
Chaney, E. (2012): “Islam and Human Capital Formation: Evidence from Pre-Modern Muslim
 Science,”in Handbook of the Economics of Religion, ed. by R. McCleary. Oxford University Press,
 Oxford.
        (2016): “Religion and the Rise and Fall of Islamic Science,”Working Paper, mimeo Harvard
  University.
Chaney, E., and R. Hornbeck (2016): “Economic Dynamics in the Malthusian Era: Evidence
 from the 1609 Spanish Expulsion of the Moriscos,” Economic Journal, 126(594), 1404–1440.
Chaudhuri, K. (1985): Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean: An Economic History from the
 Rise of Islam to 1750. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Clingingsmith, D., A. I. Khwaja, and M. Kremer (2009): “Estimating the Impact of The Hajj:
  Religion and Tolerance in Islam’s Global Gathering,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3),
  1133–1170.
Cohen, A. (1971): “Cultural Strategies in the Organization of Trading Diasporas,”in The Develop-
 ment of Indigenous Trade and Markets in West Africa, ed. by C. Meillassoux, pp. 206–281. Oxford
 University Press, London.
Conley, T. G. (1999): “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of Econo-
 metrics, 92(1), 1–45.
Davidson, B. (1969): A History of East and Central Africa. Doubleday Anchor Books, New York,
  NY.
de Graauw, A., B. Maione-Downing, and M. McCormick (2014): “Geodatabase of Ancient
  Ports and Harbours,” DARMC Scholarly Data Series, Data Contribution Series 2013-2. (version
  1.1). DARMC, Center for Geographic Analysis, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Devisse, J. (1988): “Trade and trade routes in West Africa,”in General history of Africa 3: Africa
 from the seventh to the eleventh century, ed. by M. Elfasi, and H. I., pp. 367–435. Heinemann,
 London.
Eaton, R. M. (1996): The Rise of Islam and the Bengal Frontier, 1204-1760. University of California
  Press, Berkeley, CA.
Elliot, H., and J. Dowson (1867): The History of India: As Told by Its Own Historians. The
  Muhammadan Period, v.1. Trübner and Company, London.
Engerman, S. L., and K. L. Sokoloff (1997): “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Di¤eren-
  tial Paths of Growth among New World Economies,” in How Latin America Fell Behind, ed. by
  S. Haber, pp. 260–304. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.
        (2002): “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of Development among New World
  Economies,” Working Paper No. 9259, NBER.
Ensminger, J. (1997): “Transaction Costs and Islam: Explaining Conversion in Africa,”Journal of
  Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 153(1), 3–29.
Esposito, J. (1999): The Oxford History of Islam. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ethnologue (2005): Languages of the World, SIL International; Fifteenth edition.

                                                21
Foltz, R. (1999): Religions of the Silk Road: Overland Trade and Cultural Exchange from Antiquity
  to the Fifteenth Century. St. Martin’s Press, New York, NY.
Geertz, C. (1968): Islam Observed: Religious Development in Morocco and Indonesia. University
 of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Gennaioli, N., and I. Rainer (2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,”
 Journal of Economic Growth, 12(3), 185–234.
Gray, P. J. (1999): “A Corrected Ethnographic Atlas,” Wolrd Cultures, 10, 24–85.
Greif, A. (1994): “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A History and Theoretical
 Re‡ection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” The Journal of Political Economy, 102(5),
 912–950.
Greif, A., and G. Tabellini (2010): “Cultural and Institutional Bifurcation: China and Europe
 Compared,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 100(2), 135–140.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2003): “People’s Opium? Religion and Economic
 Attitudes,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(1), 225–282.
        (2016): “Long Term Persistence,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 14(6),
  1401–1436.
Hiskett, M. (1984): The Development of Islam in West Africa. Longman, London.
Holt, P., A. Lambton, and B. Lewis (1970): The Cambridge History of Islam, v. 2A. Cambridge
 University Press, Cambridge.
Houben, V. J. (2003): “Southeast Asia and Islam,” The Annals of the American Academy of
 Political and Social Science, 588(1), 149–170.
Hsiang, S. M. (2013): “Visually-Weighted Regression,”Working Paper, mimeo Princeton University.
Hsu, B., J. Gibbon, C. Hackett, and A. Reynolds (2008): “Estimating the Religious Compo-
  sition of All Nations: An Empirical Assessment of the World Christian Database,”Journal for the
  Scienti…c Study of Religion, 74(4), 678–693.
Ibn Khaldun (1377): Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History, transl. Franz Rosenthal (1967).
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Ibrahim, M. (1990): Merchant Capital and Islam. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Insoll, T. (2003): The Archaeology of Islam in Sub-Saharan Africa. Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge.
Iyigun, M. (2010): “Monotheism (From a Sociopolitical and Economic Perspective),” Working
  Paper, mimeo University of Colorado.
Jha, S. (2013): “Trade, Institutions and Ethnic Tolerance: Evidence from South Asia,” American
  Political Science Review, 107(4), 806–832.
Kuran, T. (2003): “The Islamic Commercial Crisis: Institutional Roots of Economic Underdevel-
 opment in the Middle East,” Journal of Economic History, 63, 414–446.
         (2004): “Why the Middle East Is Economically Underdeveloped: Historical Mechanisms of
  Institutional Stagnation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18, 71–90.
Kuran, T., and S. Lustig (2012): “Judicial Biases in Ottoman Istanbul: Islamic Justice and Its
 Compatibility with Modern Economic Life,” Journal of Law and Economics, 55(3), 631–666.

                                               22
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1997): “Legal Determinants
  of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52(3), 1131–1150.
Lapidus, I. M. (2002): A History of Islamic Societies. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Last, M. (1979): “Some Economic Aspects of Conversion in Hausaland (Nigeria),” in Conversion
  to Islam, ed. by N. Levtzion, pp. 236–246. Holmes and Meier, New York, NY.
Levtzion, N. (1979): Conversion to Islam. Holmes and Meier Publishers, New York, NY.
Levtzion, N., and R. Pouwels (2000): History Of Islam In Africa. Ohio University Press, Athens,
  OH.
Lewis, B. (1993): The Arabs in History, 6th Edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Lewis, I. M. (1980): Islam in Tropical Africa. International African Institute, London.
Makhdum, S. Z. (2006): Tuhfat al-Mujahidin: A Historical Epic of the Sixteenth Century. Translated
 from Arabic by S. Muhammad Husayn Nainar. Islamic Book Trust, KualaLumpur / Calicut.
Martin, X. S. I., G. Doppelhofer, and R. I. Miller (2004): “Determinants of Long-Run
 Growth: a Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach,” American Economic
 Review, 94(4), 813–835.
Marx, K. (1833 [1970]): Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, Edited by Joseph O’Malley. Cam-
 bridge University Press, Cambrdige.
Mattulada (1983): “"Islam di Sulawesi Selatan" (Islam in South Sulawesi),” in Agama dan Pe-
 rubahan Sosial (Religion and Social Change), ed. by T. Abdullah. Rajawali, Jakarta.
McCormick, M., G. Huang, G. Zambotti, and J. Lavash (2013): “Roman Road Network
 (version 2008),”DARMC Scholarly Data Series, Data Contribution Series 2013-5. DARMC, Center
 for Geographic Analysis, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Meri, J., and J. Bacharach (2006): Medieval Islamic Civilization: An Encyclopedia, Routledge
 Encyclopedias of the Middle Ages. Routledge, New York.
Michalopoulos, S. (2012): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,”American Economic Review,
 102(4), 1508–1539.
Michalopoulos, S., A. Naghavi, and G. Prarolo (2016): “Islam, Inequality, and Pre-Industrial
 Comparative Development,” Journal of Development Economics, 120, 86–98.
Michalopoulos, S., and E. Papaioannou (2013): “Pre-Colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contem-
 porary African Development,” Econometrica, 81(1), 113–152.
Mikhail, A. (2012): Water on Sand. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Miller, J. (1969): The spice trade of the Roman Empire, 29 B.C. to A.D. 641, Oxford University
 Press Academic Monogra Series. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Minahan, J. (2014): Ethnic Groups of North, East, and Central Asia: An Encyclopedia, Ethnic
 groups of the world. Abc-Clio Incorporated, Santa Barbara, CA.
Nunn, N., and D. Puga (2012): “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,” Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 20–36.
O’Brien, P. K. (1999): Oxford Atlas of World History. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Peoples, H. C., and F. W. Marlowe (2012): “Subsistence and the Evolution of Religion,”Human
  Nature, 23(3), 253–269.

                                                23
Platteau, J.-P. (2008): “Religion, Politics, and Development: Lessons from the Lands of Islam,”
  Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 68, 329–351.
        (2011): “Political Instrumentalization of Islam and Threat of an Obscurantist Deadlock,”
  World Development, 39, 243–260.
Pryor, F. L. (2007): “The Economic Impact of Islam on Developing Countries,” World Develop-
  ment, 35(11), 1815–1835.
Ramankutty, N., J. A. Foley, C. Monfreda, and J. Foley (2008): “Farming the Planet: 1.
 Geographic Distribution of Global Agricultural Lands in the Year 2000,” Global Biogeochemical
 Cycles, 22, 1–19.
Ramankutty, N., J. A. Foley, J. Norman, and K. McSweeney (2002): “The Global Distrib-
 ution of Cultivable Lands: Current Patterns and Sensitivity to Possible Climate Change,” Global
 Ecology and Biogeography, 11, 377–392.
Rawlinson, H. (2003): Ancient and Medieval History of India. Bharatiya Kala Prakashan, New
  Delhi.
Richerson, P. J. (1996): Principles of Human Ecology. Pearson Custom Pub, New York, NY.
Ricklefs, M. (1991): A History of Modern Indonesia since c.1300, 2nd Edition. MacMillan, London.
Robinson, D. (2004): Muslim Societies in African History, New Approaches to African History.
 Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.
Roemer, H. R. (2000): History of the Turkic Peoples in the Pre-Islamic Period. Klaus Schwarz
 Verlag, Berlin.
Roes, F. L., and M. Raymond (2003): “Belief in Moralizing Gods,”Evolution and Human Behav-
 ior, 24, 126–135.
Rubin, J. (2009): “Social Insurance, Commitment, and the Origin of Law: Interest Bans in Early
 Christianity,” Journal of Law and Economics, 52, 761–777.
Shillington, K. (2005): Encyclopedia of African history, v. 3. Fitzroy Dearborn, New York, NY.
Sinor, D. (1990): The Cambridge History of Early Inner Asia, v. 1. Cambridge University Press,
  Cambridge.
Soucek, S. (2000): A History of Inner Asia. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Trimingham, J. S. (1962): A History of Islam in West Africa. Oxford University Press, London.
        (1964): Islam in east Africa. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Voigtlander, N., and H.-J. Voth (2012): “Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of
 Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1339–1392.
Wade, G. (2009): “An Early Age of Commerce in Southeast Asia, 900-1300 CE,”Journal of South-
 east Asian Studies, 40(2), 221–265.
Watt, W. M. (1961): Muhammad: Prophet and Statesman. Oxford University Press, London.
Wink, A. (1990): Al-Hind: The Making of the Indo-Islamic World. E.J. Brill, Leiden.
WLMS (2006):     World Language Mapping System,              Version 3.2 Available on-line at
 http://www.gmi.org/wlms/.
Wood, E. (2003): Empire of Capital. VERSO, New York, NY.

                                               24
WRD     (2006):       World    Religion   Database,   BRILL,   Available   on-line   at
 http://www.worldreligiondatabase.org/.




                                           25
Supplementary Appendix for "Trade and Geography in the Spread
                          of Islam"

6         Appendix
6.1         Data: Geographical Variables

Absolute Latitude: Absolute distance from the equator averaged across the centroids of each 0.5
by 0.5 decimal degrees cell that fall within a country or ethnic group in decimal degrees.
            Source: Constructed using ArcGis.
            Average Land Quality: Average suitability for farming based on climatic and soil charac-
teristics within the respective unit of analysis.
            Source: Michalopoulos (2012). The raw dataset is available at the Atlas of the Biosphere.19
            In order to construct this index, Ramankutty et al. (2002) empirically estimate the proba-
bility density function of the percentage of croplands around 1990 with respect to climate and soil
characteristics. Then the authors combine the derived probability with data on climate and soil
quality to predict regional suitability for agriculture at the resolution of 05 degrees latitude by 05
degrees longitude worldwide. The climatic characteristics are based on mean-monthly climate con-
ditions for the 1961–1990 period and capture (i) monthly temperature (ii) precipitation and (iii)
potential sunshine hours. All the climatic conditions weakly increase the suitability of land for
agriculture. Regarding the soil suitability, the traits considered are a measure of the total organic
content (carbon density) and the nutrient availability (soil pH). The relationship of these indexes
with agricultural suitability is non-monotonic. Low and high values of pH limit cultivation potential,
since these values signal that soils are too acidic or too alkaline, respectively. Speci…cally, Average
Land Quality,  is the product of two components capturing the climatic suitability for cultivation,
 , and the soil suitability,  . Hence,  =        . Each component is constructed in
the following way:  = 1 ()             2 (), where GDD denotes growing degree days and  is
a moisture index capturing the availability of water to plants. Regarding soil characteristics, 
= 1 ( )      2 ( ), where  stands for soil carbon density and  captures the acidity
or alkalinity of soil. Each functional form is derived from the probability density function of actual
cropland area versus each component. For example, in the case of 1 () and 2 (), accord-
ing to Ramankutty et al. (2002) a sigmoidal function best …ts the observed empirical relationship
between the fraction of a cell that was cultivated in 1990 and the  and  respectively. Specif-
ically, 1 () = 1(1 + exp(( ¬ ))) and 2 () = 1(1 + exp(( ¬ ))) with  = 00052
 = 1334  = 14705   = 03295 The functional forms of 1 ( ) and 2 ( ) are the follow-
ing: 1 ( ) = ((1 + exp(( ¬  )))) ((1 + exp(( ¬  )))) with  = 39157  = 13766

    19
         It may be dowloaded from http://www.sage.wisc.edu/iamdata/grid_data_sel.php.




                                                          1
                                             8                                                 9
                                             >
                                             > ¬2085 + 0475                65 >
                                                                                               >
                                             <                                                 =
 = 3468   = ¬00791 and 2 ( ) =           10                   65    8 .
                                             >
                                             >                                                 >
                                                                                               >
                                             :                                                 ;
                                                 10 ¬ 20                 8
      Distance to Mecca: Great-circle distance from Mecca averaged across the centroids of each
0.5 by 0.5 decimal degrees cell that fall within a country or ethnic group in thousand kilometers.
      Source: Calculated using the Haversine Formula.
      Distance to Trade Routes before 600 CE: Great-circle distance from the nearest trade
route before 600 CE averaged across the centroids of each 0.5 by 0.5 decimal degrees cell that fall
within a country or ethnic group in thousand kilometers.
      Source: Used the trade routes mapped in Brice and Kennedy (2001) in 600 CE; the digital
version of the Roman roads identi…ed in the Barrington Atlas (McCormick, et al., 2013); and a list
of around 2 900 ancient ports based on the writings of 66 ancient authors and a few modern authors,
including the Barrington Atlas (De Graauw, Maione-Downing, and McCormick, 2014).
      Distance to Trade Routes in 1800 CE: Great-circle distance from the nearest trade route
in 1800 CE averaged across the centroids of each 0.5 by 0.5 decimal degrees cell that fall within a
country or ethnic group in thousand kilometers.
      Source: Calculated using the all trade routes mapped in Brice and Kennedy (2001) before 1800
CE. This information is supplemented by maps from O’Brien (1999) which contain information on
trade routes within Europe, Southeast Asia, West Africa, and China during the same time period;
the digital version of the Roman roads identi…ed in the Barrington Atlas (McCormick, et al., 2013);
and a list of around 2 900 ancient ports based on the writings of 66 ancient authors and a few modern
authors, including the Barrington Atlas (De Graauw, Maione-Downing, and McCormick, 2014).
      Land Inequality: Inequality in the regional suitability for agriculture within country or
linguistic homeland. The measure used in the regressions is the log of the Gini index.
      Source: See Average Land Quality
      Sea Distance: Distance from the nearest coastline (1000s of km.) averaged across the centroids
of each 0.5 by 0.5 decimal degrees cell that fall within a country or ethnic group in thousand kilometers.
      Source: The coastline shape…le comes from the coastlines of seas and oceans dataset. Publisher:
Global Mapping International, Colorado Springs, Colorado, USA. Series name: Global Ministry
Mapping System. Series issue: Version 3.0.
      Irrigation Potential: Indicator that takes the value 1 if there are regions in a given coun-
try/homeland classi…ed as Impact Class 5, i.e., there are cells where irrigation can more than double
agricultural yields.
      Source: GAEZ available at http://webarchive.iiasa.ac.at/Research/LUC/SAEZ/index.html.
The raster …le is plate number 47.
      Ruggedness: Apply the ruggedness index formula by Nunn and Puga (2012) using the topo-
graphical data of the Global Land One-Kilometer Base Elevation (GLOBE) digital elevation model.
      Ratio of Land Allocation of Pasture Relative to Agriculture in 2000: The data on
land use come from Ramankutty et al. (2002) and provide at the grid level of 0083 by 0083 decimal


                                                    2
degrees an estimate of the shares of land allocated to pasture and agriculture in 2000 CE, respectively.
We aggregate this information at the homeland level to obtain a measure of how tilted land allocation
is in favor of pasture.

6.2   Data: Historical Variables

% Muslim in 2005 CE: Fraction of Muslim population in 2005 within an ethnic group.
      Source: World Religion Database, available at: http://www.worldreligiondatabase.org/
      % Muslim in 1900 CE: Fraction of Muslim population in 1900CE within country.
      Source: Religion Adherence Data - McCleary and Barro (2005) available at
      http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~rmcclea/data.html
      Muslim Majority: Dummy variable equals 1 if the percentage of Muslims either in a country
or an ethnic group is larger than 90%.
      Source: See % Muslim in 2005 CE / % Muslim in 1900 CE.
      Animal Husbandry: 0¬9 scale index re‡ecting the intensity of pastoralism. The index equals
0 when there 0 ¬ 5% dependence; 1 when there is 6 ¬ 15% dependence; 2 when there is 16 ¬ 25%
dependence; 3 when there is 26¬ 35% dependence; 4 when there is 36¬ 45% dependence; 5 when there
is 46 ¬ 55% dependence; 6 when there is 56 ¬ 65% dependence; 7 when there is 66 ¬ 75% dependence;
8 when there is 76 ¬ 85% dependence; and 9 when there is 86 ¬ 100% dependence. Source: Murdock
(1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v4.
      Agriculture: 0 ¬ 9 scale index re‡ecting the intensity of agriculture. The index equals 0 when
there 0 ¬ 5% dependence; 1 when there is 6 ¬ 15% dependence; 2 when there is 16 ¬ 25% dependence;
3 when there is 26 ¬ 35% dependence; 4 when there is 36 ¬ 45% dependence; 5 when there is 46 ¬ 55%
dependence; 6 when there is 56 ¬ 65% dependence; 7 when there is 66 ¬ 75% dependence; 8 when
there is 76 ¬ 85% dependence; and 9 when there is 86 ¬ 100% dependence. Source: Murdock (1967);
variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v5.
      Ratio of Historical Subsistence Share of Pastoralism Relative to Agriculture:
ln((1+v4)/(1+v5)).
      Dependence on Trade: Percent importance in contribution to subsistence from trade; vari-
able v819 from the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample (SCCS).
      Takes the following values: 0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 55%, 65%. Source: Murdock and
White (1967); variable code in the Standard Cross Cultural Sample v819.
      Class Strati…cation Indicator: Following Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) we de…ne a dummy
strati…cation index that equals zero when Murdock’s variable equals zero indicating "absence of
signi…cant class distinctions among freemen, ignoring variations in individual repute achieved through
skill, valor, piety, or wisdom," and one when Murdock’s class strati…cation measure equals 1, 2, 3, or
4. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v66.
      Inheritance Distribution for Movable Property: Non-Ordered variable that equals 1
when distribution is "equal or relatively equal," 2 when it is "exclusively," 3 when it is "ultimogen-
iture," 4 when it is "primogeniture," and 9 when there is "absence of inheritance of real property."


                                                   3
Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v77.
        Egalitarian Inheritance Distribution for Movable Property Indicator: takes on the
value of 1 when the Inheritance Distribution for Movable Property is "equal or relatively
equal" and when there is "absence of inheritance of real property" and zero otherwise. Source:
Murdock (1967); variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v77.
        Egalitarian Inheritance Distribution for Land Property Indicator: takes on the value
of 1 when the Inheritance Distribution for Land Property is "equal or relatively equal" and
when there is "absence of inheritance of real property" and zero otherwise. Source: Murdock (1967);
variable code in the Ethnographic Atlas v76.
        High Gods: A "High God" is described as "a spiritual being who is believed to have created
all reality and/or to be its ultimate governor, even though his/her sole act was to create other spirits
who, in turn, created or control the natural world." The values of this variable are: (1) absent or not
reported; (2) present but not active in human a¤airs; (3) present and active in human a¤airs but not
supportive of human morality; and (4) present, active, and speci…cally supportive of human morality.
We recoded values 1–3 into 0, thus, creating a variable "High Gods Supportive of Human Morality,"
with two values: either supportive of human morality, or not. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code
in the Ethnographic Atlas v34 ("High Gods").
        Jurisdictional Hierarchy beyond Local Community: Ordered variable ranging from 1
to 5 indicating the number of jurisdictional levels (political complexity) in each society above the
local level. A 1 indicates stateless societies, 2 and 3 indicate petty and large paramount chiefdoms
(or their equivalent), 4 and 5 indicate large states. Source: Murdock (1967); variable code in the
Ethnolinguistic Atlas v33; Murdock’s Atlas is available at:
http://eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/worldcul/EthnographicAtlasWCRevisedByWorldCultures.sav.
        Monotheistic Religions: Territories of monotheistic religions are classi…ed as those countries
with an Abrahamic religion besides Islam by 1050 CE according to O’Brien (1999).
        Muslim Empires: Territories of Muslim empires are classi…ed as those countries which at
some point hosted Islamic empires, kingdoms, and Sultanates according to Iyigun (2010).

6.3     Appendix Tables
6.3.1    Discussion on Societal Traits of Muslim Groups

In Appendix Table 4, we investigate whether Muslim groups are di¤erent from non-Muslim ones with
respect to various societal and institutional traits. The unit is the ethnic group and the sample com-
prises all groups in the Old World for which we have found a correspondence between the Ethnologue
and the Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas. All columns include country-speci…c constants.
        The dependent variable in Column 1 is the number of jurisdictional levels beyond the local
community, an index that has been used to capture historical state capacity at the ethnicity level (see
Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013). To the extent that Islam o¤ered an institutional framework
facilitating trade, one would expect Muslim groups to be more politically centralized. The positive
and signi…cant association between Muslim adherence and political complexity is consistent with the


                                                   4
idea that Islam was successful in gaining a hearing across tribal populations, politically integrating
them into more centralized units.
      One may wonder why a group needs to adopt a religion rather than just the appropriate
economic principles. Such question is vast in its scope and a comprehensive answer cannot be provided
within the con…nes of the present study. Nonetheless, among the pre-colonial traits recorded by
Murdock (1967) there is an entry describing whether a group believes in gods that are supportive of
human morality. Peoples and Marlowe (2012) and Roes and Raymond (2003) have shown that the
presence of moral gods in historical societies is associated with intensive competition for resources,
high threat of free-riding, and collective action problems. For trade to ‡ourish across geographically
unequal territories, cooperation across the underlying tribal clans was necessary. Islam’s religious
ideology with built-in penalties o¤ered such a platform. With this background in mind, in Column 2
we regress Muslim representation on whether a group believes in moral gods. The coe¢ cient suggests
that a 50% increase in Muslim adherence within a group (close to one standard deviation) increases
the likelihood that the group believes in gods that dictate what should (not) be done by 29% pointing
to the importance of Islam as a commitment device.
      Column 3 in Appendix Table 4 shows that land inequality harbors heterogeneous economic
opportunities leading to the emergence of economically strati…ed societies. One-standard-deviation
increase in geographic inequality increases the probability that a group will be strati…ed by 2%. Unlike
non-Muslim groups, for which the link between geographic and social inequality is strong (Column
5), the tendency of an unequal geography to breed social inequality is muted for Muslim-majority
societies (Column 4).
      But what type of economic traits characterize Muslim communities? Unfortunately data on
the extent of charity or usury laws within a group are not available; however, there is information
on the type of the pre-colonial inheritance system that Kuran (2003, 2004b) and others have stressed
as a key aspect of Islam. The dependent variable in Column 6 (7) of Appendix Table 4 is a dummy
that takes the value 1 when the inheritance of movable (land) property is "equal or relatively equal"
or when there is "absence of inheritance." The estimates suggest that Muslim groups are more likely
to follow equal inheritance rules.




                                                   5
   Figure 1 – Muslim Adherence and Ancient Trade Routes – Selected Countries

                           Figure 1a - China




Figure 1b - Mali                                    Figure 1c - Tanzania
Figure 1d - Indonesia




  Figure 1e - India
Figure 1 portrays Muslim adherence at the ethnic group level and historical trade routes within five countries
(1a: China, 1b: Mali, 1c: Tanzania, 1d: Indonesia and 1e: India). Muslim adherence is represented in quintiles at
the level of ethnic group, where actual homelands are from the Ethnologue version 15 and data on religious
affiliation from the World Religion Database. Darker shades represent higher Muslim shares in the population.
In Figures 1a, 1c, and 1e the trade routes are depicted as thick, black-and-white dashed lines and correspond to
pre-600 CE. These routes are digitized from Brice and Kennedy (2001). The ancient ports and harbors, depicted
as circled stars, are from Arthur de Graauw (2014). In figure 1b trade routes are relative to 900 AD, while in
figures 1c and 1d ports in year 600 CE (1800 CE) are represented with circled stars (circled dots). Country borders
are represented with a thin dashed grey line.




                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 2 – Main Old World trade routes

                                                                                                    Figure 2a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 2b


    ,
    %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %

                   ,
                   %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ##
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                    ,
                    %
                    ,
                    %
                    ,
                    %,
                     %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#*#     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                %%
                ,
                 ,
                 % ,,%
                    %
                    ,
                    % , ,%
                        %,,
                          %,
                           %
                           ,
                           %                              #
                                                          *#
                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %    ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %   ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #     *  *#*#  *# *# *# *#                          *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#     *
                   ,%
                   %,
                    ,
                    %,
                     %,%
                      %   ,                                  *#
                                                              *#
                                                               *#                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    % ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %   ,                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  * *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #                         *
                 ,
                 %
                 ,%,        ,%
                            % , %
                              %    ,
                                   %
                                   ,
                                   %                            *#
                                                                 *#
                                                                  *#*#
                                                                   *#*#*#
                                                                        *#                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,% ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %       ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %   ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       **#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#*#*#      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #                  *# *#       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                 % ,%
                   %, ,%
                      %    ,
                           %,
                            %,
                             %,
                              ,
                              %
                              ,
                              %   ,
                                  %
                                  ,
                                  ,
                                  %                                      *#
                                                                          *#
                                                                           *#
                                                                            *                                                                                                                                                                                                       % ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %  ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # *#             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,# *                    *#
                     ,
                     % ,%
                        ,,
                         % ,
                           %
                          ,%
                          %,,
                            %
                            ,
                            % ,
                              % ,%
                               ,%,                                           #
                                                                             *                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        % ,,%,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #            *#  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
              , %
              %     , ,
                      %
                      ,
                      %,
                       %,
                        %  #
                           *,
                            %
                            ,
                            %
                            ,
                            %
                            # ,
                              %%                                             #
                                                                             *                             # *#
                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                           *# *#*#
                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                  *#*#
                                                                                                                     *#                                                                                                                                                       % %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,        ,  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %%   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*#                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #  **#*# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#*                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                ,
                %,%,,%
                    % ,
                      %
                      ,,
                       %
                       ,%
                       %,,%
                         % ,*#
                             *##                                             #
                                                                             *#*#                    *#*#
                                                                                                      *# *            *#
                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                           *#                                                                                                                                                      ,%, ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       % ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             % ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *#*#*#*#*#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#   ***#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#*#
                        , *                                                                        *#
                ,
                %%  ,
                    %          *                                                 *               #*#
                                                                                                  #                         *#
                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                              *#       *#
                                                                                                                                        *#                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %%               **      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #                        *#*     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ** %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *#*#               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #            *#*#      *                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                    ,
                    %,
                     %,
                      %
                      ,
                      %,%
                       %       #
                               *#
                                **#           ##
                                               * #
                                                 *#
                                                  *#
                                                   *#                        ,
                                                                             %,
                                                                              %,
                                                                               % ,
                                                                                 %
                                                                                ,%
                                                                                %,
                                                                                 %#
                                                                                  *           ,
                                                                                              %
                                                                                              #
                                                                                              *%#
                                                                                                **
                                                                                                ,%
                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                  %                            *#*#
                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                   *#*#
                                                                                                                                    *#   *#
                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %, #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,%        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # **#   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *#*#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#*#                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#* *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#*
                          , #                 *                                                                                              *#
                         ,
                         %                          *#
                                                     *#
                                                      *#                     ,
                                                                             %
                                                                             ,%
                                                                                 ,,, %
                                                                                   %
                                                                                   ,
                                                                                   %           ,                                                                                                                                                                                                            * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #               *     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        , ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %                                   *#                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #             *#                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#*
                         ,
                         %%       *
                                  #
                                  *          ,
                                             %#
                                              *
                                              ,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %
                                              #
                                              *,
                                               %
                                               ,
                                               %,
                                                %
                                                ,
                                                %
                                                ,
                                                %,
                                                 %
                                                 ,
                                                 %,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %,
                                                   %    *#
                                                         *#*#
                                                            * #
                                                              *            ,%
                                                                           %,
                                                                            ,
                                                                            %,
                                                                             %
                                                                             %    ,
                                                                                  %
                                                                                  ,
                                                                                  %#
                                                                                   *
                                                                                   ,
                                                                                   %
                                                                                   ,
                                                                                   %,
                                                                                    %,% ,,
                                                                                       ,%,
                                                                                         %,
                                                                                          %,
                                                                                           %
                                                                                           ,
                                                                                           %,
                                                                                            %
                                                                                            ,
                                                                                            %
                                                                                            ,
                                                                                            %,
                                                                                             %
                                                                                             ,%
                                                                                             %,                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                *#*#
                                                                                                                                                   *#           *#
                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %, #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %    *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #               *#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *# *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*#
           ,%
            ,%                    #
                                  *    ,
                                       %,
                                        %
                                        ,
                                        %#
                                         *
                                         ,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %
                                        ,%
                                        % ,
                                          %
                                          ,
                                          %
                                          ,
                                          %,
                                           %  ,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %,
                                               %
                                               ,
                                               %   ,
                                                   %
                                                   ,
                                                   %
                                                   ,
                                                   %
                                                   ,
                                                   %,
                                                    %
                                                    ,
                                                    %         #
                                                              *            ,
                                                                           %
                                                                           ,
                                                                           %        ,%
                                                                                    %
                                                                                    ,
                                                                                    %%
                                                                                     ,         ,%
                                                                                               %,,
                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                 ,%
                                                                                                 %                                                  *#*#
                                                                                                                                                       *#   *# *#
                                                                                                                                                              *#  *#
                                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                    *#*#                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #                    *#*#     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*#      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           **
               ,%
               %
               , ,,
                  %,%
                   %,%,%,
                        %        ,
                                 %,
                                  %
                                  ,
                                  %,
                                   %
                                   ,
                                   %  ,
                                      %
                                      ,
                                      %,
                                       %   ,
                                           %    ,
                                                %
                                                ,
                                                %    ,
                                                     %
                                                     ,
                                                     %         #
                                                               *          ,
                                                                          %
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %                       ,,
                                                                                                   %                                                                   *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                          *#**#              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                            *#  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#                                                                       ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,% ,,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            % *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %                   *                         *#                      *# *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #                   *#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
         ,
         %
         ,
         %
         ,
         %,
          %
          ,
          %
           %
                    #
                    * #
                      *#
                       *,
                        #
                        *# *
                           #
                           *#
                            * #
                              *
                                ,%
                                %
                                ,
                                %,
                                 %
                                   ,
                                   %
                                 , %
                                    ,
                                    %
                                    ,
                                    %
                                    ,
                                    %
                                    ,,
                                     %
                                     ,
                                     %,
                                      %  ,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %,
                                          ,
                                          %
                                          ,
                                          %,
                                           %
                                           ,
                                           %
                                           ,
                                           %,
                                            %
                                            ,
                                            %
                                            ,
                                            %,
                                             %
                                             ,
                                             %
                                             ,
                                             %
                                                 ,
                                                 %
                                                 ,
                                                 %,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %,
                                                   %
                                                     ,
                                                     %
                                                     ,
                                                     %,
                                                      %
                                                      ,
                                                      %
                                                      ,
                                                      %
                                                      ,
                                                      %,%
                                                       %,%
                                                         ,,
                                                          %    #
                                                               *
                                                               #
                                                               *
                                                                ##*
                                                                **##
                                                                   *#
                                                                    *#
                                                                     * #
                                                                       *#
                                                                        *
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %,
                                                                          %        ,
                                                                                   %   ,
                                                                                       %
                                                                                                   ,%
                                                                                                   % ,
                                                                                                     ,%
                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                      %                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                          **#
                                                                                                                                                           #  *#*#
                                                                                                                                                               *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                  ** #
                                                                                                                                                                   #          *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                  *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                     *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                      *#   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                         *#        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                   *                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %        ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,%,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,%,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#                **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*# **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #* *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*#* *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*#*#**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*#*# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#  *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #   *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*#
         ,
         %
         ,
         %, #
          %     #
                *##
                  *
                 * #        ,
                            %,
                             %,
                              %,
                               %,
                                %
                                ,
                                %
                                  , %   ,
                                        %
                                        ,
                                         ,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %,
                                          %
                                          ,
                                          %
                                          ,
                                          %
                                          , %
                                          %
                                              ,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %,
                                               %
                                               ,
                                               %
                                               ,
                                               %,
                                                %
                                                ,
                                                %,
                                                 %
                                                 #
                                                 ,
                                                 %
                                                 *
                                                ,%
                                                 ,,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %
                                                   ,
                                                   %,
                                                    %
                                                    ,
                                                    %,
                                                     %
                                                     ,
                                                     %
                                                     ,
                                                     %
                                                     ,
                                                     %,
                                                      %
                                                      ,
                                                      %,
                                                       %
                                                       ,
                                                       %  #
                                                          *,
                                                           %
                                                           ,
                                                           %
                                                           ,
                                                           %#
                                                            *#
                                                             *##
                                                               *#
                                                               **
                                                                ,
                                                                %#
                                                                 *#
                                                                  *
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %,
                                                                   %#
                                                                    *
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %#
                                                                     *
                                                                     ,
                                                                     %
                                                                     ,
                                                                     %
                                                                     ,
                                                                     %,
                                                                      %#
                                                                       *#
                                                                        *
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %#
                                                                         *
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %#
                                                                          *
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %#
                                                                           *
                                                                           ,
                                                                           %
                                                                           ,
                                                                           %
                                                                           ,
                                                                           %
                                                                           #
                                                                           ,
                                                                           %
                                                                           *#
                                                                            *
                                                                            ,
                                                                            %
                                                                            ,
                                                                            %
                                                                            ,
                                                                            %
                                                                            %#
                                                                            ,*
                                                                             ,
                                                                             %
                                                                             ,
                                                                             %,
                                                                              %#
                                                                               ,
                                                                               %
                                                                               *,
                                                                                %
                                                                                ,
                                                                                %,
                                                                                 %
                                                                                 ,
                                                                                 %
                                                                                 #
                                                                                 *
                                                                                  ,
                                                                                  %
                                                                                  ,
                                                                                  %
                                                                                  ,
                                                                                  %,
                                                                                   % ,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     %,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      % ,
                                                                                        %
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                        %,
                                                                                         %
                                                                                         ,
                                                                                         %,
                                                                                          %,
                                                                                           %
                                                                                           ,%
                                                                                           %,,
                                                                                             %
                                                                                             ,
                                                                                             %,
                                                                                              %
                                                                                              ,
                                                                                              %,
                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                %
                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                  *,
                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                      * *#
                                                                                                        # *#
                                                                                                           *#                                 *#
                                                                                                                                             *# *#*#* *#
                                                                                                                                                     *# *#
                                                                                                                                                         **#
                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                         #  *#     #
                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                    **
                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                  *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#                        *#  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           , %      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       , %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *# **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *#       *#*#  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *  *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #  *# *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          * #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
         ,
         %,
          %    #
               **          *
                           ,
                           %
                           ,
                           %
                           ,
                           %
                            ,
                            %   ,
                                %
                                ,
                                %,
                                 %
                                 ,
                                 %,
                                  %
                                  ,
                                  %
                                  %     ,
                                        %
                                        ,
                                        %,%
                                         %,       ,
                                                  %,
                                                   %
                                                   ,
                                                   %,
                                                    %
                                                    ,
                                                    %
                                                    ,
                                                    %,
                                                     %
                                                     ,
                                                     %
                                                     ,
                                                     %,
                                                      %
                                                      ,
                                                      %
                                                      ,
                                                      %,
                                                       %,
                                                        %
                                                        ,
                                                        %,%
                                                         ,
                                                         %
                                                         %,,
                                                           %
                                                           ,
                                                           %,
                                                            %
                                                            ,
                                                            %    ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %,
                                                                   %
                                                                   ,
                                                                   %
                                                                   ,
                                                                   %
                                                                   ,
                                                                   %,
                                                                    %,
                                                                     %
                                                                     ,
                                                                     %
                                                                     ,
                                                                     %,
                                                                      %
                                                                      ,
                                                                      %,
                                                                       %
                                                                       ,
                                                                       %,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %,
                                                                          %
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %,
                                                                           %
                                                                           ,
                                                                           %
                                                                           ,
                                                                           %
                                                                           #
                                                                           *,
                                                                            %
                                                                            #
                                                                            *    #
                                                                                 *#
                                                                                  *#*#
                                                                                     *##
                                                                                       * #
                                                                                         * *#
                                                                                           #*#
                                                                                             * #
                                                                                               * #
                                                                                                 *          *#
                                                                                                             *                               #
                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                             *      *#
                                                                                                                                                    #               *#*
                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                      *                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                            *#   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                *#         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *                          ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #* #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            % ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  % *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #    *#*# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #    **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #   **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #* #         #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # **#                   *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *# *#      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#*#                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
         ,
         %
         ,
         %
         ,
         %
         ,
         %,
          %   #
              *
              #
              *            ,
                           %
                           ,
                           %
                           ,
                           %  ,
                              %
                              ,
                              % ,
                                %,
                                 %      ,
                                        %,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %,
                                          %    ,
                                               %  ,
                                                  %,
                                                   %
                                                   ,
                                                   %,
                                                    %
                                                    ,
                                                    %,
                                                     %,
                                                      %
                                                      ,
                                                      %      ,
                                                             %
                                                             ,
                                                             %,
                                                              %
                                                              ,
                                                              %
                                                              ,
                                                              %
                                                              ,
                                                              %
                                                              ,
                                                              %,
                                                               %
                                                               ,
                                                               %
                                                               ,
                                                               %,
                                                                %
                                                                ,
                                                                %
                                                                ,
                                                                %
                                                                ,
                                                                %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %,
                                                                   %
                                                                   ,
                                                                   %,
                                                                    %,
                                                                     %,
                                                                      %
                                                                      ,
                                                                      %
                                                                      ,
                                                                      %
                                                                      ,
                                                                      %,
                                                                       %
                                                                       ,
                                                                       %
                                                                       ,
                                                                       %,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %    #
                                                                             *#
                                                                              * #
                                                                                *#
                                                                                 *#   *
                                                                                      #
                                                                                      *                       #
                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                *#                          *#
                                                                                                                                            #*      #
                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                     *                 #
                                                                                                                                                                       *#                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                       *#  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                          *#                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#           #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #* *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #                       **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ##                   * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
         ,
         %
         ,
         %
         ,
         %,%
          %,,
            %
            ,
            % #
              *
             ,%
             %,
              ,
              %
              #
              *,%
               %
               ,
               %      ,%,
                        %
                        ,
                        %
                        ,,
                         %, %
                          %       ,
                                  %
                                  ,%
                                  %  ,%
                                      ,
                                      ,
                                      %
                                      ,
                                      %,
                                       %
                                       ,%
                                        ,,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %
                                         ,
                                         %,
                                          %
                                          ,
                                          %
                                          ,
                                          %,
                                           %
                                           ,
                                           %,
                                            %
                                              ,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %
                                             ,%
                                               ,
                                               %
                                               ,
                                               %
                                               ,
                                               ,
                                               %,
                                                %
                                                ,
                                                %,
                                                 %
                                                 ,
                                                 %
                                                 ,
                                                 %
                                                 ,
                                                 %
                                                  ,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %
                                                   ,
                                                   %
                                                   ,
                                                   %
                                                   %
                                                   ,
                                                   %
                                                   ,
                                                   %
                                                    ,
                                                    %
                                                   ,%
                                                    ,,
                                                     %       ,%
                                                             %,
                                                              ,
                                                              %,
                                                               %
                                                               ,
                                                               %
                                                               ,
                                                               %
                                                               ,
                                                               %,
                                                                %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %,
                                                                   %
                                                                   ,
                                                                   %
                                                                   ,
                                                                   %
                                                                   ,
                                                                   %,
                                                                    %
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %,
                                                                     %
                                                                     ,
                                                                     %
                                                                     ,
                                                                     %
                                                                     ,
                                                                     % ,
                                                                       %
                                                                       ,
                                                                       %
                                                                       ,
                                                                       %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %,
                                                                          %
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %      #
                                                                                 *
                                                                                  *#
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *
                                                                                    *#
                                                                                     *#
                                                                                      * #
                                                                                        *
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                        % #
                                                                                          *
                                                                                          ,#
                                                                                          ,
                                                                                          %*#*#
                                                                                              * #
                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                  *#*#
                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                      *#*#*      **
                                                                                                                  ##
                                                                                                                   *#         *#
                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                  *#*#
                                                                                                                                     *#*#
                                                                                                                                      *#* #
                                                                                                                                          **#
                                                                                                                                           #*#
                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                              *#*#
                                                                                                                                                 * #
                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                         *#**
                                                                                                                                                                            ## *#
                                                                                                                                                                              *#  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                 *#   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                   *#                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %%*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              , %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %, %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %         ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #  *#**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *# *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#*#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#             *#**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *# *# *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *# *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#*                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    **               *#            #
              ,
              %  ,
                 %,%
                  %,,,%
                     %         ,
                               %
                               ,
                               %,
                                ,
                                %
                                ,
                                %,
                                 %
                                 ,
                                 %,
                                  %,,
                                    %
                                    ,
                                    %% %   ,
                                           %
                                           ,
                                           %,
                                            %
                                            ,%
                                            %      ,
                                                   %
                                                   ,
                                                   %            ,
                                                                %,
                                                                 %
                                                                 ,
                                                                 % ,
                                                                   %,
                                                                    %,
                                                                     %,
                                                                      %,
                                                                       % ,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %,
                                                                          %
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %,
                                                                           %
                                                                           ,
                                                                           % ,
                                                                             %,
                                                                              %,
                                                                               %
                                                                               ,
                                                                               % ,
                                                                                 %
                                                                                 ,
                                                                                 %    ,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %,
                                                                                       % ,
                                                                                         %     #
                                                                                               *           #
                                                                                                           *        *      #
                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                            *             #
                                                                                                                                          *       #
                                                                                                                                                  *  *                                                                       #                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %    ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    % ,%,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               % *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      % *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #    ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # #                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #        *               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*#                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
              ,
              %,
               %
               ,
               %
               ,
               %
               ,
               %
                ,
                %
                ,
                %,
                ,%
                ,
                %
                %        ,
                         %
                         ,
                         %,
                          %,
                           %
                           ,
                           %,%
                            % ,
                              ,
                              %            ,
                                           %,
                                            %
                                            ,
                                            %
                                            ,
                                            % ,
                                              %,
                                               %  ,
                                                  %
                                                  ,
                                                  %             ,
                                                                %,
                                                                 %,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %,
                                                                   %
                                                                   ,
                                                                   %,
                                                                    %,
                                                                     %
                                                                     ,
                                                                     %,
                                                                      % ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %,
                                                                          %
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %,
                                                                           %
                                                                           ,
                                                                           %,
                                                                            %
                                                                            ,
                                                                            %
                                                                            ,
                                                                            %,
                                                                             %
                                                                             ,
                                                                             %   ,
                                                                                 %,
                                                                                  %
                                                                                  ,
                                                                                  %
                                                                                  ,
                                                                                  %,
                                                                                   %
                                                                                   ,
                                                                                   %,
                                                                                    %,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     %,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      % ,
                                                                                        %,
                                                                                         %
                                                                                         ,
                                                                                         %%
                                                                                          ,
                                                                                          %      #
                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                  *         #
                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                            #       #
                                                                                                                    * #
                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                           *            #
                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                         *       #
                                                                                                                                                 *   #
                                                                                                                                                     *                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %    ,    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      % *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ## *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %    ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #  # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               **#* #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #* *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *# **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #   *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#*#**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#* **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ##
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*#
              , %
              %
              ,
              %
                     ,,
                     % ,
                       %,
                        %
                        ,
                        %
                        ,
                        %                  ,
                                           %
                                           ,
                                           %
                                            ,
                                            %
                                            ,
                                            %
                                            ,
                                            %
                                            ,
                                            %                     ,
                                                                  %%,
                                                                    %
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %
                                                                   ,%
                                                                    ,
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %,
                                                                     %
                                                                     ,
                                                                     %
                                                                     ,
                                                                     %,
                                                                      %
                                                                      ,
                                                                      %,
                                                                       %          ,
                                                                                  %
                                                                                  ,
                                                                                  %
                                                                                  ,
                                                                                  %
                                                                                  ,
                                                                                  %,
                                                                                   %
                                                                                   ,
                                                                                   %
                                                                                   ,
                                                                                   %,
                                                                                    %,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     ,%
                                                                                     %   ,
                                                                                         %
                                                                                         ,
                                                                                          , #
                                                                                          %
                                                                                              *#
                                                                                              #  **
                                                                                                *#  #
                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                      *     *#
                                                                                                             * *#
                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                               *  *#
                                                                                                                 *#*                    #
                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                        *        #
                                                                                                                                                 *#*#
                                                                                                                                                    *#**#
                                                                                                                                                       #*#*#
                                                                                                                                                           *#*#
                                                                                                                                                              *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *                    * #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %   ,                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %%,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *#*#*#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *# #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # *#* *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #  **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #* *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *#  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         * *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #              * #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
          ,
          % ,
            %
           ,%
           %,,
             %                             ,
                                           %,
                                            %
                                            ,
                                            %
                                            ,
                                            %
                                            ,%
                                            %,,
                                              %
                                              ,
                                              %,
                                               %#              ,
                                                               %,
                                                                %
                                                                ,
                                                                %,
                                                                 %                     #
                                                                                       ,
                                                                                       %
                                                                                       *,
                                                                                        %
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                        %#
                                                                                         *#
                                                                                          *
                                                                                          #
                                                                                          * #
                                                                                            *          #
                                                                                                       * #
                                                                                                         * #
                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                             *                          #
                                                                                                                                        *          ##
                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                     *       #
                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                             *   *#
                                                                                                                                                                  *                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # ***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # #           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
        ,%
         ,                                    ,
                                              %,
                                               %,
                                                %,
                                                 %
                                                *%,
                                                  %
                                                  ,,
                                                   %
                                                   ,
                                                   %          ,
                                                              %
                                                              ,
                                                              %,
                                                               %
                                                             , %
                                                             %   ,
                                                                 %,
                                                                  %
                                                                  ,
                                                                  ,
                                                                  %,
                                                                   %
                                                                   ,
                                                                   %,
                                                                    %
                                                                    ,
                                                                    %                #
                                                                                     *#
                                                                                      *
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %  #
                                                                                         *
                                                                                         #
                                                                                         *                   #
                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                              **                        #
                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                        *      *#
                                                                                                                                              *# ** #        *#    #
                                                                                                                                                                   *#                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *                                         ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              * #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #      *    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  * #  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #     **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #* #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
        %
        ,
        %
                                                    ,
                                                    %
                                                    ,
                                                    %
                                                    ,
                                                    %,
                                                     %
                                                     ,
                                                     %,
                                                      %
                                                      ,
                                                      %
                                                      ,
                                                      %,
                                                       %,%
                                                        %,
                                                         ,%
                                                         %,,
                                                           %
                                                           ,
                                                           %
                                                            ,
                                                            %
                                                            ,
                                                            %
                                                            ,
                                                            %
                                                            ,
                                                            %
                                                                    ,%
                                                                    % ,%
                                                                       ,
                                                                       ,
                                                                       %,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %
                                                                        ,
                                                                        %,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %
                                                                         ,
                                                                         %,
                                                                          %
                                                                          ,
                                                                          %,
                                                                           %
                                                                           ,
                                                                           %
                                                                           ,
                                                                           %#
                                                                            *
                                                                            ,
                                                                            %
                                                                            ,
                                                                            %,%
                                                                             %
                                                                             ,
                                                                             %
                                                                             #
                                                                             *
                                                                             #
                                                                             *
                                                                               ,%,
                                                                                 %,%
                                                                                 ,%  #
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     *
                                                                                    ,%
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     #
                                                                                     *
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      #
                                                                                      *
                                                                                       #
                                                                                       *                       ##
                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                  *,
                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                   %#             #
                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                   * #
                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                            **#
                                                                                                                                             #                *#
                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                      *                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   **          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #* *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*#**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #  **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # #            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ##*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                             #
                                                                             *%   ,
                                                                                  %    #
                                                                                       *                            * ,
                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                     , %,        #
                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                 #                             #
                                                                                                                                                             ** #      *#                                        ##
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#*            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *#*#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #     *#*#**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    , % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %,    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         * #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                             #
                                                                             *    ,
                                                                                  %
                                                                                  ,,%
                                                                                   %,
                                                                                    ,
                                                                                    %,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                       #
                                                                                       *#
                                                                                        *
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                        % #
                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                     %  ,
                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                         ,%
                                                                                                                         %,%
                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                 *                       #
                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                          * *#          *
                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                         *                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #** #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #  **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #**# *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ##
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *  **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #             #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,%,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #* %         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # **                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # *#            **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                             #
                                                                             *#
                                                                              *#     ,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     ,
                                                                                     %  ,
                                                                                        %,
                                                                                         % #
                                                                                           *                               ,
                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                           %     #
                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                 %#
                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                  %                      #
                                                                                                                                                         *              #
                                                                                                                                                                        *#                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  % *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %,         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                               *#*#  ,
                                                                                     %
                                                                                     ,%
                                                                                     %    ,
                                                                                          %,#
                                                                                           %**
                                                                                             #                           , %
                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                            % ,,%
                                                                                                                             ,%
                                                                                                                             %  ,%*
                                                                                                                                  ,                     #
                                                                                                                                                        *                *#
                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                           *#                                 *##
                                                                                                                                                                                                               **        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *# *  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#* *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #                   *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#*        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*# *#   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *# *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            , %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %  ,,% ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        * #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,       *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                  *
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *#
                                                                                   * #
                                                                                     *
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      ,
                                                                                      %
                                                                                      #
                                                                                      *,
                                                                                       %#
                                                                                        *    ,
                                                                                             %
                                                                                             ,
                                                                                             %,
                                                                                              %
                                                                                               #
                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                        ,%
                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                        %        ,
                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                  %                 #
                                                                                                                                                    * #
                                                                                                                                                      * #
                                                                                                                                                        *                    *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                * #
                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                   * #
                                                                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                           *          ##
                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                         **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*#*#          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ##*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      % *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #                     ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *# **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#*#**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *# *#                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #** #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
   ,
   %                                                                              #
                                                                                  * %
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *     ,
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                        %,%
                                                                                          , %  ,
                                                                                               %  #
                                                                                                  *                                 ,%
                                                                                                                                    %,                                                    ##
                                                                                                                                                                                           *         **
                                                                                                                                                                                                     #                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     * #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*#   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #** #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #      **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #      **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            # *#   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *# *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *# **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # * %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   , % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        %   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                                          ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *      % ,
                                                                                           %     ,#
                                                                                                  *                                    ,
                                                                                                                                       %
                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                       %                                                  *          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                     *                        *                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              * *   *    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #     **#  #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #  **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %      , *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#*
                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                  *                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                          *                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #  *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       * #                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #  *#*#                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *
                                                                                            ,
                                                                                            %
                                                                                            ,
                                                                                            %
                                                                                            ,
                                                                                            %,
                                                                                             %
                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                 ,#
                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                 % *#
                                                                                                    *                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                           *         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #      #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # #           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *# *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %*%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #  *#                                                                                                      * #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #    * #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #                **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*#
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *          ,
                                                                                             %
                                                                                             ,
                                                                                             %
                                                                                             ,
                                                                                             %     ,
                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                   % #
                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                     %**
                                                                                                       #*                             ,
                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                 *                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                     *                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              * #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *# *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #* #    *           ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %      ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #                     *
                                                                                   #
                                                                                   *
                                                                                   #
                                                                                   *
                                                                                             ,
                                                                                             %,%
                                                                                              % , %   ,#  #
                                                                                                          *                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                  *                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                      #                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ***#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #    **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # *#**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #                                  #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       % , #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*#                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                    #
                                                                                    *#
                                                                                     *#
                                                                                      *#           ,%
                                                                                                   %  ,,%
                                                                                                       %,,#
                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                           **#
                                                                                                             *                ,%
                                                                                                                             ,%
                                                                                                                             % ,                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                       *                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*#*#***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#*# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          # *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#             ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #             , ,%     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %  ,                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                        *#
                                                                                         *#                   #
                                                                                                              *#       , %
                                                                                                                       %                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                    *                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *                                        **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #** #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #     *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #                                               *#                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #            %                                                        **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                           *#    #
                                                                                                 *,
                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                  ,
                                                                                                  %,
                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                   ,%
                                                                                                   %   ,%
                                                                                                       %,,
                                                                                                         %, #
                                                                                                          %    *
                                                                                                               #          ,                                          #
                                                                                                                                                                     *#
                                                                                                                                                                      *#                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #*  #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   # *#*# *#*#*#    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *#      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %    ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  % ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,#**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #             *%                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                *#             * ,%
                                                                                            *#
                                                                                             *#  *   ,,        *     ,%
                                                                                                                      ,                                                **                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #* *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #        *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #                                                  *#    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #   ,,     %    * %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #         ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,%                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#                                         **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                 * %   ,
                                                                                                       %,
                                                                                                        %,
                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                         % ,
                                                                                                           %  ,
                                                                                                              %* %
                                                                                                               #                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                    *   ##
                                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                          * #
                                                                                                                                                                            *#
                                                                                                                                                                             * #
                                                                                                                                                                               *                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # *#     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #                                                     *# * * %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      % *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #      ,%                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #   * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #




                                                                                                                             Ü
                                                                                                             ,%
                                                                                                              ,                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #                                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #                                                                              ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ü
                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                          %,%
                                                                                                           %                                                                                                                                                         *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *#*            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #   *#* #     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       % ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %
                                                                                                         ,%
                                                                                                         %,       , %    , %
                                                                                                                        ,%
                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                       ,%
                                                                                                                      ,%,%  ,                                                                                                                                           *# *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #* #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #      **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # *#  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # ***
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             **#**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#**#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*#*#*# *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *#**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #                                              ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    % ,               ,%,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          % , %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %    ,                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                            ,%
                                                                                                            % ,%,%       ,
                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                         %                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #                 *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ##
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %   ,%,%, %         ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #                                                    * #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #     *#  *
                                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                                          *                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                             *                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #   *           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     * *            *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *                                                                                                                                     ##
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             **                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  #                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    # *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *#*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #             *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               * #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               # *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #  **
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          #        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                                  ,%
                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                  %
                                                                                                  ,,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                 #
                                                                                 *#                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                                                     *                                                                                                                                                              ##
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   #
                                                                                  *
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *#
                                                                                   *#
                                                                                    *#    *%
                                                                                           ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #*#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *
                                                                                  #
                                                                                  *  *#  *#
                                                                                        *#
                                                                                       *#                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *#  *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#                                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #                *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              #              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                   #
                                                                                   *
                                                                                   #
                                                                                   *#    ,
                                                                                         %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %                                                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                    *#
                                                                                     *#  ,
                                                                                         %                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *                                               **#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #   ,#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %*                                                                                                                                                *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              # * *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ##
                                                                                      *#
                                                                                       *##
                                                                                        *%
                                                                                         *
                                                                                         ,
                                                                                         ,
                                                                                         %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          *#
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                Pre-Islamic Trade Routes,                                                                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pre-1800 Trade Routes, Ports
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #
                                                                                                                Ports, Harbors and Roman Roads                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Harbors and Roman Roads
                                                                                                                       #
                                                                                                                       *            Trade Routes Before 600 CE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #              Trade Routes Before 1800 CE
                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                       %            Ancient Ports and Harbors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %              Ancient Ports and Harbors

                                                                                                                                    Roman Roads                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Roman Roads




  Figure 2a (2b) shows the Old World network of Roman roads (from the Barrington Atlas), ancient ports and
  harbours (from Arthur de Graauw, 2014) and trade routes (from Brice and Kennedy, 2001) in 600 AD (1800
  AD).
  Figure 3 - Non-parametric conditional correlation – Cross-country




Figure 4 – Non-parametric conditional correlation – Cross-ethnic group
                                                 Table 1 – Countries
                                                  (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)

  Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes             -0.1500***      -0.1391***     -0.1650***      -0.1415***      -0.1307***
                                                (0.0284)        (0.0351)       (0.0320)        (0.0366)        (0.0383)
  Distance to Mecca                                           -0.0706***      -0.0309**         -0.0004        -0.0237
                                                                (0.0159)       (0.0144)        (0.0185)        (0.0194)
  Distance to the Coast                                         -0.0398        -0.1499          -0.1526       -0.1925*
                                                                (0.1055)       (0.0981)        (0.1147)        (0.1016)
  Absolute Latitude                                           -0.0054***     -0.0063***         -0.0026         0.0034
                                                                (0.0020)       (0.0018)        (0.0020)        (0.0033)
  Ln Gini Index of Land Quality                                              0.1357***         0.0932**       0.0965**
                                                                               (0.0393)        (0.0446)        (0.0425)
  Ln Average Land Quality                                                    -0.1010***      -0.0842***      -0.0640***
                                                                               (0.0186)        (0.0205)        (0.0185)
  Ln Land Area                                                                                -0.0487**        -0.0331
                                                                                               (0.0245)        (0.0224)
  Ln Ruggedness                                                                                 -0.0069       -0.0390*
                                                                                               (0.0247)        (0.0222)
  Irrigation Potential Indicator                                                             0.2508***       0.1740***
                                                                                               (0.0686)        (0.0635)
  Presence of Desert Indicator                                                                 0.2174**         0.1035
                                                                                               (0.0956)        (0.0927)
  Continental FE                                  NO             NO              NO               NO              YES
  Observations                                    127            127             127              127             127
  R-squared                                       0.09           0.23            0.48             0.55           0.62

 Table 1 reports OLS estimates associating the share of Muslims with geographical variables. Observations are at the
 level of countries, the sample is the Old World (Europe, Asia and Africa). In all specifications the dependent variable is
 the share of Muslims in 1900 from McCleary and Barro (2005). All specifications include the constant (not reported)
 and column (5) includes a set of continental effects. The Supplementary Appendix gives detailed definitions, data
 sources and summary statistics for all variables. Standard errors in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity. ***,
 **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                   Table 2 – Within-country Across Groups Univariate Specifications
                                                   (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)
 Country                                          China           Mali          Tanzania       Indonesia         India

 Distance from Trade routes 600AD              -0.2401***      -0.7736***     -0.4139***      -0.1619***      -0.1183***
                                                 (0.0839)        (0.2418)       (0.1474)        (0.0114)        (0.0425)
 Observations                                      188              44            109             615             300
 R-squared                                         0.03            0.23           0.05            0.22            0.01
Table 2 reports OLS estimates associating the share of Muslims with distance from trade routes in 600AD in selected
countries, at the level of ethnic group. In all specifications the dependent variable is the share of Muslims in 2005 at
ethnic group level from the World Religion Database. All specifications include a constant (not reported). The
Supplementary Appendix gives detailed definitions, data sources and summary statistics for all variables. Standard
errors in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.
                                                      Table 3A - Ethnic Groups
                                                         (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)

 Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes                    -0.0652***        -0.1712***        -0.0997***        -0.1071***        -0.1151***
                                                      (0.0167)          (0.0190)          (0.0298)          (0.0328)          (0.0326)
 Distance to Mecca                                                                      -0.0791***        -0.0717***        -0.0596***
                                                                                          (0.0190)          (0.0221)          (0.0225)
 Distance to the Coast                                                                    -0.0343           -0.0370           -0.0411
                                                                                          (0.0603)          (0.0585)          (0.0594)
 Absolute Latitude                                                                       0.0119**            0.0091           0.0086*
                                                                                          (0.0059)          (0.0057)          (0.0052)
 Ln Gini Index of Land Quality                                                                            0.0333***          0.0261**
                                                                                                            (0.0107)          (0.0105)
 Ln Average Land Quality                                                                                    -0.0275          -0.0278*
                                                                                                            (0.0173)          (0.0158)
 Ln Land Area                                                                                                                 -0.0026
                                                                                                                              (0.0058)
 Ln Ruggedness                                                                                                                 0.0083
                                                                                                                              (0.0105)
 Irrigation Potential Indicator                                                                                             0.0900***
                                                                                                                              (0.0304)
 Presence of Desert Indicator                                                                                                  0.0576
                                                                                                                              (0.0419)
 Country FE                                              NO               YES               YES               YES                YES
 Observations                                           3181             3181              3181              3181               3181
 R-squared                                              0.05             0.51              0.52              0.53               0.54

Table 3A reports OLS estimates associating the share of Muslims with geographical variables. Observations are at the level of ethnic group,
the sample is the Old World (Europe, Asia and Africa). In all specifications the dependent variable is the share of Muslims in 2005 from
World Religion Database. Column (1) includes the constant (not reported), while the remaining columns include a set of country fixed
effects. The Supplementary Appendix gives detailed definitions, data sources and summary statistics for all variables. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered at the country level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                             Table 3B – Ethnic Groups, Sample Split
                                                        (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                                                                                                Outside Muslim         Outside Muslim
                                                  Within Muslim          Outside Muslim
 Sample                                                                                       empires, previously     empires, previously
                                                     empires                empires
                                                                                               non-monotheistic         monotheistic

 Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes                   -0.1571***                -0.1384*              -0.1660**               0.2384***
                                                     (0.0359)                (0.0746)               (0.0804)                (0.0559)
 Distance to Mecca                                   -0.0024               -0.0784***               -0.0445*              -0.1488***
                                                     (0.0317)                (0.0155)               (0.0228)                (0.0150)
 Distance to the Coast                               -0.0548                  -0.0685                -0.0390              -0.1723***
                                                     (0.1238)                (0.0702)               (0.0900)                (0.0150)
 Absolute Latitude                                   0.0170*                  0.0050                 0.0122*              -0.0327***
                                                     (0.0086)                (0.0069)               (0.0063)                (0.0071)
 Ln Gini Index of Land Quality                        0.0125               0.0307***              0.0270***                 0.0474*
                                                     (0.0141)                (0.0099)               (0.0098)                (0.0233)
 Ln Average Land Quality                             -0.0289                -0.0464**             -0.0686***               0.0184**
                                                     (0.0179)                (0.0185)               (0.0202)                (0.0080)
 Ln Land Area                                         0.0107                  -0.0071                -0.0015                -0.0067
                                                     (0.0066)                (0.0067)               (0.0055)                (0.0089)
 Ln Ruggedness                                        0.0148                  -0.0029                -0.0190                -0.0007
                                                     (0.0095)                (0.0159)               (0.0141)                (0.0098)
 Irrigation Potential Indicator                     0.1133**                 0.0811**                0.0563*                -0.0100
                                                     (0.0524)                (0.0359)               (0.0322)                (0.0336)
 Presence of Desert Indicator                        -0.0185                  0.1096*                0.0413                 -0.0682
                                                     (0.0406)                (0.0571)               (0.0566)                (0.0656)
 Country FE                                             YES                     YES                    YES                     YES
 Observations                                          1166                    2015                   1843                    172
 R-squared                                             0.55                     0.40                   0.41                   0.81
Table 3B reports OLS estimates associating the share of Muslims with geographical variables. Observations are at the level of ethnic group,
the samples are partitions of the Old World (Europe, Asia and Africa). In Column 1 (2) the sample includes ethnic groups within (outside)
the Muslim empires as classified by Iyigun (2010). In Column 3 (4) the sample is restricted to ethnic groups outside the Muslim empires
where the dominant religion during the expansion of Islam was a non-monotheistic (monotheistic) one. In all specifications the dependent
variable is the share of Muslims in 2005 from the World Religion Database. The Supplementary Appendix gives detailed definitions, data
sources and summary statistics for all variables. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the country level. ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                            Table 4 - Ethnic Groups, Other Religions
                                              (1)                  (2)                    (3)                  (4)                   (5)
 DEPENDENT VARIABLE                        % Muslim             % Christian             % Hindu            % Buddhists         % Ethnoreligious

 Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes           -0.1151***            0.1408**                0.0405                0.0188               -0.0527
                                             (0.0326)            (0.0590)              (0.0413)              (0.0204)               (0.0356)
 Distance to Mecca                         -0.0596***              0.0072               -0.0387               -0.0104              0.0753**
                                             (0.0225)            (0.0529)              (0.0385)              (0.0163)               (0.0349)
 Distance to the Coast                        -0.0411             -0.0473               -0.0055             0.0583***                0.0605
                                             (0.0594)            (0.0581)              (0.0227)              (0.0201)               (0.0488)
 Absolute Latitude                           0.0086*              -0.0048               -0.0019               -0.0016               -0.0017
                                             (0.0052)            (0.0042)              (0.0016)              (0.0015)               (0.0044)
 Ln Gini Index of Land Quality              0.0261**              -0.0104               -0.0009              0.0223*              -0.0343***
                                             (0.0105)            (0.0099)              (0.0076)              (0.0115)               (0.0122)
 Ln Average Land Quality                     -0.0278*              0.0143                0.0188              -0.0331*                0.0174
                                             (0.0158)            (0.0128)              (0.0177)              (0.0172)               (0.0209)
 Ln Land Area                                 -0.0026            0.0087*                 0.0028                0.0021             -0.0177***
                                             (0.0058)            (0.0049)              (0.0035)              (0.0032)               (0.0039)
 Ln Ruggedness                                 0.0083              0.0055              -0.0151*                0.0078               -0.0022
                                             (0.0105)            (0.0101)              (0.0087)              (0.0056)               (0.0088)
 Irrigation Potential Indicator             0.0900***             -0.0296                0.0079               -0.0147              -0.0546**
                                             (0.0304)            (0.0185)              (0.0090)              (0.0105)               (0.0247)
 Presence of Desert Indicator                  0.0576             -0.0484                0.0111               -0.0520                0.0172
                                             (0.0419)            (0.0374)              (0.0146)              (0.0335)               (0.0482)
 Country FE                                      YES                 YES                   YES                   YES                   YES
 Observations                                   3181                3181                  3181                  3181                  3181
 R-squared                                      0.54                0.61                  0.46                  0.33                  0.33
Table 4 reports OLS estimates associating the share of different religions with geographical variables. Observations are at the level of ethnic
group, the sample is the Old World (Europe, Asia and Africa). In all specifications the dependent variable is the share of the population belonging
to a given religion in 2005 measured at ethnic group level from the World Religion Database. All columns include a set of country fixed effects.
The Supplementary Appendix gives detailed definitions, data sources and summary statistics for all variables. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered at the country level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                             Table 5 – Distance to Routes and Dependence on Trade
                                                                                            (1)                (2)                  (3)

                            Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes                               -0.0765
                                                                                          (0.0528)
                            Distance to 1800 AD Trade Routes                                              -0.1515***          -0.1511***
                                                                                                            (0.0542)            (0.0541)
                            Observations                                                   121                121                 117
                            R-squared                                                      0.01               0.03                0.04

                         Table 5 reports OLS estimates associating the relative importance of trade with distance to trade
                         routes. Observations are at the level of a historical society, the sample is the Old World (Europe,
                         Asia and Africa). In all specifications the dependent variable is the (log of 1 plus) share from trade
                         in subsistence measured as reported in the Standard Cross Cultural Sample (SCCS). Column (3)
                         excludes societies that were documented by ethnographers before 1750 (Babylonians, Hebrews,
                         Khmer, and Romans). The Supplementary Appendix gives detailed definitions, data sources and
                         summary statistics for all variables. Standard errors in parentheses are robust to
                         heteroskedasticity. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
                         respectively.

                                               Table 6 – What Does Land inequality Reflect?

                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)                (5)           (6)            (7)         (8)
 Sample                                                      Ethnologue                            Ethnologue & Murdock's Ethnographic Atlas                 SCCS
                                                                                                                                                             Log 1+
                                                Log Ratio of Land Allocation of Pasture    Log Ratio of Historical Subsistence Share of Pastoralism         Share of
 DEPENDENT VARIABLE
                                                    Relative to Agriculture in 2000                        Relative to Agriculture                        Subsistence
                                                                                                                                                          from Trade


 Ln Gini Index of Land Quality                  0.2328***     0.2203***                                          0.1854***      0.1004**
                                                 (0.0764)       (0.0789)                                          (0.0379)      (0.0445)
 Ln Average Land Quality                       -0.3790***      -0.3068**                                        -0.1569***     -0.1025**
                                                 (0.1273)       (0.1405)                                          (0.0502)      (0.0433)
 Absolute Latitude                                              0.0728**                                                       0.0386***
                                                                (0.0310)                                                        (0.0123)
 Ln Land Area                                                 -0.0931***                                                         0.0122
                                                                (0.0305)                                                        (0.0215)
 Ln Ruggedness                                                  0.1630**                                                         0.0376
                                                                (0.0715)                                                        (0.0385)
 Presence of Desert Indicator                                    0.4325                                                         0.3564**
                                                                (0.3031)                                                        (0.1537)
 Irrigation Potential Indicator                                  0.1404                                                         0.1917**
                                                                (0.1576)                                                        (0.0749)
 Share of Muslims in 2005                                                    0.7402***                                                        0.5232***
                                                                              (0.1807)                                                         (0.1510)
 Log Ratio of Historical Subsistence Share
 of Pastoralism Relative to Agriculture                                                       0.1115***                                                   0.2938***
                                                                                                (0.028)                                                    (0.0797)
 Country FE                                        YES            YES            YES              YES                 YES          YES            YES         NO
 Observations                                     2845           2845           2845             1131                1210         1210           1210        186
 R-squared                                        0.68           0.69           0.67             0.35                0.39         0.43           0.36        0.05

Table 6 reports OLS estimates associating (contemporary and historical) measures of dependence on pastoralism and agriculture with
land inequality, adherence to Islam and other historical and geographic variables. The dependent variable in columns 1 to 3 is the log ratio
of pastoral to agricultural lands from Ramankutty et al., 2008. The log ratio of historical subsistence of pastoral to agricultural share, from
Murdock's Ethnographic Atlas is the dependent variable in columns 4 to 7 and the (log +1) share of subsistence from trade from the SCCS
dataset in column 8. Observations are at the ethnic group level in columns 1 to 7 and at the level of historical societies in column 8. The
sample used is the Old-World part of the Ethnologue (columns 1 to 3), its intersection with the Murdock's Ethnographic Atlas (columns 4
to 7) and all groups in the Standard Cross Cultural Sample in column 8. The Supplementary Appendix gives detailed definitions, data
sources and summary statistics for all variables. Columns 1 to 7 include a set of country fixed effects with errors clustered at the country
level in parentheses, while those of column 8 are robust to heteroscedasticity. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                            Table 7 – Land Inequality and Proximity to Trade Routes
                                                          (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)
Sample                                                 Countries           Countries        Ethnic Groups       Ethnic Groups

(a) Ln Gini Index of Land Quality                      0.1546***           0.1135**            0.0458**           0.0368**
                                                        (0.0425)           (0.0443)             (0.0176)          (0.0158)
(b) Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes                   -0.3120***                              -0.1587***
                                                        (0.0551)                                (0.0299)
(a)*(b)                                               -0.1328***                               -0.0174*
                                                        (0.0314)                                (0.0097)
(c) Distance to 1800 AD Trade Routes                                      -0.3759***                              -0.2271**
                                                                            (0.0884)                               (0.1005)
(a)*(c)                                                                   -0.1397***                              -0.0366**
                                                                            (0.0431)                               (0.0143)
Controls                                                  ALL                  ALL                ALL                 ALL
Continental FE                                            YES                  YES                NO                  NO
Country FE                                                NO                   NO                 YES                 YES
Observations                                              127                 127                3181                3181
R-squared                                                 0.65                0.64               0.54                0.54

Table 7 reports OLS estimates associating the share of Muslims with geographical variables. Observations are at the level of
countries (columns 1 and 2) or ethnic groups (columns 3 and 4). The sample is the Old World (Europe, Asia and Africa). In columns
1 and 2 the dependent variable is the share of Muslims in 1900 across countries from McCleary and Barro (2005), while in columns
3 and 4 the dependent variable is the share of Muslims across ethnic groups from the World Religion Database (WRD). Controls are
Distance to Mecca, Distance to the Coast, Absolute Latitude, Ln Average Land Quality, Ln Land Area, Ln Ruggedness, Irrigation
Potential Indicator and Presence of Desert Indicator. The Supplementary Appendix gives detailed definitions, data sources and
summary statistics for all variables. Columns 1 and 2 (3 and 4) include a set of continental (country) fixed effects. Standard errors,
in parentheses, are robust to heteroscedasticity (columns 1 and 2) and clustered at the country level (columns 3 and 4). ***, **,
and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                   Appendix Table 1 – Descriptive Statistics and Correlations, County level

                                                            Panel A
    Variable                                       Obs             Mean            Std. Dev.         Min            Max

    % Muslim (1900)                                127              0.29            0.39               0              1
    Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes                127              0.70            0.79               0             2.74
    Distance to Mecca                              127              4.05            1.87              0.74           9.17
    Distance to the Coast                          127              0.33            0.34              0.01           1.51
    Absolute Latitude                              127             28.66            17.48             0.55          65.26
    Ln Gini Index of Land Quality                  127             -1.37            0.75             -3.45          -0.13
    Ln Average Land Quality                        127             -1.32            1.36             -5.84          -0.05
    Ln Land Area                                   127             12.19            1.59              7.87          16.65
    Ln Ruggedness                                  127              4.33            1.09              1.30           6.61
    Irrigation Potential Indicator                 127              0.72            0.45               0              1
    Presence of Desert Indicator                   127              0.30            0.46               0              1


                                                            Panel B
                                            (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)    (5)       (6)     (7)     (8)    (9)     (10)   (11)

(1)    % Muslim (1900)                         1
(2)    Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes -0.31           1
(3)    Distance to Mecca                     -0.44 0.39         1
(4)    Distance to the Coast                 0.03    0.15 -0.15        1
(5)    Absolute Latitude                     -0.09 -0.48 -0.04 -0.23          1
(6)    Ln Gini Index of Land Quality         0.42 -0.05 -0.23 0.38          0.10     1
(7)    Ln Average Land Quality               -0.57 0.04       0.35 -0.07 0.07 -0.52           1
(8)    Ln Land Area                          0.11    0.19     0.06   0.46 -0.13 0.53 -0.21            1
(9)    Ln Ruggedness                         -0.06 -0.34 0.07 -0.10 0.19 -0.08 0.29 -0.15                      1
(10) Irrigation Potential Indicator          0.41    0.07 -0.32 0.33 -0.45 0.24 -0.20 0.41 -0.07                       1
(11) Presence of Desert Indicator            0.56 -0.07 -0.36 0.33 -0.10 0.65 -0.56 0.50 -0.16 0.41                           1
Appendix Table 1, Panel A, reports summary statistics for the main variables employed in the empirical analysis at the county level.
Panel B gives the correlation structure of these variables. The Supplementary Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and data
sources.
               Appendix Table 2 – Descriptive Statistics and Correlations, Ethnic Group Level

                                                                  Panel A
    Variable                                         Obs               Mean           Std. Dev.               Min               Max

    Muslim Majority (2005)                          3181                0.20               0.40                 0                     1
    % Muslim (2005)                                 3181                0.21               0.36                 0                     1
    Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes                 3181                1.34               1.23                 0                  5.19
    Distance to Mecca                               3181                5.23               2.76                0.45               12.92
    Distance to the Coast                           3181                0.45               0.44                0.00                2.15
    Absolute Latitude                               3181               16.02               14.44               0.00               72.42
    Ln Gini Index of Land Quality                   3181               -2.19               0.89               -4.61               -0.03
    Ln Average Land Quality                         3181               -1.03               0.93               -4.60                0.00
    Ln Land Area                                    3181                8.14               1.75                3.04               15.90
    Ln Ruggedness                                   3181                4.14               1.43                 0                  7.06
    Irrigation Potential Indicator                  3181                0.25               0.44                 0                     1
    Presence of Desert Indicator                    3181                0.05               0.22                 0                     1


                                                                  Panel B
                                           (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)     (5)     (6)       (7)     (8)       (9)    (10)     (11)   (12)

 (1)    Muslim Majority (2005)              1
 (2)    % Muslim (2005)                   0.96      1
 (3)    Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes   -0.21   -0.22      1
 (4)    Distance to Mecca                 -0.22   -0.24    0.62       1
 (5)    Distance to the Coast             0.06    0.07     -0.21    -0.49     1
 (6)    Absolute Latitude                 0.09    0.07     -0.42    -0.17   0.01      1
 (7)    Ln Gini Index of Land Quality     0.25    0.26     -0.14    -0.21   0.16    0.35        1
 (8)    Ln Average Land Quality           -0.28   -0.28    0.01     0.10    -0.14   -0.28     -0.39     1
 (9)    Ln Land Area                      0.14    0.14     -0.19    -0.21   0.14    0.21      0.43    -0.23       1
 (10)   Ln Ruggedness                     -0.04   -0.05    -0.26    0.17    -0.13   0.21      -0.01   0.16      -0.09     1
 (11)   Irrigation Potential Indicator    0.30    0.31     -0.20    -0.34   0.19    0.11      0.30    -0.15     0.39    -0.19    1
 (12)   Presence of Desert Indicator      0.32    0.32     -0.15    -0.16   0.11    0.17      0.28    -0.44     0.32    -0.06   0.32      1
Appendix Table 2, Panel A, reports summary statistics for the main variables employed in the empirical analysis at the ethnic group
level. Panel B gives the correlation structure of these variables. The Supplementary Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and
data sources.
                                             Appendix Table 3 – Robustness checks
                                                  (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)
 Sample                                        Countries       Countries     Countries      Ethnic Groups     Ethnic Groups   Ethnic Groups
                                            Muslim Majority                                Muslim Majority
 DEPENDENT VARIABLE                                             Share of Muslim in 1900                          Share of Muslim in 2005
                                               Dummy                                          Dummy

 Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes              -0.1565***        -0.1192                      -0.1164***        -0.2095***
                                                (0.0459)        (0.1478)                       (0.0325)          (0.0789)
 Distance to 600 AD Trade Routes Squared                        -0.0043                                           0.0219
                                                                (0.0546)                                         (0.0163)
 Distance to 1800 AD Trade Routes                                           -0.4980***                                         -0.4038***
                                                                              (0.1353)                                           (0.0723)
 Distance to 1800 AD Trade Routes Squared                                    0.1760***                                         0.0921***
                                                                               (0.065)                                           (0.0134)
 Controls                                        ALL             ALL             ALL             ALL               ALL              ALL
 Continental FE                                  YES             YES             YES             NO                NO               NO
 Country FE                                      NO              NO              NO              YES               YES              YES
 Observations                                    127             127             127            3181              3181             3181
 R-squared                                       0.50            0.62           0.63            0.48              0.54             0.55
Appendix Table 3 reports OLS estimates associating measures of Muslim adherence with geographical variables. Observations are at the
level of countries (columns 1 to 3) or ethnic group (columns 4 to 6), the sample is the Old World (Europe, Asia and Africa). In column 1 (4)
the dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the share of Muslim in the country (ethnic group) in 1900 (2005) is greater than 50%,
from McCleary and Barro (2005) (World Religion Database). In columns 2 and 3 the dependent variable is the share of Muslim population
in 1900 measured at country level, while in columns 5 and 6 the dependent variable is the share of Muslim population in 2005 at the
ethnic group level. Included controls are Distance to Mecca, Distance to the Coast, Absolute Latitude, Ln Average Land Quality, Ln Land
Area, Ln Ruggedness, an Irrigation Potential Indicator and the Presence of Desert Indicator. The Supplementary Appendix gives detailed
variable definitions, data sources and summary statistics for all variables. Columns 1 to 3 (4 to 6) include a set of continental (country)
fixed effects. Standard errors, in parentheses, are robust to heteroscedasticity (columns 1 to 3) and clustered at the country level (columns
4 to 6). ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                 Appendix Table 4 – Historical Traits of Muslim Communities
                                       (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)                (5)             (6)                 (7)
                                      Full           Full         Full      Muslim Share       Muslim Share
 Sample                                                                                                                   Full Sample
                                    Sample         Sample       Sample         >95%                <5%
                                                                                                                 Egalitarian     Egalitarian
                                                    Belief in                                                   inheritance     inheritance
                                  Jurisdictional
 DEPENDENT VARIABLE                                  Moral                   Class Stratification                     –               –
                                    Hierarchy
                                                     Gods                                                         Movable           Land
                                                                                                                  Property        Property

 % Muslim (2005)                   0.7179***       0.5868***                                                     0.1550*         0.1439**
                                    (0.1845)        (0.0739)                                                     (0.0783)        (0.0587)
 Ln Gini Index of Land Quality                                  0.0556*          -0.0024          0.0892***
                                                                (0.0282)        (0.0480)            (0.0317)
  Controls                            NO              NO           YES             YES                 YES            NO            NO
  Country FE                          YES             YES          YES             YES                 YES            YES           YES
  Observations                       1183            838          1132             167                664            1042          1000
  R-squared                          0.32            0.62         0.16             0.05               0.17           0.24          0.26
Appendix Table 4 reports OLS estimates associating Muslim adherence across groups to various societal traits and geographical variables.
In column 1 the dependent variable is the degree of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local community level. In column 2 the dependent
variable is a dummy reflecting whether the local gods are supportive of human morality. In columns 3 to 5 the dependent variable is an
indicator whether a group is socially stratified and in columns 6 and 7 the dependent variable reflects whether there is egalitarian
inheritance with respect to movable and land property, respectively. In column 4 (5) the sample is restricted to ethnic groups with a share
of Muslim population above 95% (below 10%). Observations are at the ethnicity level and the sample comprises of groups in the Old
World for which we have created a correspondence between the Ethnologue and the Murdock's Ethnographic Atlas. Controls are Absolute
Latitude, Ln Average Land Quality, Ln Land Area, Ln Ruggedness, an Irrigation Potential Indicator and Presence of Desert Indicator. The
Supplementary Appendix gives detailed variable definitions, data sources and summary statistics for all variables. Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered at the country level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
