NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL INSURANCE:
CONNECTING THEORY TO DATA
Raj Chetty
Amy Finkelstein
Working Paper 18433
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18433
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012

We are grateful to Alan Auerbach, Liran Einav, Hilary Hoynes, Emmanuel Saez, and participants
at the Handbook of Public Economics conference held at UC-Berkeley for helpful comments. Shelby
Lin, Heather Sarsons,and Michael Stepner provided excellent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge
support from the NIA R01 AG032449 (Finkelstein) and the National Science Foundation SES 0645396
(Chetty). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Raj Chetty and Amy Finkelstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Social Insurance: Connecting Theory to Data
Raj Chetty and Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 18433
October 2012, Revised January 2013, Revised July 2014
JEL No. H5
ABSTRACT
We survey the literature on social insurance, focusing on recent work that has connected theory to
evidence to make quantitative statements about welfare and optimal policy. Our review contains two
parts. We first discuss motives for government intervention in private insurance markets, focusing
primarily on selection. We review the original theoretical arguments for government intervention in
the presence of adverse selection, and describe how recent work has refined and challenged the conclusions
drawn from early theoretical models. We then describe empirical work that tests for selection in insurance
markets, documents the welfare costs of this selection, and analyzes the welfare consequences of potential
public policy interventions. In the second part of the paper, we review work on optimal social insurance
policies. We discuss formulas for the optimal level of insurance benefits in terms of empirically estimable
parameters. We then consider the consequences of relaxing the key assumptions underlying these formulas,
e.g., by allowing for fiscal externalities or behavioral biases. We also summarize recent work on other
dimensions of optimal policy, including mandated savings accounts and the optimal path of benefits.
Finally, we discuss the key challenges that remain in understanding the optimal design of social insurance
policies.
Raj Chetty
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
chetty@fas.harvard.edu
Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics
MIT E52-383B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Over the last century, social insurance –government intervention in providing insurance against adverse shocks to individuals –has emerged as one of the major functions of government in developed
countries.1 Social insurance programs began by providing limited coverage for risks such as injury
at work and unemployment (Fishback and Kantor 1998, Baicker, Goldin, and Katz 1998). Today,
governments provide substantial insurance for a broad range of risks, including health (Medicare and
Medicaid in the U.S.), disability and retirement (the Old Age, Survivors, and Disability insurance
program), work injury (Worker’s Compensation), and unemployment (Unemployment Insurance).2
In the United States, expenditures on social insurance have risen from less than 10 percent of the
federal government’s budget in the early 1950s to almost 60 percent today and continue to grow
rapidly (Gruber 2009). Social insurance expenditures are now a de…ning characteristic of modern
developed economies. The fraction of GDP devoted to social insurance increases sharply with GDP
per capita (Figure 1).
Academic research on social insurance policies has grown alongside the expansion of these
programs. Research on social insurance has addressed two broad questions. First, when should
the government intervene in private insurance markets? The standard set of rationales includes
private market failures, income redistribution, and paternalism. More recently, a growing empirical
literature has sought to quantify the importance of these motives for government intervention. Much
of this literature has focused on one particular market failure that can provide a rationale for social
insurance: adverse selection due to asymmetric information. Second, if the government chooses to
intervene, what is the optimal way to do so? The key issue here is that expanding social insurance
creates moral hazard by distorting incentives. The literature on optimal policies seeks to identify
the policies that maximize welfare, trading o¤ the distortionary costs of social insurance programs
with the bene…ts they provide in reducing exposure to risk. This literature has analyzed several
dimensions of social insurance policies, ranging from the optimal level of bene…ts to whether the
optimal tools are provision of liquidity (e.g., via loans) or state-contingent transfers.
Research on each of these two questions has traditionally been divided into two distinct methodological strands: a normative theoretical literature that focuses on welfare analysis and a positive
empirical literature that documents the workings of private insurance markets or the impacts of
social insurance programs. The limitation of this two-pronged approach is that the theoretical
models do not by themselves o¤er quantitative answers to the key policy questions, while the descriptive empirical literature often has little to say about the welfare implications of its …ndings.
For example, the rich theoretical literature on adverse selection has shown that private markets
1

We use the term “social insurance” to refer to government programs that transfer resources across states of

nature after an individual is born rather than transfers of resources across individuals (e.g., through redistributive
taxation). Transfers of resources across individuals –which e¤ectively provide insurance behind the veil of ignorance
– are discussed in the chapters on optimal taxation in this volume.
2

See Social Security Administration (1997) for an excellent overview of modern social insurance programs in the

United States. Krueger and Meyer (2002) also provide a description of many social insurance programs in the U.S.,
as well as a review of the empirical literature on their labor supply impacts.

1

may provide too little insurance in the presence of asymmetric information. A more recent empirical literature has documented that adverse selection does in fact exist in many private insurance
markets. However, the empirical techniques developed to identify the existence of selection do not,
by themselves, permit even qualitative comparisons of the welfare costs of selection across markets,
let alone quantitative welfare statements. Similarly, a large theoretical literature has characterized
the properties of optimal insurance contracts in the presence of moral hazard. In parallel, empirical work has documented the causal impacts of social insurance programs on a broad range of
behaviors, ranging from job search to health expenditures. Again, however, the implications of
estimates of parameters such as the elasticity of unemployment durations with respect to bene…ts
for optimal policy were unclear from the initial empirical literature.
Over the past two decades, researchers have made considerable progress in connecting theoretical
and empirical work on social insurance to make empirically grounded statements about welfare and
optimal policy. For instance, recent work has shown how data on selection patterns in insurance
markets can be used to quantify the welfare costs of adverse selection in models of asymmetric
information. Similarly, researchers have developed new methods of mapping estimates of behavioral
elasticities to statements about the optimal level of social insurance bene…ts.
In this survey, we provide an overview of some of the key advances in connecting theory to data
in analyzing the welfare consequences of social insurance. In focusing on this goal, we deliberately
do not provide a comprehensive survey of the literature on social insurance. We cover only a selected
subset of the many theoretical studies that have advanced the literature. We also discuss only a
small subset of the numerous empirical studies that have estimated relevant empirical parameters.
Readers seeking a more detailed discussion of empirical evidence on behavioral responses to social
insurance may refer to Krueger and Meyer (2002) and Cutler (2002).
We divide our review of the literature into two sections, corresponding to the two major questions
discussed above. In Section 2, we discuss motives for government intervention in insurance markets.
In Section 3, we discuss optimal policy design once the government has decided to intervene. This
literature on optimal design of social insurance has proceeded mostly independently from the work
on the economic motivations for social insurance. As a result, the two sections of the paper draw
on fairly distinct literatures. Indeed, one limitation of existing work on optimal government policy
is that it typically assumes away the existence of formal private insurance markets rather than
considering optimal policy design in an environment with endogenous market failures. We conclude
in Section 4 by discussing this as well as some of the other broad challenges that remain in going
from the work we review here to statements about optimal policy design.

2

Motivations for Social Insurance

Research in public economics usually begins with the question of why the government might have a
reason to intervene in a particular private market transaction. Only then can one move forward to
consider potential forms of intervention and their consequences. Standard economic rationales for
social insurance include redistribution, paternalism, and market failures (Diamond 1977). Within
2

this relatively broad remit, our focus here is quite narrow. Following much of the recent literature,
we concentrate on the potential role for social insurance in ameliorating one particular type of
private market failure, namely selection. We return at the end of this section to brie‡y comment
on other potential rationales for social insurance and some of the existing empirical work on them.
Modern theoretical work on adverse selection in insurance markets dates to the seminal work
of Akerlof (1970) and Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), which introduced a key motivation for social
insurance: the competitive private equilibrium may under-provide insurance, creating scope for
welfare-improving government intervention. Relative to the rich theoretical literature, empirical
work on adverse selection in insurance markets lagged decidedly behind for many years. Indeed, in
awarding the 2001 Nobel Prize for the pioneering theoretical work on asymmetric information, the
Nobel committee noted this paucity of empirical work (Bank of Sweden 2001).
Over the last decade or so, empirical research had made considerable progress in developing
tools to identify whether asymmetric information exists in a given insurance market, as well as to
begin to quantify the welfare costs of this asymmetric information and the welfare consequences of
alternative public policy interventions. Some of the …ndings of this empirical work have suggested
important re…nements to the initial theory. In particular, a growing body of evidence suggests
that in addition to heterogeneity in risk type, heterogeneity in preferences can be a quantitatively
important determinant of demand for insurance. This is in constrast to the original theoretical
literature on asymmetric information which focused on the potential for (unobserved) heterogeneity
in risk type and assumed away the possibility of heterogeneity in preferences. Once one allows for
heterogeneity in preferences in addition to risk type, the competitive equilibrium may look very
di¤erent and the optimal policy intervention is no longer a priori obvious.
To summarize and discuss this empirical literature, we begin by presenting a highly stylized
model and graphical framework that allow us to review the basic results of the standard theory and
to describe their sensitivity to incorporating several “real world”features of insurance markets. The
graphical framework provides a lens through which we discuss empirical work detecting whether
selection exists and quantifying its welfare costs. Finally, we discuss some of the limitations of the
work to date and some directions for further work.

2.1

Adverse Selection: Review of the basic theory

We structure our analysis using a simpli…ed model of selection based on that presented in Einav,
Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) and discussed further in Einav and Finkelstein (2011). We begin with
the “textbook model” in which the qualitative results are unambiguous: adverse selection creates
a welfare loss from under-provision of insurance, and public policy such as mandates can reach the
e¢ cient allocation and improve welfare. Even in this textbook case, however, the magnitudes of
the welfare costs of adverse selection and the welfare gains from government intervention remain
empirical questions. Moreover, these qualitative results can be reversed with the introduction of
two important features of actual insurance markets: loads and preference heterogeneity. With
loads, it is no longer necessarily e¢ cient for all individuals to be insured in equilibrium, and

3

mandates can therefore reduce welfare in some cases. With preference heterogeneity, the market
equilibrium may lead to over-insurance rather than under-insurance. Given the qualitative as
well as quantitative uncertainty of the impact of selection and of government intervention, these
naturally become empirical questions.
2.1.1

A stylized model

Setup and notation. A population of individuals chooses from two insurance contracts, one that
o¤ers high coverage (contract H) and one that o¤ers less coverage (contract L). To further simplify
the exposition, assume that contract L is no insurance and is available for free, and that contract H
is full insurance. These are merely normalizations and it is straightforward to extend the analysis
to partial coverage contracts or to more than two contracts (Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen 2010).
The key simpli…cation we make is to …x the contract space, but allow the price of insurance to
be determined endogenously. In other words, the set of contracts that insurance companies o¤er is
determined exogenously, and the focus of the model is on how selection distorts the pricing of these
existing contracts. The analysis is therefore in the spirit of Akerlof (1970) rather than Rothschild
and Stiglitz (1976), who endogenize the level of coverage as well. This assumption greatly simpli…es
the analytical framework and makes it easier to both allow for multiple sources of heterogeneity
across consumers and to illustrate some of the key insights and implications of selection models.
However, it means that the analysis of the welfare consequences of selection or alternative possible
government interventions is limited to the cost associated with ine¢ cient pricing of a …xed set of
contracts; it does not capture welfare loss that selection may create by distorting the set of contracts
o¤ered, which may be large in some settings. We return to this central issue below.
De…ne the population by a distribution G( ), where is a vector of consumer characteristics.
For our initial discussion of the “textbook case”, we will assume that these consumer characteristics
include only characteristics relating to their risk factors; later, we will relax this assumption and
explore the implications of allowing for preference heterogeneity.
Denote the (relative) price of contract H by p, and denote by v H ( i ; p) and v L ( i ) consumer i’s
(with characteristics i ) utility from buying contracts H and L, respectively. Although not essential,
it is natural to assume that v H ( i ; p) is strictly decreasing in p and that v H ( i ; p = 0) > v L ( i ).
Finally, denote the expected monetary cost to the insurer associated with the insurable risk for
individual i by c( i ). For ease of exposition, we discuss the benchmark case in which there is
no moral hazard; the cost c of insuring an individual does not depend on the contract chosen.
Allowing for moral hazard does not fundamentally change the analysis, although it does complicate
the presentation (Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen 2010). Of course, as we will discuss at length when
we turn to the empirical work on selection in insurance markets, the potential presence of moral
hazard as well as selection does pose important empirical challenges to the analysis of either one.
Demand for insurance. Assume that each individual makes a discrete choice of whether to
buy insurance or not. Since there are only two available contracts and their associated coverages,
demand is only a function of the (relative) price p. Assume that …rms cannot o¤er di¤erent prices to

4

di¤erent individuals. To the extent that …rms can make prices depend on observed characteristics,
one should think of the foregoing analysis as applied to a set of individuals that only vary in
unobserved (or unpriced) characteristics. Assume that if individuals choose to buy insurance they
buy it at the lowest price o¤ered, so it is su¢ cient to characterize demand for insurance as a function
of the lowest price p.
Given the above assumptions, individual i chooses to buy insurance if and only if v H ( i ; p)
v L ( i ). We can de…ne ( i )
max p : v H ( i ; p) v L ( i ) , which is the highest price at which
individual i is willing to buy insurance. Aggregate demand for insurance is therefore given by
Z
D(p) = 1 ( ( ) p) dG( ) = Pr ( ( i ) p) ;
(1)
and we assume that the underlying primitives imply that D(p) is strictly decreasing and di¤erentiable.
Supply and equilibrium. We consider N 2 identical risk neutral insurance providers, who set
prices in a Nash Equilibrium (a-la Bertrand). We further assume that when multiple …rms set the
same price, individuals who decide to purchase insurance at this price choose a …rm randomly. In
the “textbook case”, we assume that the only costs of providing contract H to individual i are the
direct insurer claims c( i ) that are paid out; later we will explore the implications of allowing for
the possibility of loading factors, such as other administrative (production) costs of the insurance
company.
The foregoing assumptions imply that the average (expected) cost curve in the market is given
by
Z
1
c( )1 ( ( ) p) dG( ) = E (c( )j ( ) p) :
(2)
AC(p) =
D(p)
Note that the average cost curve is determined by the costs of the sample of individuals who
endogenously choose contract H. The marginal (expected) cost curve in the market is given by
M C(p) = E (c( )j ( ) = p) :

(3)

In order to straightforwardly characterize equilibrium, we make two further simplifying assumptions. First, we assume that there exists a price p such that D(p) > 0 and M C(p) < p for every
p > p. In words, we assume that it is pro…table (and e¢ cient, as we will see soon) to provide
insurance to those with the highest willingness to pay for it. Second, we assume that if there exists
p such that M C(p) >p then M C(p) > p for all p <p. That is, we assume that M C(p) crosses
the demand curve at most once. These assumptions guarantee the existence and uniqueness of an
equilibrium. In particular, the equilibrium is characterized by the lowest break-even price, that is:
p = min fp : p = AC(p)g :

(4)

Measuring welfare. We measure consumer surplus by the certainty equivalent. The certainty
equivalent of an uncertain outcome is the amount that would make an individual indi¤erent between
obtaining this amount for sure and obtaining the uncertain outcome. This is an attractive measure
5

of welfare because it is a money metric. Total surplus in the market is the sum of certainty
equivalents for consumers and pro…ts of …rms. We ignore income e¤ects associated with price
changes. Note that price changes have no income e¤ects if the utility function exhibits constant
absolute risk aversion (CARA).
Denote by eH ( i ) and eL ( i ) the certainty equivalent of consumer i from an allocation of contract
H and L, respectively. Under the assumption that all individuals are risk averse, the willingness
to pay for insurance is given by ( i ) = eH ( i ) eL ( i ) > 0. We can write consumer welfare as
Z
CS =
eH ( ) p 1 ( ( ) p) + eL ( )1 ( ( ) < p) dG( )
(5)
and producer welfare as
PS =
Total welfare is
T S = CS + P S =

Z

Z

(p

eH ( )

c( )) 1 ( ( )

c( ) 1 ( ( )

p) dG( ):

p) + eL ( )1 ( ( ) < p) dG( ):

(6)

(7)

It is now easy to see that it is socially e¢ cient for individual i to purchase insurance if and only if
( i)

c( i ):

(8)

In other words, in a …rst best allocation individual i purchases insurance if and only if his willingness
to pay is at least as great as the expected social cost of providing to him the insurance.
2.1.2

The textbook case

Adverse selection equilibrium Figure 2 provides a graphical representation of the adverse
selection insurance equilibrium for the “textbook case” we have just outlined. The relative price
(or cost) of contract H is on the vertical axis. Quantity (i.e. share of individuals in the market with
contract H) is on the horizontal axis; the maximum possible quantity is denoted by Qmax . The
demand curve denotes the relative demand for contract H. Likewise, the average cost (AC) curve
and marginal cost (M C) curve denote the average and marginal incremental costs to the insurer
from coverage with contract H relative to contract L.
Because agents can only choose whether to purchase the contract or not, the market demand
curve simply re‡ects the cumulative distribution of individuals’willingness to pay for the contract.
The di¤erence between willingness to pay ( ) and M C( ) is the risk premium, and is positive for
risk averse individuals.
Because of the “textbook”assumption that individuals are homogeneous in all features of their
utility function –i.e. i includes only characteristics relating to one’s expected claims ci –willingness
to pay for insurance is increasing in risk type. This is the key feature of adverse selection: individuals
who have the highest willingness to pay for insurance are those who, on average, have the highest
expected costs. This is represented in Figure 2 by drawing a downward sloping M C curve. That
is, marginal cost is increasing in price and decreasing in quantity. As the price falls, the marginal
6

individuals who select contract H have lower expected cost than infra-marginal individuals, leading
to lower average costs.
The link between the demand and cost curve is arguably the most important distinction of
insurance markets (or selection markets more generally) from traditional product markets. The
shape of the cost curve is driven by the demand-side consumer selection. In most other contexts,
the demand curve and the cost curve are independent objects; demand is determined by preferences
and costs by the production technology. The distinguishing feature of selection markets is that the
demand and cost curves are tightly linked since the individual’s risk type not only a¤ects demand
but also directly determines cost.
As noted, the e¢ cient allocation is to insure all individuals whose willingness to pay is at
least as great as their expected cost of insuring them. In the textbook case, the risk premium is
always positive, since by assumption all individuals are risk averse and there are no other market
frictions. As a result, the demand curve is always above the MC curve and, as shown in Figure 2,
it is therefore e¢ cient for all individuals to be insured (Qef f = Qmax ): The welfare loss from not
insuring a given individual is simply the risk premium of that individual, or the vertical di¤erence
between the demand and M C curves.
The essence of the private information problem is that …rms cannot charge individuals based
on their (privately known) marginal cost, but are instead restricted to charging a uniform price,
which in equilibrium implies average cost pricing. Since average costs are always higher than
marginal costs, adverse selection creates under-insurance, a familiar result …rst pointed out by
Akerlof (1970). This under-insurance is illustrated in Figure 2. The equilibrium share of individuals
who buy contract H is Qeqm (where the AC curve intersects the demand curve), while the e¢ cient
number is Qef f > Qeqm ; in general, the e¢ cient allocation Qef f is determined where the M C curve
intersects the demand curve, which in the textbook case is never (unless there are people with
risk probability of zero or who are risk neutral). The fundamental ine¢ ciency created by adverse
selection arises because the e¢ cient allocation is determined by the relationship between marginal
cost and demand, but the equilibrium allocation is determined by the relationship between average
cost and demand.
The welfare loss due to adverse selection arises from the lost consumer surplus (the risk premium)
of those individuals who remain ine¢ ciently uninsured in the competitive equilibrium. In Figure
2, these are the individuals whose willingness to pay is less than the average cost of the insured
population, Peqm: Integrating over all these individuals’risk premia, the welfare loss from adverse
selection is given by the area of the “dead-weight loss” trapezoid CDEF.
The amount of under-insurance generated by adverse selection, and its associated welfare loss,
can vary greatly in this environment. As illustrated graphically in Einav and Finkelstein (2011),
the e¢ cient allocation can be achieved despite a downward sloping marginal cost curve if average
costs always lie below demand. In contrast, if average costs always lie above demand, the private
market will unravel completely, with no insurance in equilibrium.

7

Public policy in the textbook case One can use the graphical framework in Figure 2 to
evaluate the welfare consequences of common public policy interventions in insurance markets that
alter the insurance allocation. The comparative advantage of the public sector over the private
sector is that it can directly manipulate either the equilibrium quantity of insurance (through
mandates) or the equilibrium price of insurance (through either tax/subsidy policy or regulation of
insurance company pricing). We brie‡y discuss each in turn.
Mandates. The canonical solution to the ine¢ ciency created by adverse selection is to mandate
that everyone purchase insurance, a solution emphasized as early as Akerlof (1970). In the textbook
setting, mandates produce the e¢ cient outcome in which everyone has insurance. However, the
magnitude of the welfare bene…t produced by an insurance purchase requirement varies depending
on the speci…cs of the market since, as noted, the amount of under-insurance produced by adverse
selection in equilibrium can itself vary greatly.
Tax subsidies. Another commonly discussed policy remedy for adverse selection is to subsidize
insurance coverage. Indeed, adverse selection in private health insurance markets is often cited
as an economic rationale for the tax subsidy to employer provided health insurance, which is the
single largest federal tax expenditure. We can again use Figure 2 to illustrate. Consider, for
example, a subsidy toward the price of coverage. This would shift demand out, leading to a higher
equilibrium quantity and less under-insurance. The gross welfare loss would still be associated with
the area between the original (pre-subsidy) demand curve and the MC curve, and would therefore
unambiguously decline with any positive subsidy. A large enough subsidy (greater than the line
segment GE in Figure 2) would lead to the e¢ cient outcome, with everybody insured.
Of course, the net welfare gain from public insurance subsidies will be lower than the gross welfare gain due to the marginal cost of the public funds that must be raised to …nance the subsidy; this
may be quite large since the subsidy must be paid on all the inframarginal consumers as well as the
marginal ones. Given a non-zero deadweight cost of public funds, the welfare maximizing subsidy
would not attempt to achieve the e¢ cient allocation. It is possible that the welfare maximizing
subsidy could be zero. That is, starting from the competitive allocation (point C), a marginal
dollar of subsidy may not be welfare enhancing. Although given the equilibrium distortion the
welfare gain will be …rst order, the welfare cost of raising funds to cover the subsidy is …rst-order
as well. Hence, the bene…ts of subsidies are again an empirical question.
Restrictions on characteristic-based pricing. A …nal common form of public policy intervention
is regulation that imposes restrictions on the characteristics of consumers over which …rms can price
discriminate. Some regulations require “community rates” that are uniform across all individuals,
while others prohibit insurance companies from making prices contingent on certain observable risk
factors, such as race or gender. For concreteness, consider the case of a regulation that prohibits
pricing on the basis of gender. Recall that Figure 2 can be interpreted as applying to a group of
individuals who must be given the same price by the insurance company. When pricing based on
gender is prohibited, males and females are pooled into the same market, with a variant of Figure
2 describing that market. When pricing on gender is allowed, there are now two distinct insurance
markets –described by two distinct versions of Figure 2 –one for women and one for men, each of
8

which can be analyzed separately. A central issue for welfare analysis is whether, when insurance
companies are allowed to price on gender, consumers still have residual private information about
their expected costs. If they do not, then the insurance market within each gender-speci…c segment
of the market will exhibit a constant (‡at) MC curve, and the equilibrium in each market will be
e¢ cient. In this case, policies that restrict pricing on gender unambiguously reduce welfare because
they create adverse selection where none existed before. However, in the more likely case that
individuals have some residual private information about their risk that is not captured by their
gender, each gender-speci…c market segment would look qualitatively the same as Figure 2 (with
downward sloping MC and AC curves). In such cases, the welfare implications of restricting pricing
on gender could go in either direction. Depending on the shape and position of the gender-speci…c
demand and cost curves relative to the gender-pooled ones, the sum of the areas of the deadweight
loss trapezoids in the gender-speci…c markets could be larger or smaller than the area of the single
deadweight loss trapezoid in the gender-pooled market.3 See Einav and Finkelstein (2011) for a
numerical illustrative example.
Comment: Pareto improvements. It is important to note that while various policies may be
able to increase e¢ ciency or even produce the e¢ cient outcome – such as mandates – they are
not, in this environment, Pareto improving. Consider for concreteness the case of mandates. The
insurance provider (be it the government or the private market) must break even in equilibrium,
and therefore the cost of providing the insurance must be recouped. The total cost is equal to the
market size (Qmax ) times the average cost of insurance provision to Qmax individuals, which is given
by point G. Suppose the government uses average cost pricing, e¤ectively issuing a lump sum tax
on individuals equal to the average cost of insuring all individuals (given by the vertical distance
at point G). While this policy achieves the e¢ cient allocation, those whose willingness to pay is
less than the price level at point G are made strictly worse o¤. Other …nancing mechanisms may
generate welfare gains for a larger set of individuals, but assuming that the government does not
observe the private information about individuals’costs, the government –like the private sector –
cannot price insurance to individuals based on their (privately known) marginal cost.
The inability for mandates to produce a Pareto-improvement are a direct consequence of the
Akerlovian modeling framework which has …xed the contract space. Some models that endogenize
the contract o¤ers generate Pareto-improving mandates (e.g., Wilson 1977) or Pareto-improving
tax-transfer schemes (Rothschild and Stiglitz 1976). Crocker and Snow (1985) discuss the assumptions under which the decentralized equilibrium is constrained Pareto e¢ cient in models with
endogenous contracts.4
3

This analysis focuses only on static welfare considerations and ignores the issue of insurance against reclassi…cation

risk (e.g., being a sick type, or –behind the veil of ignorance –being born a particular gender), which restrictions on
characteristic-based pricing can provide. Bundorf et al. (forthcoming) investigate empirically the reclassi…cation risk
created by characteristic-based pricing of employer-provided health insurance. Hendel and Lizzeri (2003) examine
issues of reclassi…cation risk in the context of life insurance.
4

All of the models discussed by Crocker and Snow (1985) assume that individuals di¤er only in their risk type.

Allowing for preference heterogeneity as well presumably makes the potential for Pareto improvements more limited.

9

2.1.3

Departures from the textbook environment: loads and preference heterogeneity

The qualitative …ndings of the textbook model are unambiguous: private information about risk
always produces under-insurance relative to the e¢ cient outcome, and mandating insurance always improves welfare. We now discuss two empirically relevant departures from the textbook
environment that change these qualitative …ndings.
Production costs (loads) Consider …rst the supply-side assumption we made above that the
only costs of providing insurance to an individual are the direct insurer claims that are paid out.
Many insurance markets show evidence of non-trivial loading factors, including long-term care insurance (Brown and Finkelstein, 2007), annuity markets (Friedman and Warshawsky, 1990; Mitchell
et al., 1999; Finkelstein and Poterba, 2002), health insurance (Newhouse, 2002), and automobile
insurance (Chiappori et al., 2006). While these papers lack the data to distinguish between loading
factors arising from administrative costs to the insurance company and those arising from market power (insurance company pro…ts), it seems a reasonable assumption that it is not costless to
“produce” insurance and run an insurance company.
We therefore relax the textbook assumption to allow for a loading factor on insurance, for
example in the form of administrative costs associated with selling and servicing insurance. In the
presence of such loads, it is not necessarily e¢ cient to allocate insurance coverage to all individuals.
Even if all individuals are risk averse, the additional cost of providing an individual with insurance
may be greater than the risk premium for certain individuals, making it socially e¢ cient to leave
such individuals uninsured. This case is illustrated in Figure 3, which is similar to Figure 2, except
that the cost curves are shifted upward re‡ecting the additional cost of insurance provision.
In Figure 3, the MC curve crosses the demand curve at point E, which depicts the socially
e¢ cient insurance allocation. It is e¢ cient to insure everyone to the left of point E (since demand
exceeds marginal cost), but socially ine¢ cient to insure anyone to the right of point E (since demand
is less than marginal cost).
Implications for policy analysis The introduction of loads does not a¤ect the basic analysis
of adverse selection but it does have important implications for standard public policy remedies.
The competitive equilibrium is still determined by the zero pro…t condition, or the intersection
of the demand curve and the AC curve (point C in Figure 3), and in the presence of adverse
selection (downward sloping MC curve) this leads to under-insurance relative to the social optimum
(Qeqm < Qef f ), and to a familiar dead-weight loss triangle CDE.
However, with insurance loads, the qualitative result in the textbook environment of an unambiguous welfare gain from mandatory coverage no longer obtains. As Figure 3 shows, while a
mandate that everyone be insured recoups the welfare loss associated with under-insurance (triangle CDE), it also leads to over-insurance by covering individuals whom it is socially ine¢ cient to
insure (that is, whose expected costs are above their willingness to pay). This latter e¤ect leads to
a welfare loss given by the area EGH in Figure 3. Therefore whether a mandate improves welfare

10

over the competitive allocation depends on the relative sizes of triangles CDE and EGH. These
areas in turn depend on the speci…c market’s demand and cost curves, making the welfare gain of
a mandate an empirical question. It may also depend on factors outside of our model –such as the
administrative costs of (publicly-provided) mandatory insurance relative to private sector competition. Naturally, if government-mandated or provided insurance has lower loads –e.g., because of
less spending on marketing –then the welfare gains of a mandate could be larger.
Preference heterogeneity and advantageous selection Our “textbook environment” –like
the original seminal papers of Akerlof (1970) and Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) – assumed that
individuals varied only in their risk type. In practice, however, consumers of course may also vary
in their preferences. Thus the vector of consumer characteristics i that a¤ects both willingness to
pay ( i ) and expected costs c( i ) may include consumer preferences as well as risk factors.
Recent empirical work has documented not only the existence of substantial preference heterogeneity over various types of insurance, but the substantively important role of this preference
heterogeneity in determining demand. Standard expected utility theory suggests that risk aversion will be important for insurance demand. And indeed, recent empirical evidence suggests that
heterogeneity in risk aversion may be as or more important than heterogeneity in risk type in
explaining patterns of insurance demand in automobile insurance (Cohen and Einav 2007) and in
long-term care insurance (Finkelstein and McGarry 2006). In other markets, there is evidence of a
role for other types of preferences. For example, in the Medigap market, heterogeneity in cognitive
ability appears to be an important determinant of insurance demand (Fang, Keane and Silverman,
2008); in choosing annuity contracts, preferences for having wealth after death play an important
role (Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf 2010); in annual health insurance markets, heterogeneity in
switching costs can also play an important role in contract demand (Handel, 2011).
Such heterogeneity in preferences can have very important implications for analysis of selection
markets. In particular, if preferences are su¢ ciently important determinants of demand for insurance and su¢ ciently negatively correlated with risk type, the market can exhibit what has come to
be called “advantageous selection.”
Equilibrium and public policy with advantageous selection In our graphical framework, advantageous selection can be characterized by an upward sloping marginal cost curve, as
shown in Figure 4. This is in contrast to adverse selection, which is de…ned by a downward sloping
marginal cost curve.5 When selection is advantageous, as price is lowered and more individuals
opt into the market, the marginal individual opting in has higher expected cost than infra-marginal
individuals. Note that preference heterogeneity is essential for generating these upward sloping
5

Allowing for preference heterogeneity can complicate the notion of e¢ ciency since the the mapping from expected

cost to willingness-to-pay need no longer be unique. In what follows, when we discuss the “e¢ cient allocation”under
preference heteroegneity we are referring to the constrained e¢ cient allocation which is the one that maximizes social
welfare subject to the constraint that price is the only instrument available for screening (see Einav, Finkelstein and
Cullen 2010 for further discussion).

11

cost curves. Without it, willingness to pay must be higher for higher expected cost individuals.
Marginal costs must be upward sloping because the individuals with the highest willingness to pay
are highest cost.6
Since the M C curve is upward sloping, the AC curve lies everywhere below it. If there were
no insurance loads (as in the textbook situation), advantageous selection would not lead to any
ine¢ ciency; the M C and AC curves would always lie below the demand curve, and in equilibrium
all individuals in the market would be covered, which would be e¢ cient.
With insurance loads, however, advantageous selection generates the mirror image of the adverse
selection case; it also leads to ine¢ ciency, but this time due to over-insurance rather than underinsurance. This can be seen in Figure 4. The e¢ cient allocation calls for providing insurance
to all individuals whose expected cost is lower than their willingness to pay— that is, all those
who are to the left of point E (where the MC curve intersects the demand curve) in Figure 4.
Competitive equilibrium, as before, is determined by the intersection of the AC curve and the
demand curve (point C in Figure 4). But since the AC curve now lies below the MC curve,
equilibrium implies that too many individuals are provided insurance, leading to over-insurance:
there are Qeqm – Qef f individuals who are ine¢ ciently provided insurance in equilibrium. These
individuals value the insurance at less than their expected costs, but competitive forces make …rms
reduce the price in order to attract these individuals, simultaneously attracting more pro…table
infra-marginal individuals. Intuitively, insurance providers have an additional incentive to reduce
price, as the infra-marginal customers whom they acquire as a result are relatively good risks. As
we discuss below, such advantageous selection is quite important empirically. Cutler, Finkelstein,
and McGarry (2008) summarize some of the …ndings regarding the presence of adverse compared
to advantageous selection in di¤erent insurance markets.
We can characterize the welfare loss from over-insurance due to advantagenous selection as
above. The resultant welfare loss is given by the shaded area CDE, and represents the excess of
M C over willingness to pay for individuals whose willingness to pay exceeds the average costs of
the insured population. Once again, the source of market ine¢ ciency is that consumers vary in
their marginal cost, but …rms are restricted to uniform pricing.
From a public policy perspective, advantageous selection calls for the opposite solutions relative
to the tools used to combat adverse selection. For example, given that advantageous selection
produces “too much” insurance relative to the e¢ cient outcome, public policies that tax existing
insurance policies (and therefore raise Peqm toward Pef f ) or outlaw insurance coverage (mandate
no coverage) could be welfare-improving. Although there are certainly taxes levied on insurance
policies, to our knowledge advantageous selection has not yet been invoked as a rationale in public
policy discourse, perhaps re‡ecting the relative newness of both the theoretical work and empirical
evidence. To our knowledge, advantageous selection was …rst discussed by Hemenway (1990), who
termed it “propitious” selection. De Meza and Webb (2001) provide a theoretical treatment of
6

Once one allows for preference heterogeneity, the marginal cost curve need not be monotone. However for

simplicity and clarity we focus on montone cases here.

12

advantageous selection and its implications for insurance coverage and public policy.
Advantageous selection provides a nice example of the interplay between theory and empirical
work in the selection literature. Motivated by the seminal theoretical papers on adverse selection,
empirical researchers set about developing ways to test whether or not adverse selection exists.
Some of this empirical work in turn turned up examples of advantageous selection, which the
original theory had precluded. This in turn suggested the need for important extensions to the
theory.

2.2

Empirical Evidence on Selection

Over the last decade, empirical work on selection in insurance markets has gained considerable momentum, and a fairly extensive and active empirical literature on the topic has emerged. We discuss
this literature using the graphical framework described in the previous section. We begin with work
designed to test whether or not selection exists in a particular insurance market. Existence of selection is a natural and necessary condition for investigation of its welfare consequences and, not
surprisingly, where empirical work started …rst. We then discuss more recent work designed to
empirically quantify the welfare consequences of adverse selection or public policy interventions.
2.2.1

Testing for selection

As is evident from our graphical framework, adverse selection is de…ned by a downward sloping
marginal cost curve. Testing for adverse selection essentially requires testing whether the marginal
cost curve is downward sloping. But making inferences about marginal individuals is di¢ cult. Not
surprisingly, initial empirical approaches focused on cases under which one could make inferences
simply by comparing average rather than marginal individuals. We begin by discussing these
“positive correlation tests”. We then move on to a “cost curve test,” which has the advantage of
being able to make inferences about marginal individuals, but requires more data.
Positive correlation test for asymmetric information The graphical depiction of adverse
selection in Figures 2 and 3 suggests one natural way to test for selection: compare the expected
cost of those with insurance to the expected cost of those without. More generally, one can compare
the costs of those with more insurance to those with less insurance. If adverse selection is present,
the expected costs of those who select more insurance should be larger than the expected costs of
those who select less insurance.
Figure 5 illustrates the basic intuition behind the test. Here we start with the adverse selection
situation already depicted in Figure 3, denoting the AC curve shown in previous …gures by AC H
to re‡ect the fact that it averages over those individuals with the higher coverage contract, H. We
have also added one more line: the AC L curve. The AC L curve represents the average expected
cost of those individuals who have the lower coverage contract L: That is, the AC H curve is derived
by averaging over the expected costs of those with H coverage (integrating from Q = 0 to a given

13

quantity Q) while the AC L curve is produced by averaging over the expected costs of those with L
coverage (integrating from the given quantity to Q = Qmax ).
A downward-sloping M C curve – i.e., the existence of adverse selection – implies that AC H
is always above AC L . Thus, at any given insurance price, and in particular at the equilibrium
price, adverse selection implies that the average cost of individuals with more insurance is higher
than the average cost of those with less insurance. The di¤erence in these averages is given by
line segment CF in Figure 5 (the thick arrowed line in the …gure). This basic insight underlies the
widely used “positive correlation” test for asymmetric information. The positive correlation test
amounts to testing if point C (average costs of those who in equilibrium are insured) is signi…cantly
above point F (average costs of those who in equilibrium are not insured).
Chiappori and Salanie (2000) formalized this intuition and emphasized that the basic approach
requires some re…nement because it does not clearly di¤erentiate between individual characteristics
that are observable and those that are not.7 In particular, one must stratify on the consumer characteristics that determine the contract menu o¤ered to each individual. Implementing the positive
correlation test requires that we examine whether, among a set of individuals who are o¤ered the
same coverage options at identical prices, those who buy more insurance have higher expected costs
than those who do not. In the absence of such conditioning, it is impossible to know whether a
correlation arises due to demand (di¤erent individuals self select into di¤erent contracts) or supply
(di¤erent individuals are o¤ered the contracts at di¤erent prices by the insurance company). Only
the former is evidence of selection. As a result, some of the most convincing tests are those carried
out using insurance company data, where the researcher knows the full set of characteristics that
the insurance company uses for pricing. Absent data on individually-customized prices, which are
sometimes di¢ cult to obtain, one may instead try to ‡exibly control for all individual characteristics
that a¤ect pricing.
Chiappori and Salanie’s work has led to a large literature studying how average costs vary
across di¤erent coverage options in several insurance markets, including health, life, automobile,
and homeowners insurance. The widespread application of the test in part re‡ects its relatively
minimal data requirements. The test requires that one observe the average expected costs of
individuals (who are observationally identical to the …rm) with di¤erent amounts of insurance
coverage.
A central limitation in interpreting the results of the positive correlation test is that it is a joint
test of the presence of either adverse selection or moral hazard. Even in the absence of selection (i.e.
a ‡at marginal cost curve), moral hazard (loosely, an impact of the insurance contract on expected
claims) can produce the same “positive correlation” property of those with more insurance having
higher claims than those without. Intuitively, individuals with more generous insurance coverage
may choose to utilize more services simply because their marginal out-of-pocket cost is lower. These
7

Variants of this idea have been discussed in earlier work as well. For instance, Glied (2000) and Cutler &

Zeckhauser (2000) summarize attempts to identify risk-based sorting in health insurance choice, where instead of
directly comparing claims or “accidents”across individuals with di¤erent insurance coverage, the comparison is made
over a particular individual characteristic thought to be associated with higher claims, such as age or chronic illness.

14

two very di¤erent forms of asymmetric information have very di¤erent public policy implications.
In particular, in contrast to the selection case where government intervention could potentially
raise welfare, the social planner generally has no comparative advantage over the private sector in
ameliorating moral hazard (i.e. in encouraging individuals to choose socially optimal behavior).
Thus distinguishing between adverse selection and moral hazard is crucial.8
Cost curve test of selection Faced with the challenge of how to interpret the results of the
correlation test, researchers have taken a variety of approaches. One is to test for selection in
insurance markets where moral hazard is arguably less of a concern, such as annuity markets.
More generally, researchers have used experimental or quasi-experimental variation in prices that
consumers face to try to separate selection from moral hazard (see e.g., Abbring et al. 2003a,b,
Adams et al., 2009, Cutler and Reber 1998, Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen 2010, Karlan and Zinman
2009).
The intuition for how pricing variation that is exogenous to demand (and hence by de…nition to
costs since demand depends on expected costs) allows one to separate selection from moral hazard
is easily seen in our simple graphical framework. Consider an experiment that randomly varies
the relative price at which the H contract is o¤ered (relative to the L contract) to large pools of
otherwise identical individuals. For each relative price, we observe the fraction of individuals who
bought contract H and the average realized costs of the individuals who bought contract H.9 We
thus can trace out the demand curve as well as the average cost curve in Figure 3. From these two
curves, the marginal cost curve is easily derived. Total costs are the product of average costs and
demand (quantity), and marginal costs are the derivative of total cost with respect to quantity.
The features of the marginal cost curve then provide direct evidence on selection. Speci…cally,
rejecting the null hypothesis of a constant marginal cost curve is equivalent to rejecting the null
of no selection. Moreover, the sign of the slope of the estimated marginal cost curve informs
8

If one …nds convincing evidence of a negative correlation between insurance coverage and expected claims, this is

arguably more informative, as it is consistent with advantageous selection, even in the presence of moral hazard. This
is the approach taken by Fang, Keane and Silverman (2008) who document a negative correlation between insurance
and claims in the Medigap market, thus pointing to the existence of advantageous selection in this market. When a
positive correlation is found however –as is the case in many of the papers reviewed by Cohen and Siegleman (2010) –
further work is needed to determine whether the results are driven by adverse selection, or by moral hazard (perhaps
combined even with advantageous selection).

Another vexing case occurs when one is unable to reject the null of

no correlation between insurance coverage and expected claims in the market, as in Chiappori and Salanie (2000) or
Finkelstein and McGarry (2006). Such a …nding is consistent with symmetric information or with the presence of
o¤setting advantageous selection and moral hazard. Even if moral hazard is ruled out, the inability to reject the null
of no correlation could re‡ect the presence of multiple forms of private information acting in o¤settting directions, as
Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) …nd to be the case in the US market for long-term care insurance.
9

When the L contract is no coverage, the average realized costs of indivdiuals who bought contract H are simply

the average claims paid out for people who have contract H. When the L contract involves some (lower) coverage
amount, then we measure the average incremental claims for those with policy H, or, in other words, the average
additional claims that insurance policy H would have to pay out beyond what policy L would pay out, for the accident
occurences of those who have policy H:

15

us of the nature of any selection. A downward sloping marginal cost curve (i.e. a cost curve
declining in quantity and increasing in price) indicates adverse selection, while an upward sloping
curve indicates advantageous selection. Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) develop and discuss
in more detail this “cost curve” test of selection.
Crucially, this “cost curve” test of selection is una¤ected by moral hazard. Conceptually,
variation in prices for a …xed contract allows us to distinguish selection from moral hazard. To
see this, recall that the AC curve is estimated using the sample of individuals who choose to buy
contract H at a given price. As prices change, the sample changes, but everyone always has the
same coverage. Because the coverage of individuals in the sample is …xed, the estimate of the slope
of the cost curve is not a¤ected by moral hazard, which only a¤ects costs when coverage changes.10
2.2.2

Evidence on selection

There is now a large body of empirical work testing for selection in many di¤erent insurance markets.
The results of this empirical literature have been mixed. In some markets, researchers have found
evidence consistent with adverse selection— that is, higher average costs for individuals with greater
insurance coverage— while in others they have found evidence of advantageous selection— de…ned
by a negative relationship between insurance coverage and average costs— or have been unable
to reject the null of symmetric information, meaning no di¤erence in average costs. Cohen and
Siegelman (2010) provide a comprehensive review of this work. We focus instead on characterizing
the literature as it pertains to markets with signi…cant social insurance, such as old age assistance
and health insurance. Our reading of the evidence for these two markets is that there is very clear
evidence of selection in these markets.
Annuities In return for an up-front lump sum premium, annuities provide an individual with
a survival-contingent income stream. They therefore o¤er a way for a retiree facing stochastic mortality to increase welfare by spreading an accumulated stock of resources over a retirement period of
uncertain length (Yaari, 1965; Davido¤, Diamond, and Brown 2005). Yet private annuity markets
remain quite small. As a result, annuities have attracted a great deal of interest in discussions
involving the design and reform of public pensions. Many of these public pension systems, including the current U.S. Social Security System, provide bene…ts in the form of mandatory, publicly
provided annuities. A major economic rationale for this form of bene…t provision is the potential
for adverse selection to undermine the functioning of private annuity markets, making it important
to determine whether selection actually exists in these markets.
Several studies have implemented variants of the positive correlation test for selection in annuity
markets. In the context of annuitities, higher risk (i.e. higher expected claim) individuals are the
10

Of course, it is possible that the moral hazard e¤ect of insurance is greater for some individuals than others

and that, anticipating this, individuals whose behavior is more responsive to insurance may be more likely to buy
insurance. We should still view this as selection, however, in the sense that individuals are selecting insurance on the
basis of their anticipated behavioral response to it. Einav et al. (2011) provide empirical evidence of such “selection
on moral hazard.”

16

ones who are longer lived than expected; adverse selection therefore is expected to generate a
positive correlation between annuitization and survival. Results from a number of studies all point
to evidence of a positive correlation in annuity markets on both the extensive margin –individuals
who purchase annuities tend to be longer lived than those who do not – and on the intensive
(i.e., contract feature) margin –individuals who purchase annuity contracts with shorter gaurantee
periods tend to be longer lived than those who purchase less. These …ndings obtain conditional
on the characteristics of individuals used to price annuities, namely age and gender. The positive
correlation has been documented in several countries including the United States (Mitchell et al.,
1999), the United Kingdom (Finkelstein and Poterba 2002, 2004, and 2006) and in Japan (McCarthy
and Mitchell 2003).
In the case of annuities, it may be reasonable to assume that annuitization does not induce
large behavioral e¤ects. Indeed, work in this literature tends to assume that moral hazard – an
impact of income in the form of an annuity on the length of life – is likely to be quantitatively
negligible even though theoretically possible (see Philipson and Becker 1998). As a result, evidence
of a positive correlation between annuitization and survival can be interpreted as clear evidence
of adverse selection in this market (Finkelstein and Poterba 2004). Finkelstein and Poterba’s
(2004) empirical …ndings also illustrate how selection may occur not only along the dimension of
the amount of payment in the event the insured risk occurs, but also in the form of selection on
di¤erent insurance instruments, such as the length of a guarantee period during which payments
are not survival-contingent; see Sheshinski (2008) for a theoretical discussion of this point.
Health insurance Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) review a large literature that tends to …nd a
positive correlation between insurance coverage and risk occurrence in health insurance. Conditional
on the menu of contracts o¤ered to them, individuals with more health insurance tend to have higher
medical spending than individuals with less insurance. This literature provides a nice example of
the substantive importance of conditioning on the observable characteristics of the individual that
determine the menu of contracts o¤ered to him, as emphasized by Chiappori and Salanie (2000). In
particular, since employer o¤ering of health insurance is such a major determinant of coverage, some
of the most convincing implementations of the positive correlation test compare health insurance
coverage and medical spending among individuals within the same employer, who therefore all face
the same option set. Indeed, without such conditioning, one can get the opposite result suggesting
that the insured have lower medical spending than the uninsured, driven by the di¤erence in who
is o¤ered health insurance.
In the case of health insurance, the potential moral hazard e¤ects are non-negligible. There is
compelling evidence –including results from randomized trials (Newhouse et al. 1996, Finkelstein
et al. 2011) – that health insurance has a causal e¤ect on medical spending. As a result, the
large body of evidence on the “positive correlation” property in health insurance suggests that
asymmetric information exists in health insurance, but does not itself provide direct evidence of
selection.
The task of trying to separate selection from treatment e¤ects is greatly aided by the avail17

ability of variation in the o¤ered contracts that is uncorrelated with demand. Arguably the most
compelling evidence of adverse selection in health insurance markets comes from observing “death
spirals” brought about by changes in the contract set. For example, Cutler and Reber (1998) examine the response to a change in health insurance pricing at Harvard University that required
employees to pay more on the margin for more comprehensive coverage. The introduction of this
pricing change was staggered over time across di¤erent employees. They document a death spiral
dynamic whereby the pricing change produced a decline in enrollment in the more comprehensive
plan that was particularly concentrated among lower cost (speci…cally, younger) employees. This
prompted a further price increase in the more comprehensive plan to prevent it from losing money,
which in turn prompted further exit by disproportionately younger individuals. More recently,
Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) implemented the “cost curve” test for selection using data
from a large …rm and variation across employees within the …rm in the relative price they faced for
more comprehensive coverage. They estimate a downward sloping marginal cost curve, providing
direct evidence of selection distinct from moral hazard.
We conclude that in the market for acute medical insurance in the United States, there seems
to be compelling evidence of the presence of adverse selection. The …ndings in two other health
insurance markets – speci…cally Medigap and long-term care insurance – are more mixed. While
there is compelling evidence of private information in these markets, the evidence suggests that
the resulting selection is advantageous rather than adverse (Fang, Keane and Silverman 2008;
Finkelstein and McGarry 2006, Oster et al., 2010).
Disability insurance, unemployment insurance, and worker’s compensation In contrast to the study of selection in annuity and health insurance markets there is, to our knowledge,
a dearth of work on adverse selection in several settings where there are important social insurance
programs including disability insurance, unemployment insurance, and worker’s compensation.11
It would be interesting to test for selection in these markets, although the lack of a robust private
market for these risks makes it much more challenging to implement the tests described above. To
make progress, one would need to develop tests that – unlike the existing positive correlation or
cost curve tests –do not require observing individual choices. In this respect, Hendren’s (2011) development of a method for characterizing the distribuiton of private information in a market where
trade is not observed likely represents an important step forward for empirically-based estimates
of private information in non-existent or virtually non-existent markets. He develops a method
to infer agents’private information based on subjective probability elicitations which he models as
noisy measures of their beliefs. His results provide, among other things, the …rst evidence of private
information about risk type in the disability insurance setting.
11

Hendren (2011) is a notable exception that tests for and detects evidence of private information in disability and

unemployment insurance markets.

18

2.2.3

Welfare consequences

The tests for asymmetric information described above are relatively uninformative about the welfare
impacts of interventions. Markets that appear to be “more adversely selected” by the positive
correlation metric – i.e. in which there are larger di¤erences between the expected costs of the
insured and uninsured – are not necessarily ones in which there is a greater welfare cost imposed
by that selection. Einav and Finkelstein (2011) provide a graphical illustration of this point.
Intuitively, the degree of positive correlation is a statement about the shape of the cost curves in
e.g. Figure 3 or 5. However, the welfare cost of adverse selection – i.e. the magnitude of the
“deadweight loss triangle” CDE depends not only on the shape of the cost curve but also on that
of the demand curve.
This problem has motivated recent empirical work that quanti…es the welfare losses from asymmetric information and the potential impact of government policies such as mandates, pricing
restrictions, and taxes. Conceptually, one must estimate both the demand and marginal cost
curve to pin down the welfare cost of adverse selection. Once these have been estimated, one
can identify the e¢ cient allocation and compare it to alternative allocations induced by various
government policies.
Abstractly, there are two approaches one can take to recovering the demand and marginal
cost curves. The …rst is to estimate these curves directly without estimating the underlying
primitives that generated these curves. It might be usefully called a "plan valuation” approach
and is similar in approach to traditional discrete choice demand analysis. Einav, Finkelstein, and
Cullen (2010) develop and implement such an approach to estimating the welfare cost of selection.
They show that the demand and cost curves shown in the prior …gures are su¢ cient statistics for
welfare analysis of equilibrium and non-equilibrium pricing of existing contracts. That is, di¤erent
underlying primitives (i.e. preferences and private information as summarized by ) have the same
welfare implications if they generate the same demand and cost curves. As a result, the identifying
variation used to trace out the demand and cost curves for the “cost curve”test of selection provides
the estimates needed to estimate the welfare cost of adverse selection (triangle CDE in Figure 3).
Einav, Finkelstein, and Cullen’s approach to estimating welfare is attractive for its transparency
and its reduced reliance on assumptions about consumer preferences or the nature of their ex ante
information. Moreover, it is relatively straightforward to implement in terms of data requirements.
Data on costs and quantities in insurance markets are relatively easy to obtain – as evidenced by
the widespread application of the “positive correlation” test which requires both of these data
elements. The key additional data requirement is exogenous price variation. While naturally more
challenging to obtain, the near-ubiquitous regulation of insurance markets o¤ers many potential
opportunities to isolate such variation.
A major limitation of this approach, however, is that the analysis of the welfare cost of adverse
selection is limited to the cost associated with ine¢ cient pricing of a …xed (and observed) set of
contracts. It does not capture the welfare loss that adverse selection may create by distorting
the set of contracts o¤ered, which in many settings could be the primary welfare cost of adverse

19

selection. Intuitively, in order to analyze the welfare e¤ects of introducing contracts not observed
in the data, one needs a model of the deeper primitives ( i ).
This limitation partly motivates the second approach that researchers have taken to estimating
the welfare costs of selection, which is to directly estimate these primitives and then simulate
the welfare cost of alternative policies. For example, Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf (2010)
estimate a model of demand for annuities in which the utility from di¤erent annuity contracts
depends on underlying consumer primitives ( i ). Speci…cally, they examine the semi-compulsory
market for annuities in the United Kingdom in which individuals who have saved for retirement
through certain tax preferred retirement vehicles are required to annuitize their savings but face
a choice over some of the contract features. They focus on the choice of “gaurantee period,” the
number of years in which the annuity is guaranteed to pay out even if one has already died. The
demand for guarantees depends on both indivdiuals’unobserved risk type (i.e. survival probability)
and unobserved preferences (i.e. for wealth when alive relative to wealth after death). All else
equal, longer guarantee periods are more attractive both to individuals who believe they have high
mortality and to individuals who have a greater value for wealth after death. Using the model,
together with individual-level data on annuity choices and ex post survival length, they recover the
joint distribution of survival types and preferences for wealth after death. Unlike the plan valuation
approach, this realized utilty approach allows recovery of the underlying consumer primitives ( i ).
Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010) provide more discussion of these two di¤erent approaches
and their relative attractions. Broadly speaking, the choice between the realized utility approach
and plan valuation approaches involves a standard trade-o¤. The realized utility approach requires
stronger assumptions about how consumers derive value from insurance, but allows the researcher
to use the resulting estimates to (at least in principle) examine counterfactual allocations that are
much further from the observed data.12 For instance, papers that model realized utility directly
as a function of individual primitives such as risk aversion and beliefs about risk type are able in
principle to analyze choice and welfare over contracts that vary over dimensions over which one
observes no heterogeneity in the data. The papers by Cardon and Hendel (2001), Cohen and
Einav (2007), Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2010), and Einav, Finkelstein, Ryan, Schrimpf,
and Cullen (2011) are examples in this vein.
The plan valuation approach requires weaker assumptions but commensurately limits the type
of analysis one can do. At one extreme, the approach taken by Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010)
recovers the willingness to pay for one health plan over another, but provides no information on
the characteristics of the plan determining that valuation. With this approach, inferences about
contracts that are not observed in the data are not feasible. Other papers in this literature analyze
valuation of contracts as a function of plan and individual characteristics, making it feasible to
extrapolate to contracts not observed provided that the model’s assumptions are accurate outside
the estimation sample. Examples in this vein include Carlin and Town (2010) and Lustig (2011).
12

An additional attraction of this approach is that it recovers primitives that may be of inherent interest for other

reasons, such as estimates of the distribution of risk aversion in the population.

20

Estimates of welfare costs of selection Relative to the literature discussed earlier that tests
for the existence of selection, there has been substantially less empirical work attempting to estimate
the welfare costs of selection. The work that has been done to date has focused on the welfare cost
of selection in the health insurance market for acute medical expenses or the market for annuities.
The empirical estimates of the welfare cost of selection have consistently tended to be a few percent
of premia, bounding the potential welfare gains from policy interventions that aim to address
selection at relatively low levels. This is true both in the insurance markets for acute medical
expenses (see e.g., Cutler and Reber 1998, Carlin and Town 2010, Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen
2010, Einav, Finkelstein, Ryan, Schrimpf and Cullen 2011, Handel 2011, Lustig 2011) as well as
annuity markets (Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf 2010). However, as emphasized above and as we
return to below, virtually all of these papers have studied only the welfare cost of selection arising
from ine¢ cient pricing of a given set of contracts, and have not investigated the potentially much
larger welfare losses arising from selection limiting the set of contracts o¤ered or, in the extreme,
causing a market to unravel completely.
Welfare consequences of public policy interventions Beyond estimating the welfare cost
of selection, several papers have analyzed the welfare consequences of alternative public policy
interventions. A recurring theme of this empirical work is that –as indicated by the stylized model
we began with – the welfare consequences of “textbook” public policy interventions are not as
straightforward as the simple theory suggests.
For example, recent work on mandatory insurance –perhaps the canonical public policy response
to selection –has failed to …nd welfare improvements from the set of mandates considered (Einav,
Finkelstein and Cullen 2010). Other work has concluded that while the optimal mandate would
be welfare improving, it is di¢ cult to determine which mandate would raise welfare with preference
heterogeneity and some types of mandates may actually reduce welfare (Einav, Finkelstein and
Schrimpf 2010).
Another focus of the literature has been on the welfare consequences of regulating the characteristics of consumers that can be used in pricing insurance contracts. Bundorf, Levin, and
Mahoney (forthcoming) emphasize that in the presence of heterogeneity in preferences for coverage
that is not perfectly correlated with risk, uniform pricing of contracts across consumers of di¤erent
risk types cannot induce e¢ cient consumer choice. This creates scope for welfare improvements
through characteristic-based pricing, often known as “risk adjustment.” In their empirical application, which uses data on employer-provided health insurance at several …rms, they estimate
that the welfare gains from feasible risk adjustment turn out to be relatively modest. In a similar
spirit, Geruso (2011) empirically explores the potential welfare gains from age-adjusted pricing in a
di¤erent employer-provided health insurance context. Focusing instead on distributional impacts,
Finkelstein, Poterba and Rothschild (2009) calibrate a stylized equilibrium screening model of annuties to investigate the impact of banning gender-based pricing in a compulsory annuity market;
they …nd that the re-distribution inherent in requiring unisex pricing can be greatly undone by
equilibrium adjustment of annuity contracts to the restricted pricing regime.
21

Other work, focusing once again on health insurance, has examined the implications of pricing restrictions for insurance coverage and government expenditures. Empirical examinations of
restrictions on characteristic-based pricing, such as community rating in the small group and nongroup health insurance markets have shown that such regulations can reduce coverage among lower
risk individuals (e.g., Buchmueller and DiNardo 2002, Simon 2005, Bundorf and Simon 2006). Examining risk adjustment in Medicare Advantage plans, where the government is the insurer, Brown,
Duggan, Kuziemko and Woolston (2011) conclude that more detailed pricing on consumer characteristics can exacerbate, rather than ameliorate, the selection problem as de…ned with respect to
government expenditures. The intuition stems from the fact that the variance of medical spending
is increasing with its mean. More detailed risk adjustment – which puts consumers into …ner
pricing “bins” on the basis of their expected health care costs –results in higher dispersion in the
high expected spending bins than in the overall pool, increasing the incentives for an insurer to
invest in cream skimming within the …ner risk classi…cations.13
Welfare consequences with multiple imperfections Another interesting vein of this literature has investigated how adverse selection impacts welfare in the presence of other market
imperfections. When selection is the only departure from the perfectly competitive neoclassical
benchmark, eliminating private information is always welfare improving. This need not be the case
when there are multiple frictions. For example, Starc (2011) discusses how, when …rms have market power, moving from symmetric information to asymmetric information can improve consumer
welfare. Intuitively, when …rms have market power, prices are ine¢ ciently high. Adverse selection
reduces the incentive for …rms to mark up prices because the marginal consumers they lose when
they raise prices have lower costs (and thus are higher pro…ts) than the inframarginal ones that they
retain. In a similar spirit, Handel (2011) demonstrates how in the presence of adverse selection,
switching costs that reduce consumer response to changes in plan pricing can be welfare increasing
by blunting the selection pressures that would otherwise operate.
Measuring the welfare costs of selection is also more complicated in models with additional
imperfections. Spinnewijn (2012) shows that calculations based on revealed preference – as in
Einav, Finkelstein, and Cullen (2010) –may understate the welfare costs of adverse selection in the
presence of frictions such as misperception of risks or adjustment costs. Intuitively, such frictions
create a wedge between the revealed demand for insurance via the demand curve and the actual
value of insurance. As a result, the demand curve overstates the surplus from insurance for those
who buy insurance (because some who purchased do not truly value insurance above cost) and
understates it for those who do not (because some who do not purchase should have purchased).
13

Brown et al. (2011) provide a helpful example to illustrate this intuition: “pre-risk adjustment, Hispanics were

roughly $800 cheaper than their (non-risk-adjusted) capitation payments; after risk adjustment, Hispanics with a
history of congestive heart failure (one of the most common conditions included in the risk formula) are $4,000
cheaper than their (risk- adjusted) capitation payment” (page 3). As a result, the incentive of the insurer to try
to recruit Hispanics into plans is much higher when plans are reimbursed di¤erently on the basis of whether the
indivdiual has a history of congestive heart failure.”

22

More generally, though the graphical framework developed above assumes perfect competition
among insurers, one can generalize the welfare analysis to any other given model of the insurance
market as long as one can solve for the equilibrium allocation. Lustig (2011), for example, examines
the welfare cost of adverse selection in Medicare Advantage, allowing for imperfect competition on
the supply side.
2.2.4

Directions for future work

Most of the empirical papers to date on welfare in insurance markets have taken the relatively
narrow (albeit practical) approach of focusing on the welfare costs associated with the pricing
distortions selection induces in insurance markets. In general, these papers have concluded that,
de…ned in this way, the welfare costs of selection are relatively small. One limitation to this work,
discussed above, is that it analyzes adverse selection in the absence of other potential frictions,
which can be important for both the sign and magnitude of the welfare costs of selection. In
addition, in at least two important respects, the existing work may be missing important potential
welfare consequences of selection or of government intervention. These omissions highlight both
the challenges and opportunities for further empirical work.
First, most of the existing empirical welfare analysis has abstracted from a potentially more
signi…cant welfare cost of selection that could arise from distortions in the set of contracts o¤ered.
Selection may result in certain types of coverage not being available, as in the classic Akerlof (1970)
unraveling of a market, and the welfare costs of the disappearance of certain contracts is potentially
much larger than the welfare costs of pricing distortions of the contracts that do exist. The ability
to make empirically-based estimates of the welfare cost of selection via selection’s e¤ect on the set
of contracts o¤ered remains a very important area for future work.
There are several challenges inherent in any such attempts. One is that although in principle
estimates from realized utility models can use the recovered primitives to say something about the
welfare consequences of o¤ering contracts not observed in the data, researchers have been (reasonably) wary of using the estimates of such models to say much about contracts that are too
far from the observed contracts. Another challenge stems from the supply side task of trying to
characterize the counterfactual equilibrium for unobserved contracts; as discussed by Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010), this can be particularly challenging when allowing for realistic consumer
heterogeneity as well as imperfect competition.
Even more challenging is empirical work in markets that have almost or completely unraveled,
yet it may be that these markets are precisely where the welfare costs of selection are largest; in
other words, the “lamp post problem”of empirical work gravitating to markets for which there are
data and dimensions of coverage along which there is observed variation may be one reason that
existing papers have found relatively small welfare losses.
A few recent papers have used calibration exercises to try to investigate the value of insurance in
markets that are virtually non-existent; examples include the market for annuities (Hosseini 2010),
long term care insurance (Brown and Finkelstein 2008), and high deductible health insurance (Ma-

23

honey 2012). Such exercises require that the researchers make assumptions about the population
distribution of certain primitives such as risk aversion and risk type, which are often based on
estimates made in other, thicker markets. As noted, Hendren (2011) makes important progress in
empirically characterizing the distribution of private information in markets where trade does not
occur. More work is needed in this area so that researchers may be equipped to examine the counterfactual functioning of private insurance markets that currently do not exist but where we have
important social insurance programs such as unemployment insurance, worker’s compensation, and
disability insurance.
Second, existing empirical work has focused on testing for the presence of selection and examining its welfare consequences given the existing public policies, such as tax subsidies to employer
provided health insurance or publicly provided annuities through Social Security. This raises the
question of whether selection would exist –and what its welfare consequences would be – in the
absence of these public programs or under very di¤erent public programs than we currently have.
Theoretically, it is not clear whether or when government intervention mitigates or exacerbates
selection. For example, as discussed earlier, regulatory restrictions on the consumer characteristics
insurance companies may use in setting pricing may potentially increase or decrease the welfare
costs of selection in the private market. As another example, the impact of mandatory, partial
social insurance (such as Medicare which covers some but not all medical expenses or Social Security which provides partial annuitization) on adverse selection in the residual private market for
insurance is theoretically ambiguous. Under di¤erent assumptions regarding the ability to o¤er
exclusive contracts, Abel (1986) …nds that partial public annuities provided by Social Security exacerbates adverse selection pressures in the residual private market while Eckstein et al. (1985)
document a potential welfare enhancing role for partial public annuities. Empirically, we know
little about whether the existing partial public insurance programs such as Medicare and Social
Security have exacerbated or ameliorated adverse selection problems in the residual private markets
for the elderly for health insurance (Medigap) and annuities. Finkelstein (2004) attempts to try to
begin to examine such questions empirically. The recent introduction of Medicare Part D, which
covers some but not all prescription drug expenses, may provide a fruitful opportunity for empirical
work on this question.

2.3

Other motivations

Following much of the recent literature, we have concentrated our discussion above on asymmetric
information as a motive for social insurance.14 This recent focus should not be interpreted as a
re‡ection of a conclusion that selection is the important rationale for social insurance. Here, we
brie‡y summarize several other potential rationales for social insurance. Many of these are ripe for
empirical work quantifying their importance.
Incomplete Contracts. Private insurance contracts can only insure risks which are realized after
14

We focused on adverse selection and not moral hazard since, as previously noted, moral hazard is in general not

an area where the public sector has a comparative advantage over the private sector in redressing market failure.

24

birth, as one cannot write contracts behind the Rawlsian veil of ignorance. Social insurance programs can address this problem by redistributing across individuals born with di¤erent endowments
(e.g., of skills or health). The ability of social insurance to insure risks realized at or before birth
might explain why most developed countries –including the United States in the near future –provide or mandate universal health insurance. Social insurance for risks behind the veil of ignorance
is formally analogous to optimal taxation and hence we do not treat it further here; see the chapter
by Piketty and Saez in this volume for a review of this literature.
Aggregate Risks. Some risks represent aggregate shocks for which the private insurance market’s
ability to diversify the risk cross-sectionally may be impaired. By contrast, the government may
be able to spread such risk inter-generationally. This may suggest a welfare-improving role for
social insurance against such correlated risks as aggregate unemployment shocks, natural disasters,
changes in population life expectancy, or technological change in medicine.
An interesting vein of this literature has investigated why such aggregate shocks cannot instead
be e¤ectively diversi…ed –and thus insured –intertemporally through private capital markets. In
the context of catastrophe risk (e.g., hurricanes and earthquakes), Froot (2001) discusses a variety of
possible demand-side and supply-side explanations for why in practice the role of capital markets
in reinsuring these risks appears to be limited and prices appear to be high. He also reviews
the available evidence for each hypothesis. Demand side explanations include agency issues with
insurance company managers who do not value protection for policyholders against extremely high
losses if the protection does not avoid default by the …rm, ex-post intervention by third parties
such as the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) that substitute for insurance, and
optimization failures. Supply side explanations include potential market failures such as adverse
selection and moral hazard, …rm market power, capital market imperfections that restrict the supply
of reinsurance, and high transaction costs.
A related set of issues for private insurance concerns aggregate uncertainty. On the supplyside, it may be di¢ cult for would-be providers to o¤er insurance against risks with considerable
parameter uncertainty; terrorism risk insurance is an example of where this issue may be important
(e.g., Brown, Kroszner and Jenn 2002). On the demand-side, aggregate uncertainty may reduce
demand for long-term insurance contracts against future risk. For example, Brown and Finkelstein
(2011) conjecture that aggregate uncertainty regarding future policy and the survivorship of private
insurance companies may depress demand among prime age adults for long-term care insurance that
would cover nursing and home health costs in old age.
Externalities. Externalities from insurance constitute another potential rationale for government
intervention. One possiblity is physical externalities, particularly in the case of health insurance,
which subsidizes the treamtent or prevention of infectious disease.15 Another is the possibility
of …scal externalities stemming from the Samaritan’s dilemna (Buchanan 1975). If an altruistic
society will provide charitable assistance to those experiencing adverse events ex post, this can
15

Physicial externalities may be substantial in some cases; in a developing country context, recent work has doc-

umented the enormous social returns in both the short and longer run to the subsidized de-worming of children
(Kremer and Miguel 2004, Baird et al., 2011).

25

reduce individuals’incentives to purchase insurance ex ante. Coate (1995) demonstrates that the
optimal transfer policy therefore involves in-kind transfers of insurance to address the ine¢ cient
under-insurance that arises in response to unconditional transfers. Ex post unconditional public
transfers are frequently observed in the context of health, natural disasters, and terrorism and thus
may deter ex ante insurance purchases in these markets to some extent. In health insurance,
researchers have documented the relationship between charity care and private insurance coverage
(e.g., Herring 2005) and the role of bankruptcy protection in reducing demand for high deductible
health insurance (Mahoney 2012). However, we have little evidence on the overall importance of
the Samaritan’s dilemma e¤ects as a motive for social insurance.
Optimization Failures. Another class of motivations for social insurance is a paternalistic
motive premised on imperfect optimization in individual insurance purchases. There is considerable
evidence that individuals do not adhere to the lifecycle expected utility model underlying traditional
models of risk and insurance. For instance, demand for insurance that covers very small risks with
high loads –such as toaster warranties, ‡ight insurance, or homeowners insurance deductibles (e.g.,
Sydnor 2010) – implies levels of risk aversion that are inconsistent with expected utility theory
(Rabin 2000). Barseghyan et al. (2012) argue that this excess demand for low deductibles is
explained by misperceptions of loss probabilities. The lack of demand for other types of insurance
such as annuities is also di¢ cult to explain in neoclassical models (e.g., Davido¤, Diamond, and
Brown 2005).
In the context of Medicare Part D – the 2006 addition to the Medicare program that allows
individuals to choose a subsidized prescription drug plan – there is also evidence that individuals
make suboptimal choices in choosing not just the level but also the characteristics of insurance
coverage. Abaluck and Gruber (2011) argue that many individuals choose sub-optimal drug
insurance plans in the Medicare Part D program given the risks they face. Kling et al. (2012)
implement a …eld experiment which suggests that these suboptimal choices in drug insurance plans
are due to “comparison frictions” – di¢ culty for consumers in using available information about
plan features to make choices. These are just some examples from a vast literature in psychology
and economics that has documented that individuals are prone to various biases such as impatience,
loss aversion, overcon…dence, and inattention.
The need to account for such biases is especially evident in dynamic models of temporary
shocks such as unemployment. As we discuss below, unemployment shocks are quite costly as
judged by ex-post measures of consumption-smoothing or liquidity e¤ects. Given these costs,
rational agents would build up bu¤er stocks to help cushion temporary shocks (Deaton 1991,
Carroll 1997). But in practice, most individuals build very limited bu¤er stocks. The median job
loser has less than $200 in liquid assets at the beginning of his unemployment spell (Chetty 2008).16
16

One potential explanation for low asset holdings is that individuals would save much more in the absence of

government-provided social insurance. However, empirical estimates of the impact of unemployment bene…t levels
on savings are relatively modest in magnitude (Engen and Gruber 2001) and increases in unemployment bene…ts
appear to substantially relax liquidity constraints in practice (Card, Chetty, Weber 2007, Chetty 2008).

These

…ndings indicate that individuals would not accumulate substantial bu¤er stocks even if social insurance bene…ts

26

Thus, it is di¢ cult to reconcile the ex-post costs of shocks with optimizing behavior even in an
environment without any private insurance markets, because self insurance would be adequate to
smooth most temporary shocks.17 Indeed, Lucas (1987) calculates that optimizing agents would
pay less than 1% of lifetime consumption to entirely eliminate business cycle ‡uctuations even
without any private insurance. Hence, the role for social insurance against temporary shocks
is quite limited in optimizing models. This suggests that imperfect optimization must be an
important motive for social insurance programs in practice. We brie‡y discuss recent work on
optimal social insurance with agents who do not optimize perfectly in Section 3.3.5.

3

Design of Public Insurance Programs

A large literature has analyzed the optimal government response to the failures in private insurance
markets discussed above. The goal of this literature is to …nd the optimal system in terms of trading
o¤ protection against risk with minimizing moral hazard. In practice, this problem has several
dimensions. Conditional on deciding to insure a risk such as unemployment, there are several
policy choices to be made. What level of bene…ts should be paid? Should bene…ts rise or fall over
an unemployment spell? Should the insurance plan be …nanced by taxing …rms or workers?
The traditional approach to answering such policy questions is to identify a model’s structural
primitives and conduct welfare analysis by simulating alternative policies. In social insurance,
Wolpin (1987), Hansen and I·mrohoro¼
glu (1992), Wang and Williamson (1996), and Hopenhayn
and Nicolini (1997) are in‡uential examples of such work. Lentz (2009) and Huggett and Parra
(2010) provide recent state-of-the-art applications. While the structural approach is in principle
the ideal method of analyzing policy, in practice it is di¢ cult to fully identify all the primitives of
complex dynamic models.
Because of this problem, recent studies have instead tackled the optimal policy problem using a
“su¢ cient statistic” approach, which we focus on here. This approach seeks formulas for optimal
policy that are a function of high-level empirically estimable elasticities and are relatively robust
to changes in the underlying model of behavior. The advantage of this approach is that it o¤ers
results about optimal policy that do not rely on the strong assumptions made in structural studies
for tractability and identi…cation. The cost is that it can only be used to analyze marginal changes
in policy, e.g., the impact of changing the level of bene…ts incrementally from its current observed
level. See Chetty (2009) for a more detailed discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of the
su¢ cient statistic approach.
Research on social insurance has focused primarily on identifying the optimal level of bene…ts.
We organize our discussion of the optimal level of bene…ts into three subsections. First, we analyze
a static model of insurance in which individuals live for a single period and face one risk. In this
were lower.
17

The lack of such bu¤er stock savings is even more di¢ cult to explain given that shocks such as unemployment

generate long-lasting, possibly permanent earnings losses (von Wachter, Song, and Manchester 2009).

27

static model, it is straightforward to derive an intuitive condition for the optimal level of bene…ts
that trades o¤ the moral hazard costs with the bene…ts of smaller consumption ‡uctuations.
Second, we show that this condition for the optimal level of bene…ts can be written in terms of
various empirically estimable parameters. We derive three representations of the formula discussed
in recent work: consumption-smoothing bene…ts, moral hazard vs. liquidity e¤ects, and changes in
reservation wages. We discuss empirical evidence on each of these parameters and their implications
for the optimal level of bene…ts.
Third, we analyze the implications of relaxing the assumptions made in the static model. Some
of the assumptions are inconsequential. For instance, the formulas obtained from the static model
carry over with minor modi…cations to more realistic dynamic models with endogenous savings,
borrowing constraints, and persistent uncertainty. But other extensions to the model –in particular, introducing features such that total private surplus is not maximized by agents’choices –have
signi…cant consequences. For example, if private markets provide insurance that also generates
moral hazard, the simple formulas no longer apply because of “multiple dealing”externalities. Similarly, if agents do not maximize their expected utilities because of behavioral failures, the formulas
again require modi…cation.
After discussing the literature on the optimal level of bene…ts, we review recent work on three
other aspects of optimal social insurance. First, we discuss work on using mandated savings
accounts instead of tax-and-transfer systems to help agents smooth consumption when they face
shocks. Next, we discuss imperfect takeup of social insurance programs and its implications for
optimal policy. Finally, we review recent work on the optimal path of bene…ts in dynamic models.
Unlike the work on the optimal level of bene…ts, this literature is primarily theoretical. We
therefore present brief summaries of some of the key results in this literature and discuss ways in
which theory could be connected to data to make further progress on these questions.
Most recent work on connecting theory to data in optimal social insurance has focused on
the case of unemployment insurance. Formal models of unemployment translate readily to most
other insurance programs such as worker’s compensation, disability, and catastrophic risks. One
exception is the analysis of social security. The models we consider below focus on redistribution
across states of nature for a given individual. Social security programs do insure against longevity
risk by providing annuities, but also have important e¤ects on the path of individuals’consumption
pro…les over their lifecycle. As a result, models of optimal social security typically focus on other
factors – such as discount rates and wealth accumulation for retirement – independent of risk
reduction. We do not consider models of optimal social security design here; see the chapter by
Feldstein and Liebman (2002) for a survey of these models. Gruber and Wise (1999) and Krueger
and Meyer (2002) summarize the existing evidence on the impacts of social security programs on
retirement behavior. Unlike other social insurance programs, the evidence on social security has not
been integrated as tightly with theoretical models to make quantitative statements about welfare
and optimal policy. We view this as a fertile area for future research and return to this issue in
the concluding section.

28

3.1

Optimal Bene…t Level in a Static Model

Setup. The simplest model of insurance is static and has two states, high (h) and low (l). These
states could re‡ect the risk of job loss (unemployment insurance), injury at work (Worker’s Compensation), or natural disasters (home insurance). Let wh denote the individual’s income in the
high state and wl < wh income in the low state. Individuals enter the model with exogenously
determined assets A. The government pays a bene…t b in the low state that is …nanced by an
(b) denote consumption
actuarially fair tax (b) = 1 e e b in the high state. Let ch = A + wh
in the high state and cl = A + wl + b denote consumption in the low state. Let v(c) denote the
agent’s utility as a function of consumption in the high state and u(c) utility in the low state. This
allows for the possibility that utility is state-dependent, e.g., agents may value consumption more
when healthy. We assume that both u and v are smooth and strictly concave.
A critical feature of the optimal social insurance problem is moral hazard. If individuals’
behaviors were not distorted by the provision of insurance, the planner would achieve the …rst best
by setting b to perfectly smooth marginal utilities, v 0 (ch ) = u0 (cl ). We model moral hazard by
assuming that the agent can control the probability of being in the bad state by exerting e¤ort
e at a cost (e). For instance, “e¤ort” could re‡ect spending time to search for a job, taking
precautions to avoid injury, or locating a house away from areas prone to natural disasters. We
choose units of e so that the probability of being in the high state is given by e 2 [0; 1].
Agent’s Problem. The agent chooses e¤ort e to maximize his expected utility:
max V (e) = ev(ch ) + (1
e

e)u(cl )

(e)

(9)

Importantly, we assume that the agent takes the tax and bene…t levels o¤ered by the government
( (b), b) as …xed when solving this maximization problem. This assumption is a convenient
analytical approximation to capture behavior in an economy with a large number of agents, in
which the impact of any single agent’s choice of e on the tax rate (b) is negligible.18 The …rst
order condition for the maximization problem in (9) is:
v(ch )

u(cl ) =

0

(e).

(10)

Intuitively, the level of e that maximizes V (e) equates the marginal bene…t of an extra unit of e¤ort,
given by the di¤erence in utilities in the low and high states, with the marginal cost of exerting an
extra unit of e¤ort. Let e(b) denote the agent’s optimal choice of e¤ort given a bene…t level b.
Planner’s Problem. The social planner’s objective is to choose the bene…t level b that maximizes
the agent’s expected utility, taking into account the agent’s endogenous choice of e¤ort:
18

Formally, consider an economy with i = 1; :::; N identical agents solving (9) and facing idiosyncratic risks. For

1
each agent, the impact of changes in his own e¤ort on t(b) are proportional to de
. For the planner, the aggregate
db N
N
P 1 de
= de
. As N grows large, the impact of agent i’s e¤ort on t(b) approaches 0
impact of changes in e¤ort is
N db
db
i=1

and can therefore be ignored when solving the private optimization problem in (9). However, the impact of changes
in e¤ort on the planner’s problem in (11) are una¤ected by N .

29

max W (b) = ev(A + wh

(b)) + (1

b

e)u(A + wl + b)

(e)

(11)

s.t. e = e(b)
Di¤erentiating (11) and using the …rst-order condition for e in (10) gives
dW (b)
= (1
db
= (1

d
ev 0 (ch )
db
"1 e;b 0
e)fu0 (cl ) (1 +
)v (ch )g
e

e)u0 (cl )

(12)

where "1 e;b = d(1db e) 1 b e denotes the elasticity of the probability of being in the bad state (which
can be measured as the unemployment rate, rate of health insurance claims, etc.) with respect to
the bene…t level.19 Notice that in this expression, the behavioral response "1 e;b enters only via its
impact on the government budget constraint t(b). The direct impact of changes in e on the agent’s
private welfare is second-order because the agent has already set e at the optimum that maximizes
his private welfare ( @W
@e (e(b)) = 0). This envelope condition plays a critical role in generalizing
(12) to richer, more realistic models, as we discuss in Section 3.3.1.
Equation (12) does not have a cardinal interpretation because it is scaled in utils. One natural
cardinal metric is to normalize the welfare gain from a $1 (balanced budget) increase in the size of
the government insurance program by the welfare gain from raising the wage bill in the high state
by $1:
MW (b) =
=

dW
e)
db (b)=(1
dW
dwh (b)=e
u0 (cl ) v 0 (ch )
v 0 (ch )

"1

e;b

e

(13)

The …rst term in (13) measures the gap in marginal utilities between the high and low states, which
quanti…es the welfare gain from transferring an additional dollar from the high to low state. The
second term measures the net cost to the government of transferring this $1 across states due to
behavioral responses. The second term arises because the agent does not internalize the …scal
externality that he imposes on the government budget when changing his level of e¤ort. This
creates a wedge between the private return to e¤ort and the social return to e¤ort, generating a
welfare loss.
At the optimal bene…t level b , MW (b) = 0 and hence
"1 e;b
u0 (cl ) v 0 (ch )
=
v 0 (ch )
e

(14)

This expression is a simple variant of Baily’s (1978) classic formula for the optimal level of social
insurance. It captures a simple – and, as we show below, quite robust – intuition about optimal
19

This elasticity measures the total e¤ect of an increase in bene…ts on e, taking into account the tax increase needed

to …nance the higher level of bene…ts.

30

policy: the optimal bene…t level equates the marginal gains from a smoother consumption path
with the marginal cost, measured by the behavioral response in e¤ort. Note that (14) is a condition
that must hold at the optimal bene…t level b but is not an explicit formula for the level of bene…ts
because all the parameters in (14) are endogenous to b.
Another way to write (14) is in terms of the replacement rate, r = b=wh :
r
1

r

=

e
u0 (cl ) v 0 (ch )
v 0 (ch )
"1 e;wh

(15)
b

where "1 e;wh b = d(1db e) w1h eb denotes the elasticity of the probability of being in the bad state
with respect to the net wage wh b. This formula bears a close resemblance to the inverse elasticity
rules that are familiar from the literature on optimal commodity taxation (Auerbach 1985). Indeed,
the optimal social insurance problem is formally identical to an optimal Ramsey taxation problem
(Chetty and Saez 2010).
It is important to note that equation (15) is not an explicit formula for the optimal replacement
rate r . The reason is again that the parameters on the right hand side are all functions of r. The
0
0
very purpose of raising r is to reduce u (cul )0 (cvh )(ch ) . Moreover, the elasticity "1 e;wh b may also vary
with r because of liquidity e¤ects (Chetty 2008), as we explain below.
Even in this simple static model, calculating the marginal welfare gain (13) empirically requires
0
0
some work. The challenge is estimating the gap in marginal utilities u (cvl )0 (cvh )(ch ) , which requires
knowledge of the utility function as well as assets A and wage rates, which may be unobserved by
the econometrician. We now discuss recent approaches to tackling this problem.

3.2

Su¢ cient Statistics Implementation

The modern literature on social insurance has developed three approaches to recover the marginal
utility gap in (13): studying consumption ‡uctuations (Gruber 1997), liquidity and substitution
e¤ects in e¤ort (Chetty 2008), and reservation wages (Shimer and Werning 2007). We present
simple derivations of each approach here and review empirical evidence in each context.
3.2.1

Consumption Smoothing

Gruber (1997) implements (13) under the assumption that utility is state independent, i.e. v = u.
We …rst present Gruber’s approach under this assumption and then show how it can be extended to
allow for state-dependent utility. Taking a quadratic approximation to the utility function yields:
u0 (cl ) u0 (ch )
=
u0 (ch )
00

c
ch

(b)

(16)

(ch )
where = uu0 (c
ch is the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion evaluated at ch and c = ch cl .
h)
Plugging this expression into (13), one obtains the following expression for the marginal welfare
gain of raising b:
"1 e;b
c
MW (b) =
(b)
.
ch
e

31

This equation shows that risk aversion , the observed consumption drop from the high to low state
c
ch , and the elasticity "1 e;b are together su¢ cient to calculate the marginal welfare consequences
of changing bene…ts from the current level. It follows that estimating these statistics is adequate
to determine whether the current bene…t level is too high or low if the welfare function is concave.
To go further and calculate the optimal level of bene…ts, Gruber estimates the relationship between
the size of the consumption drop chc (b) and the level of bene…ts b. He posits that the e¤ect of
bene…ts on consumption is a linear function of the replacement rate r = b=wh :
c
ch

(b) '

log c =

+ r

(17)

In this speci…cation,
measures the drop in consumption that would occur absent government
intervention while measures the slope of the consumption function with respect to the bene…t
level. Putting this equation together with (16) and (13) yields the following expression for the
marginal welfare gain from increasing the bene…t level:
MW (b) = ( + r)

"1

e;b

e

.

(18)

Gruber solves for the level of r that sets (18) equal to zero to identify the optimal replacement
rate.20 Implementing this formula empirically requires estimates of how consumption ‡uctuates
around shocks as a function of bene…t levels ( ; ), the curvature of the utility function , and the
elasticity that measures distortions in behavior "1 e;b . There are now several studies estimating
each of these parameters for various social insurance programs; we brie‡y review some illustrative
examples of quasi-experimental studies from this literature here.
Evidence on Consumption Smoothing. An early study by Hamermesh (1982) investigates the
impacts of unemployment insurance on consumption using cross-sectional consumption data from
the Consumer Expenditure Survey. Because Hamermesh does not have panel data, he cannot
study changes in consumption around unemployment shocks. Instead, he compares individuals
who are currently unemployed and receiving UI with those who are employed. He …nds evidence
that the marginal propensity to consume out of UI bene…ts is signi…cantly higher than out of other
sources of income, which he interprets as evidence supporting a consumption-smoothing role of UI.
Cochrane (1991) improves upon the analysis in Hamermesh (1982) by using panel data from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Using panel data, he studies how unemployment shocks
a¤ect within-household food consumption ‡uctuations. This is a signi…cant advance over crosshousehold comparisons, which are likely to be plagued by omitted variable bias. Cochrane …nds
that unemployment shocks are imperfectly insured –i.e., > 0 in (17) –implying that there is a potential role for government intervention via unemployment insurance. However, Cochrane does not
estimate the extent to which providing insurance through a UI system would a¤ect consumption.21
20

This approach assumes that the other parameters in (18) –namely

and "1

e;b

–do not vary with b. In practice,

these parameters are likely to vary with b. For example, the liquidity e¤ects documented e.g., in Chetty (2008) imply
that "1

e;b

is likely to fall as b rises, as liquidity constraints bind more tightly when b is low.

Hence, one should

ideally estimate all the su¢ cient statistics in (18) as a function of b to calculate the optimal bene…t level.
21

Cochrane’s conclusion that insurance markets for unemployment are incomplete rests on the assumption that

32

Gruber (1997) exploits variation in UI bene…t levels that is driven by state law changes to
identify
using data on food consumption from the PSID. By controlling ‡exibly for crosssectional determinants of the level of UI bene…ts (such as prior wage rates) and simulating UI
bene…ts based on state laws, Gruber isolates variation in UI bene…ts that is plausibly orthogonal to
other determinants of consumption. Gruber’s point estimates of (17) are = 0:24 and = 0:28.
These estimates imply that consumption drops on average by 10% given existing UI replacement
rates, which are approximately 50% of wages. In the absence of UI, consumption would drop by
24%. Hence, UI plays a signi…cant role in smoothing consumption. However, a 10 percent increase
in UI replacement rates generates only a 2.8 percentage point reduction in the consumption drop.
This implies that part of the increase in UI bene…ts is crowded out by other responses, such as
reductions in savings (Engen and Gruber 2001) and changes in spousal labor supply (Cullen and
Gruber 2000).22
Gruber’s approach has since become the benchmark quasi-experimental strategy for analyzing
how social insurance a¤ects consumption.23 For instance, Browning and Crossley (2001) implement
a similar analysis using data on a broader set of consumption goods from Canada. They …nd that
the average impact of increases in UI bene…ts on consumption is quite modest, but the impacts are
especially large among a subset of households that are likely to be liquidity constrained. Gertler and
Gruber (2002) show that severe health shocks have large e¤ects on consumption using panel data
from Indonesia and that bu¤ering these shocks by reducing income ‡uctuations would signi…cantly
reduce consumption ‡uctuations. Bronchetti (2012) implements an approach analogous to Gruber
(1997) to the Worker’s Compensation program in the U.S. and again …nds evidence that increases
in Worker’s Compensation bene…ts signi…cantly increase consumption levels while individuals are
out of work due to injury.
While the evidence that has been accumulated clearly demonstrates that insurance markets are
incomplete – i.e., consumption does fall when individuals are hit with shocks – the consumptionsmoothing role of social insurance programs is less clear. We can be con…dent given available
evidence that > 0 for at least a subset of households, but we have very imprecise estimates of .
For instance, the estimates of from Gruber (1997) have a con…dence interval spanning = 0:08
to 0:48. The imprecision and instability of estimates arise from the fact that consumption is very
di¢ cult to measure accurately due to noise and recall errors and is typically available for relatively
small samples. Obtaining a more precise understanding of the consumption-smoothing bene…ts of
utility is not state-dependent. If utility is state-dependent, consumption may fall during unemployment spells simply
becaues the marginal utility of consumption is lower when not working.

Gruber’s (1997) approach provides more

de…nitive evidence of incomplete insurance by using variation in UI bene…t amounts rather than simply quantifying
the size of consumption drops during unemployment.
22

If ch ' wh , as we would expect with low unemployment risk, then a 10 percentage point increase in the replacement

rate would lead to a 10 percentage point reduction in the consumption drop absent crowd-out.
23

Another prominent approach is to analyze the impacts of income ‡uctuations on consumption using statistical

decompositions of the income process into permanent and transitory components and examining the covariances of
these components with consumption (see e.g., Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston 2008). Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010)
provide a comprehensive review of this work.

33

insurance will likely require administrative data on consumption, e.g., from credit-card databases,
scanner data, or value-added tax registers.
Empirical studies of consumption smoothing have focused on the short-run drop in consumption
from employment to unemployment. We show below that this short-run consumption drop is
what matters for calculating optimal unemployment bene…t levels using (18) irrespective of how
consumption evolves after the individual …nds a new job. However, it is important to recognize that
long-term impacts of temporary shocks on consumption are also signi…cant. von Wachter, Song,
and Manchester (2009) show that unemployment shocks due to mass layo¤s have large, permanent
impacts on earnings. Given that consumption must converge to income in the long run for all
workers except the few with substantial wealth before job loss, this result strongly suggests that
even temporary unemployment shocks have long-lasting e¤ects. If shocks have persistent impacts
on consumption, the optimal insurance policy may not be just to provide bene…ts while agents
are out of work, but rather a wage insurance system that insures long-lasting earnings losses, as
proposed e.g., by Lalonde (2007).24 An interesting direction for further work would be to apply
the methods reviewed here to analyze optimal wage insurance policies.
Evidence on Distortions in Behavior. The literature on measuring behavioral responses to social
insurance programs –the impacts of unemployment insurance on unemployment durations, health
insurance on health expenditures, disability insurance on labor force participation rates –has a long
tradition that predates the theoretical work on social insurance discussed here. We have much
more evidence on the distortions created by insurance programs than their consumption-smoothing
bene…ts because of data availability. For instance, administrative data on unemployment durations
must be collected in order to make UI payments, making it much easier to study the impacts of UI
on durations than on consumption.
There are many excellent surveys of the literature on how social insurance a¤ects behavior; see
e.g., Krueger and Meyer (2002) for a review of work on how UI, DI, and Worker’s Compensation
a¤ect labor supply and Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) or Cutler (2002) for a review on how health
insurance a¤ects the demand for medical care. Here, we brie‡y discuss selected …ndings from
the literature that have been used to inform theoretical calculations of optimal bene…t levels using
su¢ cient statistic formulas.
In the context of unemployment, most studies have focused on measuring the impacts of increases in UI bene…ts on the duration of unemployment. The probability of being laid o¤ could also
respond to the level of bene…ts. The literature has focused less on this issue because UI bene…ts are
typically at least partially experience rated, meaning that …rms bear the unemployment insurance
cost of laying o¤ workers. In a perfectly experience rated system, changes in the level of bene…ts
do not distort incentives to lay o¤ workers. However, with imperfect experience rating, changes
in the level of UI bene…ts can also a¤ect unemployment rates by distorting …rms’layo¤ decisions
24

To be clear, persistent wage shocks do not invalidate the use of temporary consumption drops to analyze optimal

UI, because the observed consumption drop incorporates all future changes in income in an optimizing model (see
Section 3.3.1). However, peristent wage shocks raise the possibility that the optimal insurance policy is not merely
to provide bene…ts while the agent is out of work but also after he is re-employed.

34

(Feldstein 1978, Blanchard and Tirole 2008). While studies such as Topel (1983) and Andersen
and Meyer (1993) have documented signi…cant e¤ects of experience rating on …rm layo¤s, there
is relatively little recent work on this issue. Analyzing whether social insurance programs a¤ect
the rate at which …rms hire and lay o¤ workers using modern quasi-experimental designs is a very
promising area for further research.
The modern literature estimating the impact of UI on durations has adopted the hazard model
speci…cations used by Meyer (1990). Meyer estimates semi-parametric models for the hazard of
exiting unemployment as a function of UI bene…ts and other variables using administrative data
on the duration of UI claims. He exploits variation in UI bene…ts coming from di¤erential changes
in bene…ts over time across states, as in Gruber (1997). Meyer …nds that higher UI bene…ts
reduce the hazard of exiting unemployment signi…cantly, with an implied elasticity above 0.8 in
most speci…cations.
Subsequent studies have obtained qualitatively similar results using a variety of di¤erent data
sources. For instance, Lalive, van Ours, and Zweimuller (2006) use a regression-discontunity
design in administrative data from Austria and …nd that UI bene…t increases signi…cantly raise
unemployment durations, although to a lesser extent than suggest by Meyer’s estimates. Chetty
(2008) estimates elasticities of approximately 0.5 using survey data from the Survey of Income and
Program Participation. Landais (2012) replicates Meyer’s analysis using a regression-kink design
and estimates smaller elasticities, around 0.3. In general, the literature has settled on a consensus
estimate of "1 e;b for UI and unemployment durations of about 0.5 (Krueger and Meyer 2002).
Meyer (1990) and Katz and Meyer (1990) document a spike in hazard rates when unemployment
bene…ts expire. This is typically viewed as prima facie evidence that UI distorts search behavior,
as it suggests that people time their unemployment exits to coincide with the expiry of social
assistance. This spike in unemployment exit hazards in the weeks prior to bene…t exhaustion is
now a well established empirical regularity; see Card, Chetty, and Weber (2007a) for a review of
this literature.
However, Card, Chetty, and Weber (2007a) use data from Austria to show that the spike in job…nding rates when UI bene…ts expire is far smaller than the spike in unemployment exit rates. In
Austria, as in most other European countries, individuals can stay on the UI system to receive job
…nding assistance and other bene…ts even after their bene…ts expire, but the majority of individuals
choose to drop out of the UI system when their bene…ts end. Most of these individuals, however,
remain unemployed even after they leave the UI system. In the U.S., individuals may choose not
to collect their last unemployment check because it is often a small leftover amount, which would
create the appearance of a surge in hazard rates in the weeks before bene…ts expire. Because the
margin relevant for calculating the e¢ ciency costs of the UI system are time spent working rather
than time spent on the UI system, this evidence suggests that the original sharp spikes documented
in the literature likely overstate the degree of moral hazard created by UI. The more general lesson
is that it is crucial to measure distortions in real economic choices rather than simply use measures
that are well recorded in administrative databases.
Analogous behavioral responses have been documented for other social insurance programs
35

beyond unemployment insurance. Meyer, Viscusi, and Durbin (1995) use di¤erential changes
in worker’s compensation bene…ts across states to show that higher bene…t levels induce injured
workers to stay out of work longer before returning to work. Gruber (2000) analyzes a disability
insurance expansion in Canada that raised bene…t levels for individuals in all provinces except
Quebec. He …nds that this bene…t increase signi…cantly reduced labor force participation rates for
males ages 45-59, implying an elasticity of the non-participation rate with respect to DI bene…ts of
0.25. Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (forthcoming) use random variation in assignment to disability
insurance examiners to estimate that eligibility for DI reduces labor force participation rates for
the marginal entrant to DI by approximately 20 percentage points, with signi…cantly smaller e¤ects
for those with more severe impairments. In the context of health insurance, the RAND health
insurance experiment (Manning et al. 1987) and Oregon health insurance lotteries (Finkelstein et
al. 2011) have demonstrated that increases in consumer cost-sharing signi…cantly reduce health
care expenditures.
Evidence on Risk Aversion. Economists have estimated risk aversion using a broad array of
techniques. The most direct and widely used method of estimating risk aversion is to assess
preferences over gambles. Using empirical estimates of the distribution of risk and an expected
utility model with a speci…c functional form for utility such as constant relative risk aversion, one
can back out the value of implied by individuals’choices over risky streams of income. Early work
in asset pricing inferred risk aversion from portfolio choice and asset returns in standard asset pricing
models (e.g., Mehra and Prescott 1985, Kocherlakota 1996). More recent work has used responses
to hypothetical large-stake gambles (Barsky et. al. 1997), automobile insurance choices (Cohen
and Einav 2007), risk-taking in game shows (Metrick 1995), and home insurance deductible choices
(Sydnor 2010) to infer risk aversion. There is little consensus on the value of from this literature:
the estimates range from 1 to well above 10 in the case of deductible choices and asset prices. One
explanation of this discrepancy in estimates is that they re‡ect the behavior of di¤erent subgroups
of the population. Barseghyan, Prince and Teitelbaum (2011) and Einav et al. (forthcoming) test
this explanation by examining the risk preferences of the same individuals in di¤erent domains of
choice, such as health insurance deductibles and 401(k) portfolio allocations. While individuals’
risk preferences are correlated across the domains, there is substantial heterogeneity in estimated
risk aversion from each choice.
All of these estimates of risk aversion are based on ex-ante choices, which requires that individuals’subjective assessment of risks (e.g., the probability of a large ‡uctuation in stock prices) and
other parameters are consistent with the model assumed by the researcher as well as the maintained
assumptions of expected utility theory. Chetty (2006a) proposes a di¤erent method of estimating
that does not rely on subjective probabilities. He shows that expected utility models imply a
direct connection between the curvature of the utility function over consumption and the impacts of
wage changes on labor supply. Intuitively, if the utility function is very curved, individuals should
become sated with goods as their income rises, and should choose to work less as their wages rise.
The fact that uncompensated wage increases almost always raise labor supply in practice implies an
upper bound on the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion of approximately 1 without any assumptions
36

about the structure of the utility function.25 Because this method of estimating risk aversion uses
the same types of ex-post data used to measure "1 e;b and cc , it o¤ers a more direct estimate of
the curvature of utility that matters for evaluating the welfare cost of shocks.26
Unfortunately, even this ex-post measure of risk aversion varies signi…cantly across contexts.
Chetty and Szeidl (2007) develop a theoretical model of risk preferences in which individuals have
“consumption commitments” –goods such as housing or …xed service contracts which can only be
adjusted by paying …xed transaction costs. In this environment, individuals have ampli…ed risk
aversion over moderate-stake shocks because of their commitments. To understand the intuition,
consider a two good model in which the agent spends half his income on housing (which can only
be adjusted by paying a transaction cost) and half on food (which is freely adjustable). When
facing a shock such as temporary job loss that forces them to reduce expenditure by say 10%, most
individuals will rationally choose to bear the shock by cutting food consumption by 20% in order to
avoid having to move out of their house. This concentrated reduction in food expenditures raises
marginal utility sharply, amplifying risk aversion. Chetty and Szeidl con…rm this prediction of
the model in the PSID data used by Cochrane and Gruber: homeowners who become unemployed
do not change housing consumption but cut back on food consumption signi…cantly, while renters
(who face lower adjustment costs) diversify the shocks more broadly by reducing consumption of
both food and housing. Chetty and Szeidl’s analysis suggests that the value of relevant for
shocks such as unemployment could be as high as = 4 because of …xed commitments. However,
for large shocks such as permanent disability that induce households to abandon commitments, the
relevant value of could be closer to 1.
Because of the tremendous uncertainty about the appropriate value of , researchers typically
report welfare calculations for a range of values of . Gruber implements the formula in (18)
using his own estimates of the consumption smoothing response and estimates of "1 e;b from Meyer
(1990). He …nds that with a coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion < 2, increasing the UI bene…t
level above the levels observed in his data (roughly 50% of the wage) would lead to substantial
welfare losses. Extrapolating out-of-sample based on the assumption that "1 e;b remains constant
and the consumption function is given by (17), Gruber shows that it is di¢ cult to justify having a
positive level of UI bene…ts (b > 0) with risk aversion < 2 given his estimates of the consumptionsmoothing bene…t of UI. With = 4, however, the optimal bene…t level could be as large as 50%.
Bronchetti (2012) presents estimates of the optimal level of Worker’s Compensation bene…ts based
on a range of values for using the formula in (18). She concludes that the optimal level of worker’s
compensation bene…ts is likely to be below the current level of 68%, but her estimates of the optimal
replacement rate range from 26% to 61% as risk aversion varies from = 1 to = 4. Bound et
al. (2004) calculate the welfare gains from the current Disability Insurance program under varying
25

If utility is non-separable, one must bound the degree of complementarity between consumption and leisure in

order to bound risk aversion using this method. Chetty uses the estimates of Cochrane (1991) and Gruber (1997)
to place an upper bound on this complementarity parameter and shows that even at this upper bound,
26

< 1:25.

Conversely, however, this approach is less likely to yield accurate predictions about ex-ante choices in risky

environments.

37

degrees of risk aversion taking account of heterogeneity across individuals. Based on simulations
of the bene…ts of DI, they conclude that the optimal level of bene…ts is likely somewhat lower than
current levels, but the optimal level of bene…ts again is quite sensitive to assumptions about .
Estimating risk aversion accurately is particularly important because the size of the consumption
drop cc is inversely related to , as shown by Chetty and Looney (2006). As a result, the
welfare gains from insurance could be large even if consumption drops are small, as documented by
Townsend (1994) and others in developing economies. Intuitively, highly risk averse households –
e.g., those facing subsistence constraints –are likely to have very smooth consumption paths because
they will go to any e¤ort (e.g., by taking their children out of school in developing countries) in
order to subsist. But these e¤orts to smooth consumption are very costly – i.e., (e) is highly
convex. Chetty and Looney show that the marginal gains from insurance, given by cc , could
actually be larger in economies with smoother consumption paths if that smoothness is driven by
greater risk aversion.
State-Dependent Utility. When utility is state-dependent, the consumption-smoothing approach requires estimation of an additional parameter that measures the degree to which marginal
utilities vary across states. With state-dependent utility, the quadratic approximation used above
yields
c
u0 (cl ) v 0 (ch )
= v
+
0
v (ch )
c
v 00 (ch )ch
v =
v 0 (ch ) denotes the coe¢
u0 (cl ) v 0 (cl )
measures the degree of
v 0 (ch )

where

cient of relative risk aversion in the employed state and

=
state-dependence in marginal utilities. The parameter
answers the question, “starting from equal consumption in the low and high states, how much
would the agent pay to reallocate $1 of consumption from the high state to the low state?” If
utility is not state-dependent, the answer to this question would be = 0. If the marginal utility
of consumption is higher when the agent is in the low state, the willingness to pay is > 0.27 The
parameter directly enters the formula for MW (b) in (18) as an additive term. If > 0, insurance
has greater value because it is transferring resources to a state where money has more value at any
given level of consumption.
Finkelstein, Luttmer and Notowigdo (2009) describe some approaches to estimating : Broadly
speaking, can be estimated based on either choice data that reveals individuals’ demand for
moving resources across states or based on observed utility changes as states change. For example,
the extent to which agents voluntarily choose to have more or less consumption in high vs. low
states reveals in an environment with perfect insurance. Unfortunately, most individuals are
not perfectly insured in practice – if they were, there would be no reason for social insurance
to begin with! – and it is rare to be able to observe consumption across state changes in data
(e.g., health shocks or unemployment spells). Absent perfect insurance, one can try to focus on
subgroups that are better insured. This requires assumptions about the degree of insurance one
has. Moreover, since the life cycle budget constraint must be satis…ed, inferring state dependence
27

Technically, one must measure the willingness to pay in the high state, as v 0 (ch ) appears in the denominator of

.

38

from the consumption ‡uctuations of individuals who experience di¤erent unexpected shocks (such
as health events) requires strong assumptions about the nature of bequest motives. For example,
Lillard and Weiss (1997) estimate a structural model of health shocks and use data on consumption
trajectories to identify under the assumption that the marginal utility of bequests does not depend
on health. They estimate > 0, i.e. positive state dependence for health and disability.28
An alternative approach to identify state-dependence that does not require choice data from
environments with full insurance is to use data on subjective well-being. Intuitively, by estimating
whether a cash grant has a larger impact on happiness in the low vs. high state, one can learn about
. The challenge in implementing this approach is that subjective well being measures have no
inherent cardinal interpretation, whereas is a cardinal parameter.29 One must therefore choose
a cardinal scale for happiness to estimate using data on subjective well-being. One approach is
to scale happiness so that one obtains estimates of the coe¢ cient of relative risk aversion that
match estimates from choice data. Finkelstein, Luttmer, and Notowidigdo (2008) implement such
an approach and conclude based on survey data that < 0, i.e. the marginal utility of consumption
is higher when individuals are healthy. In sum, there is currently little consensus in the literature
on the sign of for shocks such as unemployment, disability, and sickness, let alone its magnitude
in these contexts. We view this as an important but challenging area for future work.
Because optimal bene…t calculations are highly sensitive to the assumed value of and , more
recent studies have sought alternative techniques for recovering the gap in marginal utilities that
do not require estimates of these parameters. We now turn to these alternative approaches.
3.2.2

Liquidity vs. Moral Hazard

Chetty (2008a) shows that the gap in marginal utilities in (13) can be inferred from the comparative
statics of e¤ort choice, yielding a formula for optimal bene…ts that does not require any data on
consumption or risk preferences. Recall that the …rst order condition for e¤ort in our static model
is 0 (e) = v(ch ) u(cl ). Now consider the e¤ect of an exogenous cash grant (such as a severance
payment to job losers) on e¤ort, holding …xed the tax :
@e=@A = fv 0 (ch )

u0 (cl )g=

00

(e)

0

The e¤ect of increasing the bene…t level on e¤ort (again holding
@e=@b =

u0 (cl )=

00

(19)

…xed) is:

(e)

(20)

Finally, the e¤ect of increasing the wage in the high state on e¤ort is:
@e=@wh = v 0 (ch )=
28

00

(e)

(21)

In a di¤erent context, Browning and Crossley’s (2001) …nding that unemployment shocks have little impact on

consumption for individuals with high levels of assets suggests that

may be 0 for unemployment (i.e. no state

dependence for leisure).
29

For instance, suppose giving an agent $1,000 increases his reported happiness from 2 to 3 in the low state and 7

to 9 in the high state. One cannot identify

without knowing whether an increase in happiness from 2 to 3 translates

into a smaller or larger welfare gain than an increase in happiness from 7 to 9.

39

Combining (19) and (20), we see that the ratio of the “liquidity”e¤ect (@e=@A) to the “substitution”
e¤ect (@e=@wh = @e=@A @e=@b) recovers the gap in marginal utilities:
u0 (cl ) v 0 (ch )
@e=@A
=
0
v (ch )
@e=@A @e=@b
Plugging this expression into (13) yields the following expression for the welfare gain from increasing
the bene…t level:
"1 e;b
@e=@A
MW (b) =
(22)
@e=@A @e=@b
e
In this formula, the degree to which marginal utilities ‡uctuate across states is identi…ed from the
relative size of liquidity and moral hazard e¤ects in the impact of bene…t levels on e¤ort.30 In a
model with perfect consumption smoothing, the liquidity e¤ect @e=@A = 0, because a cash grant
raises v(ch ) and u(cl ) by the same amount. Note that unlike the consumption-smoothing method
above, this approach does not require estimation of the degree of risk aversion or state-dependence
in utility.31
One intuition for the liquidity vs. moral hazard formula comes from familiar results from price
theory. The impact of an increase in b on e can be decomposed into two terms, analogous to a
Slutsky decomposition: @e=@b = @e=@A @e=@wh . The …rst term is analogous to an income e¤ect,
and re‡ects the fact that higher bene…ts also raise agents’cash-on-hand and thus reduce the supply
of e¤ort. The second term is a pure substitution (price) e¤ect and arises from the distortion in
marginal incentives created by the social insurance program. The substitution e¤ect is e¢ ciency
reducing because it re‡ects second-best behavior arising from the wedge between private and social
incentives. In contrast, the liquidity e¤ect is e¢ ciency enhancing because it allows the agent to
choose a level of e that is closer to what he would choose with complete markets. The size of the
liquidity e¤ect measures the extent to which insurance markets are incomplete. The ratio of the
liquidity e¤ect to the distortionary substitution e¤ect thus captures the marginal bene…t of social
insurance.
Another way to understand (22) is that it uses revealed preference to value the bene…ts of
insurance. Consider an application to health insurance. The e¤ect of a lump-sum cash grant on
health care consumption reveals the extent to which health insurance permits the agent to attain a
more socially desirable allocation. If the agent chooses to spend a lump-sum grant on buying a new
car instead of purchasing more healthcare, we infer that the agent only spends more on health care
when health insurance bene…ts are increased because of the price subsidy for doing so. In this case,
30

tax

A technical issue which arises in empirical implementation of (22) is that
…xed, whereas the elasticity "1

e;b

must be measured while permitting

@e
@b

must be measured holding the

to vary.

Instead of attempting to

estimate both parameters, Chetty uses numerical simulations to show that the e¤ect of a UI bene…t increase on job
…nding rates is virtually identical whether or not UI taxes are held …xed. This is because the fraction of unemployed
individuals is quite small, making UI tax rates very low.
31

If utility is not state dependent, one could infer the agent’s degree of risk aversion

vs. liquidity e¤ects and the consumption drop:

=

@e=@A
=(
@e=@A @e=@b

from the size of moral hazard

c=c). This restriction, which is closely related

to the formula for risk aversion in Chetty (2006a), could be evaluated empirically in future work.

40

health insurance simply creates ine¢ ciency by distorting the private cost of health care below the
social cost, implying dW
db < 0. In contrast, if the agent raises his health expenditures substantially
even when he receives a non-distortionary lump sum cash grant, we infer that insurance permits
him to make a more (socially) optimal choice, i.e. the choice he would make if insurance market
failures could be alleviated without distorting incentives. The liquidity vs. moral hazard approach
in (22) thus identi…es the policy that is best from the libertarian criterion of correcting market
failures as revealed by individual choice.
It follows from equation (22) that larger elasticities "1 e;b do not necessarily mean that social
insurance is less desirable, a point emphasized by Nyman (2003) in the context of health insurance.
@e
It matters whether a higher value of "1 e;b comes from a larger liquidity ( @A
) or moral hazard
@e
( @wh ) component. To the extent that comes from a liquidity e¤ect, insurance reduces the need
for agents to make suboptimal choices driven by insu¢ cient ability to smooth consumption. In
contrast, if "1 e;b is large primarily because of a moral hazard e¤ect, insurance is distorting incentives. For instance, the reductions in labor force participation caused by disability insurance
documented by Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2011) may not be undesirable. If DI helps individuals whose marginal product is lower than their disutility of work, this behavioral response is
welfare-improving.
Evidence on Liquidity vs. Moral Hazard. The advantage of this formula relative to (18) is that it
can be implemented purely using data on e (e.g., unemployment durations or health expenditures).
Chetty (2008) implements (22) using survey data from the U.S. He estimates @e
@b using data from the
Survey of Income and Program Participation, following the speci…cations in Meyer (1990). Using
the SIPP data, Chetty shows that individuals who have low levels of assets prior to job loss exhibit
much higher levels of @e
@b than those with higher levels of assets. This suggests that a signi…cant
part of the impact of UI bene…ts on durations may be driven by a liquidity e¤ect. Chetty then
@e
by studying the e¤ects of lump-sum severance payments on unemployment durations
estimates @A
using data from a survey of UI exhaustees conducted by Mathematica in collaboration with the
Department of Labor. He …nds that individuals who receive lump-sum severance payments have
signi…cantly longer unemployment durations, especially if they have low levels of assets prior to job
loss. Using his estimates, Chetty calculates the welfare gain of raising the UI bene…t level from
the current replacement rate of approximately 50% of wages. He …nds that the welfare gains from
raising b are small but positive, suggesting that the current bene…t level is slightly below but near
the optimum.
Chetty’s (2008) analysis relies on cross-sectional variation across individuals in severance pay,
and therefore rests on the strong identi…cation assumption that severance recipients and nonrecipients are comparable. More recent studies have documented similar results using research
designs that make weaker assumptions. Card, Chetty, and Weber (2007b) use a regressiondiscontinuity design that exploits a universal cuto¤ for severance pay eligibility based on job tenure
in Austria. Using administrative data for the universe of job losers in Austria, they show that
individuals laid o¤ just after the tenure cuto¤ – who receive 2 months of wages as a lump sum
severance payment as a result –have unemployment durations that are about 10 days longer than
41

individuals laid o¤ just before the cuto¤. They compare these liquidity e¤ects to the impacts of UI
bene…t extensions using a similar RD design and show that the size of liquidity e¤ects is large relative to the impact of bene…t extensions, implying that many unemployed individuals are liquidity
constrained. Centeno and Novo (2009) present evidence that liquidity-constrained households are
more sensitive to UI bene…t changes using a regression-discontinuity design in Portugal. Lalumia
(2011) shows that individuals who happen to be laid o¤ after they receive a tax refund (and have
more cash-on-hand) have longer unemployment durations relative to individuals laid o¤ at other
times of the year.
There is less evidence on liquidity e¤ects in other insurance programs because of the relatively recent development of these formulas and because researchers have not yet formulated quasi@e
for many programs. One exception is Nyman
experimental designs to estimate liquidity e¤ects @A
(2003), who presents considerable anecdotal evidence and theoretical arguments suggesting that
liquidity e¤ects play a very important role in health insurance. The bene…ts of health insurance
are extremely di¢ cult to quantify, making the liquidity-based revealed preference approach particularly attractive in that context. Finding research designs to identify liquidity e¤ects in health
and other insurance programs is thus a very promising area for further work.
3.2.3

Reservation Wages

Shimer and Werning (2007) show that the gap in marginal utilities can be recovered from the
comparative statics of reservation wages in a standard model of job search. They analyze a model
in which the probability of …nding a job, e, is determined by the agent’s decision to accept or reject
a wage o¤er rather than by search e¤ort. Wage o¤ers are drawn from a distribution F (w). If the
agent rejects the job o¤er, he receives income of wl + b as in the baseline model above.32
The agent rejects any net-of-tax wage o¤er w
below his outside option wl + b, i.e. his
reservation wage once searching for a job is wl + b + . Therefore, e = 1 F (wl + b + ) and the
agent’s expected utility when searching for a job is
W (b) = eE[v(A + w

)jw

> wl + b] + (1

e)u(A + wl + b).

Now suppose we ask the agent what wage he would be willing to accept with certainty before the
start of job search. De…ne the agent’s reservation wage prior to job search as the wage w0 that
would make the agent indi¤erent between accepting a job immediately vs. starting the process of
job search, which yields expected utility of W (b). This pre-job-search reservation wage w0 satis…es
v(A + w0

) = W (b)

The government’s problem is to
max W (b) = max v(A + w0
) max w0
32

)
(23)

Both formulas derived above continue to hold in this model with stochastic wages. Conversely, the Shimer and

Werning formula also holds in a model with variable search intensity.

42

Di¤erentiating (23) gives the following formula for the marginal welfare gain of raising b:33
MW (b) =

dw0
db

d
dw0
=
db
db

1

e

1
(1 + "1
e
e

e;b )

(24)

0
In this formula, dw
db encodes the marginal value of insurance because the agent’s reservation wage
directly measures his expected value when unemployed. Intuitively, if agents can smooth marginal
utilities perfectly across states, their reservation wage will depend purely on their expected income,
and the marginal value of raising b by $1 (holding …xed ) is simply (1 e). But this marginal
gain is outweighed by the cost of …nancing the extra dollar of bene…ts, which exceeds 1 e because
of the behavioral response "1 e;b . When marginal utilities ‡uctuate across states, agents value
an increase in b at more than its actuarial cost, increasing the marginal value of public insurance.
The extent to which agents value insurance can be captured by asking them how their valuation
0
Like the liquidity
of being in the unemployed state varies with b, which is the parameter dw
db .
vs. moral hazard method, this approach also does not require identi…cation of state-dependence in
utility or risk aversion.
An interesting implication of this result is that a higher sensitivity of reservation wages to
bene…ts implies a larger value of social insurance, contrary to the intuition embodied in earlier
empirical studies (e.g., Feldstein and Poterba 1984), which view the sensitivity of reservation wages
to UI bene…ts as a distortion. This point, like the moral hazard vs. liquidity decomposition above,
illustrates the importance of connecting empirical estimates to models in order to fully understand
the implications of empirical …ndings for policy.
Evidence on Reservation Wages. A long literature has sought to measure unemployed workers’
reservation wages; see Devine and Kiefer (1991) for a review of early work and Krueger and Mueller
(2011) for recent evidence. While these studies have shown that reservation wages have predictive
power for unemployment durations and the types of o¤ers that workers accept, they have also
documented signi…cant problems with self-reported reservation wage measures. For instance, a
large fraction of workers end up accepting jobs that pay below their reported reservation wage.
Moreover, most jobs have many characteristics that matter beyond the wage rate, such as the
nature of the work or commuting distance. A one-dimensional reservation wage measure does
not incorporate these other dimensions. When jobs have multiple characteristics, in order to
implement (24), one would ideally like to measure how reservation utilities for jobs vary with the
bene…t rate. Because such reservation utilities cannot be easily measured, it is di¢ cult to estimate
dw0
db accurately.
Perhaps because of these measurement issues, there is relatively little evidence on the impact of
UI bene…ts on reservation wages. Feldstein and Poterba (1984) use survey data from the Current
0
Population Survey to estimate dw
db by studying how changes in UI bene…t levels a¤ect reported
reservation wages. Their point estimates imply a substantial correlation between UI bene…t levels
33

This corresponds to equation (12) in Shimer and Werning (2007), where the unemployment rate is u = 1

The slight di¤erence between the formulas (the

1
1 u

e.

factor in the denominator) arises because Shimer and Werning

write the formula in terms of a partial-derivative-based elasticity. Here, "1

e;b

is the elasticity including the UI tax

response needed to balance the budget; in Shimer and Werning’s notation, it is holding the tax …xed.

43

and reservation wages. However, their speci…cation does not isolate purely exogenous variation
in UI bene…ts due to law changes, as in more recent work, which raises concerns about omitted
0
variable bias. Shimer and Werning implement (23) using an estimate of dw
db from Feldstein and
Poterba (1984) and …nd a large, positive value for MW (b) at current bene…t levels. They caution,
however, that their exercise must be viewed as purely illustrative given the uncertainty in estimates
0
of dw
db and call for further work on estimating this parameter using alternative methods.
One alternative approach is to use data on actual wages obtained at the next job and back
out the implied distribution of reservation wages. There are now a large set of studies using
administrative panel data that study whether increasing UI bene…ts raises subsequent wage rates.
Card, Chetty, and Weber (2007b) use a regression discontinuity design in data from Austria to
show that individuals eligible for 10 additional weeks of UI bene…ts take more time to …nd a job
but do not have higher wages at their next job. Their estimates are su¢ ciently precise to rule out
even a 1% increase in the wage rate at the upper bound of the 95% con…dence interval. They also
show that there are no detectable impacts on other observable job characteristics or on the number
of years the worker spends at his next job, a summary measure of job match quality. Subsequent
studies using similar RD designs have reached very similar conclusions. For instance, Lalive (2007)
studies a 170 week bene…t extension in Austria and shows that it has no impact on subsequent
wages. van Ours and Vodopivec (2008) use a di¤erence-in-di¤erence approach using data from
Slovenia and …nd that changes in bene…t duration from 6 months to 3 months had no impact on
subsequent earnings. These …ndings that ex-post observed wages are una¤ected by bene…t levels
0
imply that reservation wages must be una¤ected by bene…t levels, i.e. dw
db = 0.
How can UI have signi…cant consumption-smoothing and liquidity bene…ts but little e¤ect on
ex-post wages? Lentz and Tranaes (2005), Chetty (2008), and Card, Chetty, and Weber (2007b)
develop pure search intensity models with borrowing constraints that generate these patterns. We
present a stylized version of this model in Section 3.3.1 below. In these models, workers can control
the amount of e¤ort they spend searching for a job, but have a …xed wage rate. Such models can
be viewed as an approximation to an environment in which the arrival rate of suitable job o¤ers
is relatively low, so the option value of waiting for a better o¤er is small and most workers take
the …rst o¤er they receive. One puzzling feature of the data given this explanation is that there
is tremendous heterogeneity in observed wage changes from the previous job to the new job across
unemployed workers. Understanding how the variance of job o¤ers can be reconciled with the lack
of mean impacts of UI bene…ts on reservation wages is an open question for future research.34
In summary, there are now a variety of methods of calculating the welfare gains from increasing
bene…t levels in social insurance programs, but each of the methods yields di¤erent results because
empirical evidence on many of the key parameters remains inadequate. Moreover, the three
formulas discussed above are not an exhaustive list of potential approaches for connecting theory
to data in analyzing optimal bene…t levels for social insurance. There could be many other
34

One possibility is a model with impatient workers who wait to search for a job until they have no cash on hand.

Such a model would generate signi…cant liquidity e¤ects but no impacts on ex-post wages, and would have very
di¤erent welfare implications.

44

representations of the optimality condition in (13) that could be useful for applied work. The
multiplicity of formulas for MW (b) is a general property of the su¢ cient-statistic approach (Chetty
2009). Because the positive model is not fully identi…ed by the inputs to the formula, there are
generally several representations of the formula for welfare gains. This ‡exibility allows researchers
to use the representation most suitable for their applications given the available variation and data.

3.3

Generalizing the Static Model

The analysis above rests on a static model that makes several strong assumptions that are unlikely
to hold in practice. Many of these assumptions turn out to have little impact on the formulas
for optimal social insurance derived above, which is why these formulas have been widely applied.
However, there are some assumptions that are more consequential and raise issues that remain
unresolved. In this section, we consider the consequences of each of the main assumptions in turn.
The general principle is that if agents’choices in the private sector maximize private surplus, then
the formulas derived above continue to hold irrespective of the structure of the model. However,
as soon as choices do not maximize private surplus – either because of externalities or imperfect
optimization –the formulas no longer hold.
One important assumption that we do not relax below – not because it is inconsequential
but rather because there is very limited normative work on this issue – is that wage rates and
all other prices are …xed. That is, we do not consider the possibility that changes in social
insurance policies will a¤ect market clearing prices in general equilibrium. Acemoglu and Shimer
(1999) analyze optimal unemployment insurance in an equilibrium search model with endogenous
occupation choice and show that expanding UI can improve e¢ ciency in this environment by
encouraging more workers to take high-wage, high-risk jobs. There is no empirical evidence to
date on the magnitude of such e¤ects.35 Perhaps an even greater challenge is that there are no
results to date on how such empirical estimates could be connected to equilibrium models to make
quantitative statements about optimal policy.
3.3.1

Dynamics: Endogenous Savings and Borrowing Constraints

The most important limitation of the model analyzed above is that it does not incorporate dynamics.
In dynamic models, agents can smooth consumption across periods and thus “self insure”part of the
income ‡uctuations they face, potentially reducing the value of social insurance. In addition, social
insurance distorts not just agents’e¤ort choices but also their consumption and savings decisions.
Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1995) present simulation evidence suggesting that social insurance
35

Rothstein (2010) and Chetty et al. (2011) present evidence that tax and transfer policies a¤ect wage rates and

the distribution of jobs in equilibrium. Rothstein shows that expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)
depress wages for workers who are ineligible for the EITC, while Chetty et al. show that the tax schedule in Denmark
a¤ects even the earnings of workers una¤ected by the tax incentives because of …rm responses. The e¤ects of social
insurance on equilibrium outcomes could potentially be uncovered using a similar research design that focuses on
groups whose incentives are not directly a¤ected by the program.

45

and means-tested transfer programs can substantially reduce savings rates. Engen and Gruber
(2001) show that increases in UI bene…ts have small but signi…cant e¤ects on wealth accumulation
prior to job loss among workers at risk of layo¤. These intertemporal consumption-smoothing and
savings responses may be further complicated by borrowing constraints, generating bu¤er stock
behavior as in Deaton (1991) or Carroll (1997).
Models that incorporate all of these features have been widely studied and are complex and
di¢ cult to solve analytically. Surprisingly, however, the three simple formulas for the marginal
welfare gain from raising social insurance bene…ts derived above continue to hold in such models with
small modi…cations. Because this result underpins much of the modern literature on connecting
theory to data in analyzing optimal social insurance, we provide a simple proof here.
We analyze the optimal level of unemployment bene…ts in a dynamic job search model with
borrowing constraints, following Lentz and Tranaes (2005) and Chetty (2008). For instructive
purposes, we structure the analysis to parallel the steps for the static case in Section 4.1: (1) model
setup, (2) characterizing the agent’s problem, (3) the planner’s problem, (4) deriving a condition
for optimal bene…ts by exploiting envelope conditions, and (5) deriving empirically implementable
su¢ cient statistic formulas.
Setup. The agent lives for T periods f0; :::; T 1g. The interest rate and the agent’s time
discount rate are set to zero to simplify notation. The agent becomes (exogenously) unemployed
at t = 0. An agent who enters a period t without a job …rst chooses search e¤ort et . As in the
static case, we normalize et to equal the probability of …nding a job in the current period. Let (et )
denote the cost of search e¤ort, which is strictly increasing and convex. If search is successful, the
agent begins working immediately in period t. All jobs last inde…nitely once found.
We make two assumptions to simplify exposition: (1) the agent earns a …xed pre-tax wage
of w when employed, eliminating reservation-wage choices and (2) assets prior to job loss (A0 )
are exogenous, eliminating e¤ects of UI bene…ts on savings behavior prior to job loss. Neither
assumption a¤ects the results below (Chetty 2008).
If the worker is unemployed in period t, he receives an unemployment bene…t b < w. If the
worker is employed in period t, he pays a tax . Let cet denote the agent’s consumption in period
t if a job is found in that period. Note that the agent will optimally set consumption at cet for all
t0 > t as well because he faces no uncertainty once he …nds a job and therefore smooths consumption
perfectly. If the agent fails to …nd a job in period t, he sets consumption to cut . The agent then
enters period t + 1 unemployed and the problem repeats. Let u(ct ) denote ‡ow consumption utility
when unemployed and v(ct ) denote ‡ow utility when employed.
Agent’s Problem. We characterize the solution to the agent’s problem using discrete-time dynamic programming. The value function for an individual who …nds a job at the beginning of
period t, conditional on beginning the period with assets At is
Vt (At ) = max v(At
At+1 L

At+1 + wt

) + Vt+1 (At+1 ).

(25)

where L is the borrowing constraint. The value function for an individual who fails to …nd a job

46

at the beginning of period t and remains unemployed is
Ut (At ) = max u(At
At+1 L

At+1 + bt ) + Jt+1 (At+1 )

(26)

where
Jt (At ) = max et Vt (At ) + (1
et

et )Ut (At )

(et )

(27)

is the value of entering period t without a job with assets At .36
An unemployed agent chooses et to maximize expected utility at the beginning of period t, given
by (27). Optimal search intensity is determined by the …rst-order condition
0

(et ) = Vt (At )

Ut (At ).

(28)

The condition parallels (10) in the static model, except that the marginal value of search e¤ort is
given by the di¤erence between the optimized present values of employment and unemployment in
the dynamic model rather than the di¤erence in ‡ow utilities.
Planner’s Problem. The social planner’s objective is to choose the unemployment bene…t
level b that maximizes the agent’s expected utility at time 0, J0 (A0 ; b; ), subject to balancing
TP1 Q
t
the government’s budget. Let D =
(1 ej ) denote the agent’s expected unemployment
t=0 j=0

duration. The planner’s problem is:

max J0 (A0 ; b; ) s.t. Db = (T
b;

D)

(29)

Di¤erentiating J0 w.r.t. b yields:
@V0
@U0
@V0
@U0 d
dJ0
= e0
+ (1 e0 )
(e0
+ (1 e0 )
)
(30)
db
@b
@b
@
@
db
The key step in obtaining an empirically implementable representation of (30) is to exploit the
envelope conditions for et , cut , and cet . These variables are all chosen to maximize the agent’s
expected utility at each stage of his dynamic program. Because changes in these variables do not
have a …rst-order impact on utility, one can ignore the impacts of changes in b and on these choices
when calculating the derivatives in (30). Hence, the only terms that appear in the derivatives are
the marginal utilities in which b and directly appear. To characterize these terms, de…ne the
average marginal utility of consumption while unemployed as
t

Eu0 (cut ) =

1 TP1 Y
(1
D t=0

ei )u0 (cut ))

i=0

and the average marginal utility of consumption while employed as
Ev 0 (cet ) =
36

1
T

D

(e0 T v 0 (ce0 ) +

TP1

t
Y
[ (1

ei

1 )]et (T

t=1 i=1

t)v 0 (cet )).

It is easy to show that Vt is concave because there is no uncertainty following re-employment; however, Ut could

be convex. Lentz and Tranaes (2005) and Chetty (2008) report that non-concavity never arises in their simulations
for a broad range of plausible parameters. Therefore, we assume that Ut is globally concave in the parameter space
of interest and use …rst-order conditions to identify the optimal level of bene…ts.

47

Some algebra yields:
@V0
+ (1
@b
@V0
+ (1
e0
@

e0

@U0
= DEu0 (cut )
@b
@U0
e0 )
= (T D)Ev 0 (cet )
@
e0 )

The government’s budget constraint implies that
expressions, it follows that
dJ0
= DEu0 (cut )
db

d
db

=

D
T D (1

DEv 0 (cet )(1 +

+

T
T

D

T
T D "D;b ).

Combining these

"D;b )

As in the static model, we normalize the welfare gain from a $1 increase in the size of the government
insurance program by the welfare gain from raising the wage bill in the high state by $1 to obtain
MW (b) =
=
=

dJ0
db (b)=D
dJ0
dw (b)=(T

D)

1
fEu0 (cut )
0
Eu (cet )
Eu0 (cut ) Ev 0 (cet )
Ev 0 (cet )

Ev 0 (cet )(1 +
1

T
T

1
"D;b .
D=T

D

"D;b )g
(31)

This expression coincides with the formula for MW (b) from the static model in (13) with two
changes. First, the fraction of time spent unemployed is measured over the entire life of the agent
(D=T ) instead of in a single period. Correspondingly, the relevant elasticity is "D;b rather than
"1 e;b . Second, and more importantly, the gap in marginal utilities that enters the formula is the
di¤erence between the average marginal utility when employed and unemployed. This is because
the average value of a marginal dollar of UI bene…ts depends upon the mean marginal utility across
all the periods over which the agent is unemployed during his life. Similarly, the average cost of
raising the UI tax depends upon the cost of losing $1 during all the periods over which the agent
is employed.
Su¢ cient Statistics Implementation. Equation (31) can be implemented using each of the three
approaches described above with modi…cations to account for the fact that one must measure the
gap in average marginal utilities. To implement the consumption-smoothing approach, one must
estimate the mean consumption drop between periods when the agent is employed and unemployed,
e
Ecu
c
t Ect
ce =
Ece , as the gap in expected marginal utilities when utility is not state-dependent is
t

0 e
Eu0 (cu
t ) Eu (ct )
Eu0 (cet )

= cec . Identifying cec is conceptually analogous to identifying cc in the static
model. However, it may not directly correspond to the di¤erence between consumption immediately
before and after unemployment, as measured by Gruber (1997) and others, if consumption trends
substantially over the lifecycle. The extent to which cec di¤ers from estimates using Gruber’s
approach has not yet been investigated empirically and requires further work.
Similarly, to implement the liquidity vs. moral hazard approach, one must estimate the impacts
of annuities to recover expected marginal utilities over the unemployment spell in a dynamic model.
Again, this is conceptually no di¤erent than estimating the impact of lump sum cash grants, but
48

may be harder to implement empirically. In practice, Chetty (2008) translates his estimates of
the impacts of cash grants on unemployment durations into the impacts of annuities by making
assumptions about discount rates. Finally, Shimer and Werning (2007) show that their reservation
wage approach goes through in a dynamic model provided that utility has a CARA speci…cation
that eliminates income e¤ects.
The general lesson from the analysis of the dynamic model is that one does not need to fully
characterize all the margins through which agents may respond to shocks to calculate the marginal
welfare gains of social insurance. Even in complex dynamic models, the calculation of welfare gains
can be distilled to two parameters: the gap in average marginal utilities and the elasticity that
enters the government’s budget constraint "D;b . There is no need to identify additional structural
parameters such as the tightness of the borrowing constraint (L) or the cost of job search
to
dW
calculate db . Similarly, one can show that the formula in (31) is robust to a variety of other
extensions as well. For example, Kaplan (2010) shows that many young unemployed workers move
back in with their parents as a method of consumption smoothing. He shows that incorporating
this margin of adjustment into a structural model has signi…cant e¤ects on consumption ‡uctuations
and the bene…ts of unemployment insurance. However, this margin is automatically accounted for
in the formulas derived above. Mathematically, the option to move back home is simply another
choice variable for agents and thus has no impact on (31). Intuitively, optimizing agents account
for the option to move back home in all their choices. Thus, empirically observed consumption
patterns, liquidity e¤ects, and reservation wages all already incorporate this margin.
Chetty (2006b) establishes the validity of (31) at its most general level by analyzing a dynamic
model where transitions from the good state to the bad state follow an arbitrary stochastic process.
Agents make an arbitrary number of choices and are subject to arbitrary constraints. The choices
could include variables such as reservation wages, savings behavior, spousal labor supply, or human
capital investments. Chetty shows that (31) holds in this environment as long as agents’choices
maximize private welfare.37 This is the critical assumption underlying (31). In the rest of this
section, we discuss a series of important externalities that violate this assumption.
3.3.2

Externalities on Private Insurers

Public insurance is motivated by market failures of the types discussed in Section 2. However, most
of the literature on optimal public insurance simply assumes that private markets do not provide
any insurance against risks rather than modelling the underlying sources of the market failure. This
assumption –which we made when deriving (31) above –is a convenient technical simpli…cation but
37

A related point is that the same formula also holds in the context of other social insurance programs where the

structure of the positive model di¤ers. For instance, in the context of health insurance, one may choose the intensity
of care after getting sick rather than controlling ex-ante e¤ort. The formula in (31) holds in such a model with an
appropriate rede…nition of the average marginal utilities and the elasticity that enters the planner’s budget constraint.
Chetty (2006b) considers an example of “tenure review” that is formally analogous to this case.

49

has important consequences for optimal social insurance.38 If there is a formal market for private
insurance, agents’ choices will no longer maximize total private surplus (including the agent and
private insurer) because the private insurance contract will distort choices. As a result, marginal
changes in agents’choices will have …scal externalities on private insurers. For example, suppose
that part of health expenditures are covered by public insurance and part by private insurance.
When the government raises health insurance bene…ts, agents will spend more on health care, and
this increased expenditure will raise costs for both the government and the private insurer. This
added …scal externality on the private insurer is a …rst-order e¤ect that reduces the marginal value
of insurance and is not accounted for in (31).
Before discussing how these …scal externalities a¤ect optimal bene…ts, it is worth emphasizing
that only private insurance contracts that generate moral hazard alter the formulas for optimal
public insurance. Private insurance that does not generate moral hazard – such as informal
insurance between relatives that is well monitored –has no impact on the original formula in (31).
To see this, suppose that the agent can transfer bp between states at a cost q(bp ), so that increasing
consumption by bp in the low state requires payment of a premium 1 e e bp + q(bp ) in the high state.
As long as the level of bp is chosen to maximize utility, it is simply another choice variable in
Chetty’s (2006b) framework, and thus has no impact on the optimal social insurance formula. The
e¤ects of any such insurance arrangement are automatically embedded in the empirically observed
consumption drop and other parameters that enter the formula.
There is relatively little work analyzing optimal social insurance with private insurance that induces moral hazard. Golosov and Tsyvinski (2007) analyze optimal government policy in a model
in which agents can purchase insurance from multiple private providers. They rule out market
failures due to adverse selection by assuming that agents can sign contracts before private information is revealed. However, the private market still does not achieve an e¢ cient outcome because
of a “multiple dealing” externality across …rms, originally discussed by Pauly (1974). Intuitively,
each …rm does not take into account the fact that its provision of insurance distorts the agent’s
behavior, thereby a¤ecting other insurers’budgets and leading to over-provision of insurance in the
decentralized private market equilibrium. Golosov and Tsyvinski show that the government can
raise welfare by imposing a corrective tax that countervails the multiple dealing externality. They
also show that the provision of public insurance partially crowds out private insurance and may
reduce welfare because it leads to further over-provision of insurance. Using numerical calibrations,
they demonstrate that these e¤ects could be quite large quantitatively.
While these results demonstrate that endogenous private insurance could reduce the scope for
government intervention in insurance markets, the implications of their analysis for optimal bene…t
levels in practice are less clear. Golosov and Tsyvinski rule out many of the rationales for publicly
provided insurance we discussed above, such as adverse selection, by assumption. In addition, their
38

One potential rationale for this approach is that private markets are essentially at a corner of providing zero

insurance against certain risks (e.g., unemployment), and thus marginal changes in public insurance can be evaluated
under the assumption that there is no private insurance.

Unfortunately, this is not an accurate description of

insurance markets in many important applications such as health.

50

numerical calibrations rest on strong assumptions about the structure of the underlying model that
are not directly grounded in empirical evidence.
Chetty and Saez (2010) attempt to connect the theory to the data more explicitly by deriving
formulas for optimal bene…ts in terms of empirically estimable parameters with endogenous private
insurance. They …rst analyze a case in which agents are homogeneous and purchase insurance
from a private …rm. Because there is no market failure in this model, if agents in the private sector
optimize perfectly, the marginal gain from government intervention is strictly negative (Kaplow
1991). When the private sector does not o¤er the optimal level of insurance – e.g., because
of behavioral biases of the types discussed in Section 3.3.5 below – there is a potential role for
government intervention. Chetty and Saez assume that the planner maximizes the agent’s true
expected utility (which they assume is not state-dependent) and show that the marginal welfare
gain from public insurance b can be expressed as
MW (b) = (1

r)

u0 (cl ) u0 (ch )
u0 (ch )

"1

e;b

e

1 + bp =b
1 r
db

(32)

where bp is the private insurance bene…t level in equilibrium and r = dbp measures the extent to
which private insurance is crowded out by public insurance. When bp = 0, this formula reduces to
(13) with state-independent utility. When bp > 0, two additional terms enter the formula. First,
the marginal welfare gain is scaled down by (1 r) because $1 more of public insurance raises total
insurance (b + bp ) by only $(1 r). This e¤ect rescales but does not change the sign of MW (b)
and thus does not a¤ect the optimal public bene…t level b . The second and more important
1+b =b
e¤ect of endogenous private insurance is captured by the added term 1 pr that ampli…es the
elasticity. This term re‡ects the …scal externality that expanding public insurance has on private
insurers. When the agent reduces e in response to a $1 increase in b, it not only has a cost to the
government proportional to "1 e;b but also a cost to the private insurer proportional to "1 e;b bp =b.
This externality e¤ect reduces the optimal bene…t level beyond what one would have calculated
based on the formula in (31) that ignored private insurance.
Chetty and Saez implement (32) in the context of unemployment insurance and health insurance
to illustrate their approach. For unemployment – where the only form of private insurance is
b
severance pay – Chetty and Saez estimate bp = 0:2 and r = 0:14 using cross-state variation in
UI bene…ts. Because the share of private UI bene…ts and crowdout e¤ects are small, endogenous
private insurance has small e¤ects on the optimal UI bene…t level with plausible elasticities. For
b
health, the share of private insurance is much larger ( bp = 0:89), as is the degree of crowdout. Cutler
and Gruber (1996) estimate that a $1 increase in public health insurance bene…ts reduces private
insurance bene…t levels by 50 cents, implying r = 0:5. As a result, accounting for endogenous
private insurance reduces the marginal welfare gains of an aggregate health insurance expansion by
more than an order of magnitude according to (32).
The shortcoming of the formula in (32) is that it is sensitive to the sources of private market
failures. For instance, Chetty and Saez extend their baseline analysis to a case where there are
heterogeneous agents who have private information about their risk types. This generates adverse
51

selection and partial private insurance provision by the market. In this setting, the formula for
MW (b) has additional terms relative to (32) because it has the added bene…t of pooling risks across
individuals of di¤erent types through a mandate. Hence, (32) is not a robust “su¢ cient statistic”
formula because it is sensitive to the structure of the positive model. Developing formulas that are
robust to the underlying sources of private market failures and can be implemented empirically is
among the most important priorities for future research on social insurance.
3.3.3

Externalities on Government Budgets

Fiscal externalities can also arise when the government itself provides multiple types of social insurance or levies taxes. For instance, expansions in disability insurance may reduce the probability
that a worker with a high disutility of work chooses to search for a job and claim unemployment
insurance. A more general source of …scal externalities is taxation. Any reduction in labor supply
induced by social insurance programs will have a negative …scal externality on the government by
reducing income tax revenue.
It is useful to divide …scal externalities into two categories. The …rst are mechanical externalities that arise because the choice insured by the program (e) directly a¤ects other parts of the
government’s budget, such as tax revenue. The second are indirect …scal externalities that arise
because of other behavioral responses unrelated to e itself. For instance, an increase in UI bene…ts
may induce agents to save less, which could reduce revenue from capital gains taxes.
To see how such …scal externalities a¤ect (31), let us return to the static model and add an
initial period, t = 0, in which the agent chooses how much to save, which we denote by A, before
he faces the risk of unemployment. Let Z denote the agent’s wealth at the beginning of period
0, which we take as …xed. In period 0, consumption is given by c0 = Z A. Let A denote the
tax levied on savings A (e.g. a capital gains tax) and e denote an income tax levied on employed
individuals. Tax revenue R = A A + e e is rebated to the agent as a lump sum in the high state,
so that ch = A + wh
(b) + R.
The agent chooses e¤ort e to maximize his expected utility taking the parameters of the tax
system as …xed:
max V (e; A) = v(Z
e;A

A) + ev(A + wh

(b) + R) + (1

e)u(A + wl + b)

(e)

The social planner’s objective is to choose the bene…t level b that maximizes the agent’s expected
utility:
max W (b) = v(Z
b

A) + ev(A + wh

(b) + R) + (1

s.t. e = e(b) and A = A(b) and R =

AA

+

e)u(A + wl + b)

ee

Algebra analogous to that above yields:
MW (b) =

u0 (cl ) v 0 (ch )
v 0 (ch )

"1

e;b

e
52

(1 +

e

b

)+

1
1

A
eb

A "A;b

(e)

This equation di¤ers from the original formula in (13) in two ways. The …rst new term, be , re‡ects
the mechanical externality arising from the fact that reductions in e reduce income tax revenue.
"
The magnitude of this e¤ect is proportional to 1 ee;b . Accounting for this mechanical externality
does not require estimating any additional parameters; one must simply take the income tax rate
into account when calculating the impact of changes in e on the government budget. The second
new term is proportional to A "A;b . This term re‡ects the indirect …scal externality imposed by
distorting the choice of savings A. Accounting for this indirect externality requires estimation of
the additional elasticity "A;b , e.g., as in Engen and Gruber (2001).39
Empirically, an important source of indirect …scal externalities are behavioral responses that
a¤ect takeup of other social insurance programs. Autor and Duggan (2003) provide empirical
evidence on the interaction between unemployment and disability insurance in the U.S. Using
local employment shocks instrumented by industry shares, they show that more individuals exit
the labor force and apply for DI when they are laid o¤ when DI bene…ts are raised. As a result,
unemployment rates rise less when disability insurance is expanded and, correspondingly, one would
expect UI bene…t payments to fall. Of course, the government also loses revenue by collecting fewer
taxes from individuals who would have worked if the DI bene…t level were lower.
Borghans, Gielen, and Luttmer (2010) quantify the magnitude of such …scal externalities using
administrative data from the Netherlands. They use a regression discontinuity design to show that
reducing the generosity of DI bene…ts increases reliance on other forms of social insurance. They
estimate that every $1 saved in DI bene…ts via a bene…t cut leads to approximately 50 cents of
additional expenditure on other social insurance programs. Part of this cost is o¤set by increased
tax revenue, but it is clear that accounting for such …scal externalities is critical in designing
optimal social insurance policy. More generally, one should ideally analyze social insurance and
tax policies in a uni…ed framework rather than optimizing each program (UI, DI, health insurance,
etc.) separately.
3.3.4

Other Externalities

Agents in the private sector may have direct non-pecuniary externalities on each other independent
of the …scal channels discussed above. In Section 2.3, we discussed how such externalities –such as
the spread of contagious diseases –could provide a motivation for social insurance. In this section,
we discuss how such externalities a¤ect the optimal design of social insurance policies.
While any externality would a¤ect (31), the literature on optimal social insurance has focused
on two types of externalities in particular. The …rst are social multiplier e¤ects, which refer to
the idea that one individual’s choices may a¤ect the choices of those around him. For instance,
an increase in disability bene…ts may induce some agents to stop working, which in turn may
increase the value of leisure for their peers. The second are congestion externalities, which arise
because of constraints that make one agent’s behavior change the returns to e¤ort for another agent.
39

Consistent with the results in section 3.3.1, the distortion in A has no impact on the formula if

because savings are taxed that this behavioral response matters.

53

A

= 0; it is only

For instance, in the context of unemployment, agents compete for a limited number of positions
when jobs are rationed. In this setting, changes in UI bene…ts can have di¤erent e¤ects at the
macroeconomic level relative to the microeconomic level.
Theoretical work on social multipliers e¤ects and social insurance has shown that the aggregate
e¤ects of insurance on behavior could be signi…cantly larger than microeconomic estimates of a
single individual’s behavioral responses to a change in his marginal incentives. For instance,
Lindbeck, Nyberg, and Weibull (1999) present a benchmark model of how social norms about labor
supply change the impacts of the welfare state on the economy. In their model, individuals’taste
for work depends not only upon their private disutility of work but also the fraction of individuals
who rely on social support rather than work to make a living. They demonstrate that in this
environment, small changes in policy can lead to dramatic, discontinuous changes in the size of the
welfare state by shifting the equilibrium. For instance, the macroeconomic e¤ect of an increase
in disability bene…ts on labor supply, "M , could be much larger than the microeconomic elasticity
" for any single individual. Intuitively, when social insurance bene…ts are increased, the direct
e¤ect on each agent’s behavior is ampli…ed by the feedback mechanism of the change in the norm.
Lindbeck, Nyberg, and Weibull argue that these non-linear responses could explain why some
developed countries (e.g. Scandinavia) have much larger social insurance systems than others (such
as the U.S.).
How do such social multipliers a¤ect the formula for optimal bene…ts in (31)? If social multipliers a¤ect behavioral responses but do not directly a¤ect utility, (31) holds, but " must be replaced
by the macro elasticity "M . This is because the aggregate response "M is what determines how an
increase in bene…ts a¤ects the government budget. If the social externalities enter utility directly
–e.g., if one agent not working increases the utility of leisure for others agents –then an additional
term enters (31) to capture the impact of this externality on welfare, as the envelope conditions
used to derive (31) do not take account of this e¤ect.40
Empirical evidence lends support to the presence of such social multipliers. For instance,
Lalive (2003) presents evidence that an extension of unemployment bene…ts to workers over age
50 in Austria a¤ected the labor supply of their peers below age 50, although his results rely on
relatively strong identi…cation assumptions. Clark (2003) uses data on subjective well-being from
a panel of households in the United Kingdom and shows that unemployed individuals report higher
levels of happiness when the local unemployment rate is higher, while employed individuals report
lower levels of satisfaction. Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan (2000) show that individuals are
more likely to take up welfare when living in neighborhoods with a large population of residents
who speak their own language, suggesting that there are network e¤ects in welfare takeup. A
limitation of this analysis is that it relies purely on cross-neighborhood comparisons and thus
rests on relatively strong identi…cation assumptions. Chetty, Friedman, and Saez (2012) present
evidence of social spillovers via learning using panel data. They show that individuals are more
likely to change their earnings behavior in response to the incentives created by the Earned Income
40

See Kroft (2008) for an analysis of optimal UI with social spillovers in takeup decisions.

54

Tax Credit in the U.S. when they move to a neighborhood where other individuals respond to the
program. Unfortunately, none of these studies provide estimates of how the micro impacts of policy
(") changes di¤er from their macro impacts ("M ).
While social multiplier e¤ects amplify elasticities and potentially reduce the optimal level of
social insurance, congestion externalities have the opposite e¤ect. Landais, Michaillat, and Saez
(2012) analyze optimal unemployment insurance in a job search model with rationing. A standard
matching function maps the number of vacancies and job openings to the equilibrium level of
unemployment. They assume that wages are rigid, so that when the economy is hit by a negative
productivity shock, jobs are rationed in the sense that the labor market does not clear even if
workers exert arbitrarily high search e¤ort. In this environment, job seekers have a negative search
externality on each other: each individual tries to outrun his peers to …nd a job, leading to excess
search e¤ort via a standard rat-race mechanism. Landais, Michaillat, and Saez demonstrate that
this externality has two e¤ects on (31). First, it reduces the macro elasticity of unemployemnt with
respect to the bene…t rate relative to the micro elasticity. Again, it is the macro elasticity that
enters (31) for the reasons described above. Second, the negative job search externality creates an
added bene…t from raising UI bene…ts, because when each individual searches less, he has a positive
spillover e¤ect on other job seekers. Because job rationing is more severe in recessions, Landais,
Michaillat, and Saez conclude that the optimal level of UI bene…ts should be countercyclical. They
show that the micro and macro elasticities along with the other parameters in (31) are su¢ cient
statistics to calculate the optimal level of bene…ts in a relatively general environment.41
Motivated by the question of whether unemployment bene…ts should vary over the business
cycle, a recent empirical literature has investigated whether elasticities of unemployment durations
with respect to bene…t levels vary with labor market conditions. Most of the existing evidence uses
identi…cation strategies that are more likely to recover partial-equilibrium micro elasticities rather
than general-equilibrium macro elasticities. This is because the need for a control group often makes
it easier to identify partial equilibrium e¤ects using quasi-experimental methods. Schmieder, von
Wachter, and Bender (2012) show that UI bene…t extensions have smaller e¤ects on unemployment
exit hazards in recessions than in booms using data for Germany, implying that the moral hazard
e¤ect of UI is smaller at the micro level in recessions. Landais (2011) uses a regression kink
design to show that changes in UI bene…t levels have similar e¤ects on unemployment durations in
recessions and booms in the United States. Kroft and Notowidigdo (2011) present evidence that
the moral hazard e¤ects of changes in UI bene…ts are smaller in recessions, while the consumptionsmoothing bene…ts are roughly constant, although their estimates are somewhat imprecise due to
a lack of power.
Crepon et al. (2012) present evidence that the macro elasticity "M is much smaller than the
micro elasticity " in weak labor markets because of congestion e¤ects. They run a randomized
experiment that provides job placement assistance to a large group of individuals in a given labor
41

Landais, Michaillat, and Saez focus on bene…ts levels rather than the duration of bene…ts. However, the typical

policy response to a recession is an extension in the duration of bene…ts rather than an increase in the level of bene…ts.
Understanding why this is the case is an interesting open area for further work.

55

market. They …nd that the individuals who did not receive assistance have signi…cantly lower
probabilities of …nding a job in weak labor markets when many of their peers receive job placement
assistance. This constitutes direct evidence of congestion e¤ects in the labor market and, based on
the models discussed above, suggests that the optimal UI bene…t level is higher when labor markets
are weak.
3.3.5

Imperfect Optimization

Another important reason that agents’choices may not maximize total private surplus is failures
of optimization. As we noted in Section 2.3 above, if agents optimized perfectly, we would observe
very small consumption ‡uctuations cc for temporary shocks such as unemployment. Hence, (31)
would imply that the welfare gains of social insurance are small. It is tempting to simply plug in a
statistic such as the observed (large) values of cc and calculate the welfare gains of social insurance
by applying (31) even if agents do not optimize. Unfortunately, (31) is not a valid formula for
optimal bene…ts when agents do not optimize. This formula is valid only if agents optimize, and
we know that if they optimized cc would not be large. Because a biased agent’s choices do not
maximize his own utility, the envelope conditions exploited to derive (31) no longer hold. Hence,
one must modify the formulas to allow for imperfect optimization to obtain an internally consistent
understanding of optimal social insurance.42
At a broad level, there are two conceptual challenges in accounting for imperfect optimization.
First, conducting welfare analysis requires recovering the individuals’ true preferences, which is
challenging when one cannot rely on the standard tools of revealed preference used above. One
approach to solving this problem is to posit a structural model of behavioral failures, such as
hyperbolic discounting (Laibson 1997), and estimate the parameters of that model to analyze
optimal policy. Another approach, which is closer in spirit to the su¢ cient statistic methods we
have focused on here, is to derive formulas for the welfare consequences of social insurance that do
not rest on a speci…c positive model of optimization failures (Bernheim and Rangel 2009, Chetty,
Looney, and Kroft 2009). The chapter by Bernehim in this volume discusses welfare analysis
in behavioral models in greater detail. Second, from an empirical perspective, it is unclear how
to systematically distinguish mistakes from unobserved attributes such as risk aversion or private
information about expected losses under an insurance contract. While we are able to identify
speci…c examples where we can reject the null of perfect optimization, it is less clear how we can
quantify the degree to which individuals are biased, which is necessary for implementing corrective
policies.
There is relatively little work on social insurance in behavioral models. DellaVigna and Paserman (2005) estimate a model of job search with impatient agents and show empirically that agents
who are more impatient –as measured by variables that quantify tradeo¤s between immediate and
42

This point illustrates a general weakness of the su¢ cient statistic approach, which is that the assumptions used

to derive the formula are never explicitly tested because the parameters of the model are never fully identi…ed. See
Chetty (2009) for further discussion of these issues.

56

delayed payo¤s –search less for jobs. In their model, increasing UI bene…ts would have additional
costs because it would further reduce e¤ort below the optimum. Fang and Silverman (2009) estimate a similar model of time inconsistency in the context of welfare program participation and
estimate the model’s structural parameters. They then use their model to show that policies that
limit the number of months for which individuals are eligible for social transfers could raise welfare.
These papers are examples of the …rst approach to welfare analysis in behavioral models described
above – positing a structural model and using it to analyze the welfare consequences of policy
changes.
Spinnewijn (2010) is an example of the second approach to behavioral welfare analysis. He
generalizes the su¢ cient statistic formulas for optimal bene…t levels derived above to an environment
in which agents are overoptimistic about their probability of …nding a job. Spinnewijn shows that it
is crucial to distinguish between two types of biases in beliefs: baseline bias, which is misestimating
the probability of …nding a job holding search e¤ort …xed, and control bias, which is misestimating
the impact of increased search e¤ort on the probability of …nding a job. Baseline bias has no impact
on the formula in (31) because it does not a¤ect the agent’s behavioral responses to bene…t changes
or his utility. In contrast, control bias introduces a new term in the formula that arises from the
fact that the agent does not set e at its true optimum. As a result, changes in b have a …rstorder e¤ect on utility by inducing changes in e. For instance, an agent who is control-pessimistic
will undersupply e¤ort in equilibrium, and increases in bene…ts will lower welfare by distorting e
downward even further. Spinnewijn presents empirical evidence that agents are indeed controlpessimistic in practice, suggesting that calculations of optimal bene…ts based on the traditional
formula in (31) will overstate the welfare gains of insurance.
The limitation of these papers is that each one characterizes the implications of a speci…c type
of bias for policies. The challenge for research on social insurance in behavioral models is …nding
a framework that incorporates a broad set of biases yet o¤ers empirically implementable results for
optimal policy. Further work along these lines is a challenging but promising direction for future
research.

3.4

Other Dimensions of Policy

While much of the literature connecting theory to data has focused on identifying the optimal level
of social insurance bene…ts, there are many other important questions in the design of insurance
programs. In this section, we brie‡y review three areas that have received attention in recent work:
mandated savings accounts, increasing program takeup rates, and changing the path or duration
of bene…ts.
3.4.1

Liquidity Provision and Mandated Savings Accounts

Our analysis thus far has focused exclusively on a social insurance system that transfers money
from individuals in the high state to those in the low state via taxes and transfers. However,
as we discussed above, there would be little need for social insurance against temporary shocks
57

such as unemployment if individuals had access to su¢ cient liquidity while unemployed. Recent
research has therefore analyzed policies that provide liquidity to unemployed individuals or force
them to build a bu¤er stock via mandated savings accounts rather than transferring resources
across individuals. Intuitively, if the motive for social insurance bene…ts is a lack of liquidity, the
optimal tool to correct this problem may be to directly provide liquidity rather than to provide
state-contingent transfers.
Shimer and Werning (2008) analyze optimal unemployment insurance in a model where agents
can freely save and borrow using a riskless asset while unemployed. Under constant absolute risk
aversion preferences, they demonstrate that the optimal policy provides free access to liquidity and
a relatively low level of unemployment bene…ts. Chetty (2008) numerically compares the welfare
gains from the provision of zero-interest loans with the welfare gains of increasing unemployment
bene…ts in a search model calibrated to match empirical estimates of liquidity and moral hazard
e¤ects. Consistent with Shimer and Werning’s intuition, Chetty’s simulations show that the
provision of loans yields large welfare gains and greatly reduces the gains from raising unemployment
bene…t levels. While these results highlight the potential value of liquidity provision as a policy
tool, the costs of providing liquidity (e.g., due to default risk) are not modeled in these studies.
Hence, these studies do not shed light on the optimal combination of loans and unemployment
insurance bene…ts. Identifying the optimal combination of these two policies in an environment
where both policies have social costs is an important open question.
An alternative approach to providing liquidity is to directly address agents’ failure to build
bu¤er stocks by mandating savings prior to unemployment. Feldstein and Altman (2007) propose
a system of UI savings accounts in which individuals are required to save a fraction of their wages
in accounts designated to be used only in the event of unemployment spells. If they become
unemployed, individuals would draw upon these accounts at standard bene…t rates. If individuals
run out of money in their savings account, they would automatically draw bene…ts from the state
UI system, which would continue to be …nanced by a (smaller) payroll tax. Any remaining balance
at the point of retirement would be refunded to the individual. The bene…t of such a system is
that individuals’incentives to search for a job while unemployed are not distorted by the provision
of UI bene…ts, because each extra $1 they use in UI bene…ts leaves them with $1 less of wealth in
retirement, provided that they do not fully deplete their savings account balance. Using data from
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, Feldstein and Altman show that less than half of UI bene…ts
would be paid to individuals who hit the corner of a zero account balance, implying that incentives
could potentially be improved for many people. Orszag and Snower (2002) present calibrations
showing that the impacts of such a system on unemployment durations could be quite large.
Stiglitz and Yun (2005) present a more formal argument for the optimality of UI savings accounts. They analyze a model in which individuals pay money into a pension system that is taken
as exogenous. They prove that permitting individuals to draw down these pension assets in the
event of adverse shocks raises welfare if individuals are borrowing constrained. The intuition is
that allowing individuals to borrow against retirement savings relaxes borrowing constraints and
permits better consumption smoothing at a lower e¢ ciency cost than state-contingent transfers.
58

An important limitation of existing theoretical work on optimal liquidity provision and mandated savings accounts is that they all analyze models with agents who optimize perfectly. Mandated savings can only be justi…ed if agents su¤er from biases such as impatience, as the government
is simply restricting the choice set available to agents. However, if agents are impatient, it is not
clear that they will fully internalize the bene…ts of having more wealth in retirement if they draw
less UI bene…ts when they are young. Hence, in a model that justi…es mandated savings, such
policies could well have e¢ ciency costs similar to traditional social insurance systems. Countervailing this e¤ect, there may be other biases –such as the increased salience of UI savings accounts
relative to eligibility for UI bene…ts – that may reduce distortions when agents do not optimize
perfectly. These intuitions illustrate that imperfect optimization should be a central element of
future work on optimal liquidity and insurance policies.
Empirical evidence on the impacts of UI savings accounts is scarce because few governments
have implemented such systems. Hartley, van Ours, and Vodopivec (2011) present suggestive evidence that a UI savings account program introduced in Chile reduced unemployment durations.
Their analysis uses individuals who endogenously choose to opt into a traditional unemployment
insurance program as a comparison group. Their conclusions therefore rest on stronger identi…cation assumptions than most of the empirical studies discussed above. Further work using
quasi-experimental designs to study the impacts of mandated savings accounts in needed to fully
understand their impacts.
3.4.2

Imperfect Takeup

Another important dimension of social insurance policy is program participation. In the analysis
above, we assumed that all individuals who are eligible for a social insurance program automatically
participate in the program. In practice, takeup rates for most programs are often well below 100%
(Currie 2006). For instance, only 75% of individuals eligible for UI actually receive UI bene…ts
when laid o¤. Incomplete takeup raises two questions for optimal program design. First, should
the government seek to increase takeup rates, and if so what methods should be used to do so?
Second, is the optimal level of bene…ts di¤erent when only some agents take up the bene…t?
The social value of raising takeup rates –e.g., by reducing the costs of applying for a program –
depends upon the value agents who choose not to participate get from the program relative to the
takeup utility cost incurred by all agents. Imperfect takeup could in principle be socially desirable
if the agents who choose not to take up value the program signi…cantly below its social cost. For
example, Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982) propose a stylized model in which implementing a hurdle
to claim bene…ts raises social welfare by removing individuals who do not value the program highly
from the pool of recipients. In this model, the costs of taking up a program can serve as a
screening mechanism, allowing public funds to be targeted at the subgroups who are in greatest
need of assistance (e.g., those with the least liquidity).43 However, the screening induced by hurdles
43

Such screening through costly ordeals is only desirable if the ordeal is highly e¤ective at separating agents with

high vs. low valuations of the program. If the screening mechanism is not powerful, simply reducing bene…t levels

59

to take up need not necessarily operate in this bene…cial manner. For instance, suppose individuals
who do not participate are uninformed about the program’s existence or make optimization errors.
In this environment, policies that increase takeup rates could raise welfare, because they may bring
the individuals who would value social support most highly into the system. The nature of the
marginal agents who do not take up social insurance is ultimately an empirical question, and the
answer could vary across programs and environments.
Empirical evidence on the determinants of takeup shows that imperfect takeup is driven by a
mix of factors. Anderson and Meyer (1997) present evidence that individuals are more likely to
take up UI bene…ts when net bene…t levels are higher. Black et al. (2003) present experimental
evidence that individuals are more likely to drop out of the UI system when they receive a mailing
announcing that they must attend a training program in order to remain eligible for bene…ts.
These results suggest that takeup is based on a rational cost-bene…t conclusion and imply that
the individuals who do not take up may be those who value the bene…t the least. In contrast,
Ebenstein and Stange (2010) show that the shift from in-person to telephone registration for UI
bene…ts, which signi…cantly reduced the time costs of takeup, had no impact on UI takeup rates.
Bhargava and Manoli (2011) present experimental evidence showing that simplifying tax forms
increases takeup of the Earned Income Tax Credit. These results raise the possibility that some
individuals who do not take up may actually bene…t signi…cantly from the program despite getting
screened out under the current program design. What remains unclear is the average valuation of
bene…ts for those who do not take up, which is a key parameter for determining whether resources
should be invested in increasing takeup rates. Developing methods to estimate this parameter and
calculate the marginal welfare gains from increasing takeup is a promising area for future research.
How does incomplete takeup a¤ect the optimal design of other parameters of the social insurance
system? Kroft (2008) analyzes the optimal UI bene…t level in a model with imperfect takeup. He
generalizes the su¢ cient-statistic formulas derived above to a model with heterogeneous takeup
costs and rational agents. The formula in (31) changes in two ways in this setting. First,
Eu0 (cut ) must be computed for the subgroup of individuals who takes up bene…ts rather than all
individuals in the low state. Second, the elasticity parameter that is relevant is the sum of the
behavioral elasticity "1 e;b and the takeup elasticity, as increases in bene…t rates raise expenditures
both through traditional margins and by raising the number of individuals claiming bene…ts. In
general, accounting for endogenous takeup lowers the optimal bene…t rate relative to computations
that apply (31) to the subsample of individuals who take up bene…ts.
3.4.3

Path of Bene…ts

Most shocks have a variable time span. For instance, spells of work injury, disability, and unemployment all have uncertain durations. Although many health shocks are one-time events, there
are some chronic conditions that generate expenditures over longer periods. In such settings, the
by an equivalent amount may yield larger welfare gains. See the chapter by Piketty and Saez in this volume for a
discussion of related issues in the context of “workfare” models of taxation.

60

social planner can choose not just the level of bene…ts but also its path. At an abstract level,
one can choose a di¤erent bene…t level bt in each period t during which the individual is in the
low state. In practice, many social insurance systems have one or two-tiered bene…t systems, in
which bene…ts are provided at a constant level for a …nite duration and then reduced or completely
eliminated (e.g., the termination of UI bene…ts at 6 months in the U.S.). Our preceding analysis
has focused on identifying the optimal level of b under the assumption that bt = b for all t. In this
section, we discuss the small but growing body of work that has sought to characterize the optimal
path of bene…ts.
The fundamental tradeo¤ in setting the path of bene…ts, originally described by Shavell and
Weiss (1979), is again between consumption smoothing and moral hazard. Increasing bene…ts over
time is desirable from a consumption smoothing perspective, as it provides the largest bene…ts to
the agents who need it most. Intuitively, those who su¤ered from a long unemployment spells are
likely to have depleted their assets and have a very high marginal utility of consumption. But
increasing bene…ts over time is costly from an e¢ ciency perspective, as it creates an incentive
to “hold out” for higher bene…ts by prolonging one’s duration in the low state. Unfortunately,
deriving formulas that map the relative magnitude of these two e¤ects to quantitative predictions
about the optimal path of bt is challenging. The literature on the optimal path of bene…ts has
thus been less successful in connecting theory to data because of the complexity of dynamic models
and the high-dimensional nature of the problem. We therefore brie‡y describe some of the main
theoretical and empirical results that bear on this problem, highlighting the scope for further work
deriving su¢ cient statistic formulas in this area.
Shavell and Weiss (1979) characterize the optimal path of a bene…ts in a discrete time model
in which agents make consumption and search e¤ort choices in each period. When agents cannot
save or borrow, the optimal path of bene…ts is declining because an upward sloping bene…t path
does not provide a smoother consumption path but creates moral hazard. When agents can save
or borrow, Shavell and Weiss show that the optimal path could be upward or downward sloping
depending upon the structural parameters of the model. Hopenhayn and Nicolini (1997) extend
Shavell and Weiss’ analysis to allow for a wage tax after re-employment, but focus on the case
with no saving or borrowing. They show that the optimal path of bene…ts is again declining in
this environment, but that there is a signi…cant welfare gain from levying a substantial tax upon
re-employment.
Werning (2002) generalizes Hopenhayn and Nicolini’s analysis to a case with hidden savings,
i.e. a more realistic environment where the planner can set bene…t levels but cannot directly
control consumption. Werning (2002) shows that when agents can save or borrow, optimal bene…t
levels may increase over time and are much lower in levels than those predicted by Hopenhayn and
Nicolini’s analysis.44 Shavell and Weiss, Hopenhayn and Nicolini, and Werning all study models
where agents have …xed wages and only choose search e¤ort. Shimer and Werning (2008) analyze a
44

The very high optimal replacement rates predicted by Hopenhayn and Nicolini’s model should essentially be

interpreted as optimal consumption levels over the unemployment spell rather than optimal bene…t levels.

61

standard reservation-wage model in which agents draw stochastic wage o¤ers. They prove that the
optimal path of bene…ts is constant (bt = b) in a setting without liquidity constraints and CARA
utility. Intuitively, under these assumptions, the agent’s problem while unemployed is stationary
because his attitudes toward risk and incentives to …nd a job do not change as he depletes his assets.
As a result, the moral hazard costs and consumption-smoothing bene…ts of a steeper bene…t pro…le
perfectly cancel out, yielding a constant optimal bene…t path. Shimer and Werning argue that in
cases where agents do not have access to perfect capital markets, the optimal government policy is
to provide loans and constant bene…ts.
While this result is a useful benchmark, the optimal path of bene…ts could di¤er substantially
under alternative assumptions about the structure of the positive model. In practice, agents are
highly liquidity constrained while unemployed and governments tend not to o¤er loans to such
agents, perhaps because of moral hazard problems in debt repayment. Moreover, there could be
signi…cant non-stationarities in responses to incentives over a spell, due both to selection in an
environment with heterogeneity and changes in the cost of e¤ort. For instance, individuals who
remain unemployed after 6 months could be relatively elastic types but may also have a hard time
controlling the arrival rate of o¤ers, driving "1 e;b down over the course of an unemployment spell.
Such forces eliminate the stationarity that drives Shimer and Werning’s constant bene…t result, as
discussed in Shimer and Werning (2006). The quantitative magnitude of such e¤ects is ultimately
an empirical question whose answer could vary across environments and social insurance programs.
The empirical literature, which also focuses primarily on unemployment insurance, shows that
the path of bene…ts has signi…cant e¤ects on agents’behavior in a manner that is consistent with
forward-looking decisions. Card and Levine (2000) analyze the impacts of a 13 week extension in
UI bene…ts in New Jersey on unemployment durations. Their estimates imply that this extension
would have raised durations on the UI system by 1 week had individuals been eligible for the
extension from the start of their spells. Card, Chetty, and Weber (2007b) analyze a discontinuity
in the Austrian UI bene…t system based on work history that makes some individuals eligible
for 20 weeks of bene…ts and others eligible for 30 weeks of bene…ts. Individuals eligible for 30
weeks of bene…ts have signi…cantly lower job …nding hazards even in the …rst …ve weeks of their
unemployment spell, suggesting that the “holding out” moral hazard e¤ect identi…ed by Shavell
and Weiss is indeed operative in the data. Lalive (2008) …nds similar impacts of an age-based
discontinuity in the Austrian unemployment system that varies eligibility much more dramatically,
from 30 weeks to 209 weeks.
There is no evidence to date on the consumption-smoothing of extending bene…ts for a longer
period due to the lack of high-frequency data on consumption. One approach to this problem may
be to estimate liquidity e¤ects at di¤erent points of a spell using variation in cash-on-hand from
tax credits or other sources, as in Lalumia (2011). Investigating the path of asset decumulation
and borrowing over the course of shocks would also shed light on the dynamic bene…ts of social
insurance.
One approach for connecting the empirical evidence to theoretical models that make weaker
assumptions may be to limit the set of bene…t schedules that one considers. For instance, one
62

could analyze two-parameter systems in which bene…ts are paid at a constant rate b and then
terminated at some date T or systems in which bene…ts follow a linear path bt = + t. It may be
possible to derive analytic formulas in terms of the elasticities estimated in the empirical literature
for the optimal two-parameter system. Given that governments are unlikely to implement highly
variable bene…ts over time, such simpli…cations of the problem might not be very restrictive from
a practical perspective.

4

Challenges for Future Work

Our review of the literature indicates that modern methods of connecting theory to data have
proven to be quite fruitful, but much remains to be learned before one can draw strong conclusions
about social insurance policy from this work. We conclude by summarizing some of the main
outstanding challenges and open areas for future research.
First, there is a lack of empirical evidence on key parameters for many programs. Table 1
summarizes the current state of the literature for …ve major social insurance programs. For each
program, we mark areas where we are aware of existing work on …ve topics: testing for selection (e.g.,
using positive correlation or cost curve tests), quantifying its welfare costs, estimating the bene…ts
of social insurance (e.g., consumption smoothing or liquidity e¤ects), estimating moral hazard costs
(e.g., by studying behavioral responses to the program), and calculating optimal bene…t levels (e.g.,
using su¢ cient statistic formulas). As discussed earlier, most empirical work to date on selection
in insurance markets, and particularly its welfare costs, has concentrated on health insurance, with
a few papers on annuities; noticeably missing is work on selection in unemployment insurance,
disability insurance, or worker’s compensation.45 Research on government-provided insurance has
focused primarily on measuring moral hazard costs rather than bene…ts. Unemployment insurance
is one of the few programs in which both the bene…ts and costs of insurance have been studied
extensively, with a corresponding well-developed literature on optimal policy.
A natural and quite valuable direction for further work is to …ll in the empty boxes in Table 1
by applying the approaches surveyed here to these other important areas of social insurance. One
particularly important program that has received relatively little attention in terms of measuring
bene…ts and welfare consequences is disability insurance. Social insurance programs for health care
–Medicaid and Medicare –are another area ripe for welfare analysis of optimal bene…t levels. These
programs have been the subject of a rich empirical literature examining their moral hazard impacts
on health spending, and their bene…ts in terms of health and (to a more limited extent) consumption
smoothing (see for Medicare e.g., Card et al. (2008, 2009), Finkelstein (2007), or Finkelstein and
McKnight (2008) or for Medicaid e.g., Currie and Gruber (1996a, 1996b), Finkelstein et al. (2011)
or Gross and Notowidigdo (2011)). Yet there have been virtually no attempts to translate these
policy estimates into statements about welfare or optimal policy (Finkelstein and McKnight (2008)
45

The literature may have developed in this way because it is most natural study selection in markets where there

is some private provision of insurance. In the U.S., which has been the primary focus on empirical work because of
data availability, private insurance has been much more important in the health care market than the other markets.

63

is a notable, although highly stylized, exception). Another area in which modern tools connecting
theory to data have not yet been applied is the analysis of social security programs. While there is
a wealth of evidence of the reduced-form impacts of social security programs and a rich theoretical
literature on optimal social security design, there is little work deriving robust formulas for optimal
social security design in terms of empirically estimable parameters.
Second, the majority of the research we reviewed has focused on models with perfectly optimizing agents. However, as we argued above, it is di¢ cult to rationalize some social insurance
programs such as unemployment insurance in an environment with forward-looking agents because
intertemporal consumption smoothing (“self insurance”) is quantitatively a very good substitute for
insurance against temporary shocks. An important challenge for future work is to understand the
consequences of behavioral economics for optimal insurance. For instance, if large liquidity and
consumption-smoothing e¤ects of unemployment insurance are driven by the fact that impatient
workers postpone job search until they run out of cash, the gains from insurance may be much
smaller than existing calculations suggest. Similarly, the optimal tools to correct behavioral biases
may be very di¤erent from traditional insurance programs, which make state-contingent income
transfers.
Third, most methods of connecting theory to data make restrictive assumptions that do not
permit a full spectrum of general equilibrium responses. Results on measuring the welfare cost of
selection have usually treated the o¤ered contracts as …xed, and focused primarily on the distortions
in prices created by selection. Likewise, formulas for optimal social insurance based on reduced-form
elasticities all require that wage rates and other prices are una¤ected by government policies. In
practice, large-scale social insurance policies are likely to induce substantial supply-side responses,
making it crucial to develop methods to account for such general equilibrium e¤ects.
Fourth, and relatedly, the literature on optimal social insurance design we have reviewed has
tended to focus on relatively speci…c design questions within the structure of existing programs,
such as the optimal level of bene…ts given the existing time path of bene…ts or the optimal …nancing
of bene…ts. It is generally silent on more global optimal design questions, such as those that would
alter several features of a program simultaneously. One relatively under-studied design question
is the choice of instrument used for government intervention. Governments can intervene in
private insurance markets in at least three ways: direct public provision (e..g. Medicare, Social
Security, and Unemployment Insurance), mandates on …rms to provide insurance (e.g., Worker’s
Compensation), and direct intervention in or regulation of private insurance markets (e.g., tax
subsidies for employer provided health insurance or regulation of the allowable contracts and prices
in the individual health insurance markets). The optimal choice of these instruments has not been
well explored.46
Fifth, the literature on motivations for social insurance and the optimal policy response are
not yet well integrated. Existing empirical work on adverse selection analyzes selection and its
46

One exception is Summers (1989), who compares the e¤ects of mandates and taxes in a static model without

uncertainty. Extending Summers’analysis to insurance markets would be an interesting direction for future research.

64

consequences given the existing public policies, such as tax subsidies to employer provided health
insurance or publicly provided annuities through Social Security. This raises the question of
whether selection would exist –and what its welfare consequences would be –in the absence of these
public programs or under very di¤erent public programs than we currently have. Understanding,
both theoretically and empirically, how public insurance programs or policies a¤ect the existence
and nature of adverse selection in the residual private markets is therefore an important area for
futher work. Similarly, in the optimal policy literature, …scal externalities on private insurers and
other parts of the government budget such as tax revenue could signi…cantly reduce the gains from
social insurance. Characterizing optimal public insurance in models that incorporate endogenous
private market insurance failures is therefore essential to obtain a more precise understanding of
the welfare consequences of social insurance.
Finally, a general conceptual challenge for the approaches we have discussed in this paper is that
they are less informative about fundamental policy reforms, such as implementing universal health
insurance, than local changes, such as changing copayment rates by 10%. This is because the
reduced-form empirical estimates that the literature uses to make quantitative welfare predictions
are identi…ed using local variation around the currently observed environment. This makes it
di¢ cult to extrapolate out-of-sample to impacts of policies that have not been observed. The
questions discussed above of how private markets would function in the absence of public insurance
are one example of this problem. More generally, informing policy makers about signi…cant reforms
to social insurance programs will require a more global understanding of how these policies a¤ect the
economy. These issues are a fundamental challenge not just for the literature on social insurance
but for empirical work more generally.

65

References
Abaluck, J. and Gruber, J. (2011). Choice Inconsistencies among the Elderly: Evidence from Plan
Choice in the Medicare Part D Program. American Economic Review, 101(4):1180–1210.
Abbring, J. H., Chiappori, P.-A., and Pinquet, J. (2003a). Moral Hazard and Dynamic Insurance
Data. Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(4):767–820.
Abbring, J. H., Heckman, J. J., Chiappori, P.-A., and Pinquet, J. (2003b). Adverse Selection and
Moral Hazard In Insurance: Can Dynamic Data Help to Distinguish? Journal of the European
Economic Association, 1(2-3):512–521.
Abel, A. B. (1986). Capital Accumulation and Uncertain Lifetimes with Adverse Selection. Econometrica, 54(5):1079–97.
Acemoglu, D. and Shimer, R. (1999). Efficient Unemployment Insurance. Journal of Political
Economy, 107(5):893–928.
Adams, W., Einav, L., and Levin, J. (2009). Liquidity Constraints and Imperfect Information in
Subprime Lending. American Economic Review, 99(1):49–84.
Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3):488–500.
Anderson, P. M. and Meyer, B. D. (1993). Unemployment Insurance in the United States: Layoff
Incentives and Cross Subsidies. Journal of Labor Economics, 11(1):70–95.
Anderson, P. M. and Meyer, B. D. (1997). Unemployment Insurance Takeup Rates and the AfterTax Value of Benefits. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3):913–37.
Auerbach, A. J. (1985). The theory of excess burden and optimal taxation. In Auerbach, A. J.
and Feldstein, M., editors, Handbook of Public Economics, volume 1, pages 61–127. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, North Holland.
Autor, D. H. and Duggan, M. G. (2003). The Rise In The Disability Rolls And The Decline In
Unemployment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1):157–205.
Baicker, K., Goldin, C., and Katz, L. F. (1998). A Distinctive System: Origins and Impact of
U.S. Unemployment Compensation. In Bordo, M. D., Goldin, C., and White, E. N., editors, The
Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century,
pages 227–263. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Baily, M. N. (1978). Some aspects of optimal unemployment insurance. Journal of Public Economics, 10(3):379–402.
Baird, S., Hicks, J. H., Kremer, M., and Miguel, E. (2011). Worms at Work: Long-run Impacts of
Child Health Gains. Mimeo. http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~emiguel/pdfs/miguel_wormsatwork.pdf.
Bank of Sweden (2001). Press Release: The 2001 Sveriges Riksbank (Bank of Sweden) Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, Advanced Information. http://www.nobelprize.org/
nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/2001/advanced-economicsciences2001.pdf.
Barseghyan, L., Molinari, F., O’Donoghue, T., and Teitelbaum, J. C. (2012). The Nature of Risk
Preferences: Evidence from Insurance Choices. SSRN Working Paper 1646520.
66

Barseghyan, L., Prince, J., and Teitelbaum, J. C. (2011). Are Risk Preferences Stable across
Contexts? Evidence from Insurance Data. American Economic Review, 101(2):591–631.
Barsky, R. B., Juster, F. T., Kimball, M. S., and Shapiro, M. D. (1997). Preference Parameters
and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement Study.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2):537–579.
Bernheim, B. D. and Rangel, A. (2009). Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice-Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics-super-. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1):51–104.
Bertrand, M., Luttmer, E. F. P., and Mullainathan, S. (2000). Network Effects And Welfare
Cultures. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3):1019–1055.
Bhargava, S. and Manoli, D. (2011). Why are Benefits Left on the Table? Assessing the Role
of Information, Complexity, and Stigma on Take-up with an IRS Field Experiment. Working
Paper.
Black, D. A., Smith, J. A., Berger, M. C., and Noel, B. J. (2003). Is the Threat of Reemployment
Services More Effective Than the Services Themselves? Evidence from Random Assignment in
the UI System. American Economic Review, 93(4):1313–1327.
Blanchard, O. J. and Tirole, J. (2008). The Joint Design of Unemployment Insurance and Employment Protection: A First Pass. Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(1):45–77.
Blundell, R., Pistaferri, L., and Preston, I. (2008). Consumption Inequality and Partial Insurance.
American Economic Review, 98(5):1887–1921.
Borghans, L., Gielen, A. C., and Luttmer, E. F. P. (2010). Social Support Shopping: Evidence
from a Regression Discontinuity in Disability Insurance Reform. IZA Discussion Paper 5412,
Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Bound, J., Cullen, J. B., Nichols, A., and Schmidt, L. (2004). The welfare implications of increasing
disability insurance benefit generosity. Journal of Public Economics, 88(12):2487–2514.
Bronchetti, E. T. (2012). Workers’ compensation and consumption smoothing. Journal of Public
Economics, 96(5):495–508.
Brown, J., Duggan, M., Kuziemko, I., and Woolston, W. (2011). How does Risk Selection Respond
to Risk Adjustment? Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program. NBER Working Paper
16977, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Brown, J. R. and Finkelstein, A. (2007). Why is the market for long-term care insurance so small?
Journal of Public Economics, 91(10):1967–1991.
Brown, J. R. and Finkelstein, A. (2008). The Interaction of Public and Private Insurance: Medicaid
and the Long-Term Care Insurance Market. American Economic Review, 98(3):1083–1102.
Brown, J. R. and Finkelstein, A. (2011). Insuring Long-Term Care in the United States. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 25(4):119–42.
Brown, J. R., Kroszner, R. S., and Jenn, B. H. (2002). Federal Terrorism Risk Insurance. National
Tax Journal, 55(3):647–657.

67

Browning, M. and Crossley, T. F. (2001). Unemployment insurance benefit levels and consumption
changes. Journal of Public Economics, 80(1):1–23.
Buchanan, J. (1975). The Samaritan’s Dilemma. In Phelps, E., editor, Altruism, Morality and
Economic Theory, pages 71–85. Russell Sage, New York.
Buchmueller, T. and DiNardo, J. (2002). Did Community Rating Induce an Adverse Selection
Death Spiral? Evidence from New York, Pennsylvania, and Connecticut. American Economic
Review, 92(1):280–294.
Bundorf, M. K., Levin, J., and Mahoney, N. (forthcoming). Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan
Choice. American Economic Review.
Bundorf, M. K. and Simon, K. I. (2006). The Effects of Rate Regulation on Demand for Supplemental Health Insurance. American Economic Review, 96(2):67–71.
Card, D., Chetty, R., and Weber, A. (2007a). The Spike at Benefit Exhaustion: Leaving the
Unemployment System or Starting a New Job? American Economic Review, 97(2):113–118.
Card, D., Chetty, R., and Weber, A. (2007b). Cash-On-Hand and Competing Models of Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(4):1511–1560.
Card, D., Dobkin, C., and Maestas, N. (2008). The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance Coverage
on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare. American Economic Review, 98(5):2242–58.
Card, D., Dobkin, C., and Maestas, N. (2009). Does Medicare Save Lives? Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 124(2):597–636.
Card, D. and Levine, P. B. (2000). Extended benefits and the duration of UI spells: evidence from
the New Jersey extended benefit program. Journal of Public Economics, 78(1-2):107–138.
Cardon, J. H. and Hendel, I. (2001). Asymmetric Information in Health Insurance: Evidence from
the National Medical Expenditure Survey. RAND Journal of Economics, 32(3):408–27.
Carlin, C. and Town, R. (2010). Adverse Selection: The Dog That Didn’t Bite. Mimeo, University
of Minnesota.
Carroll, C. D. (1997). Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1):1–55.
Centeno, M. and Novo, A. (2009). Reemployment wages and UI liquidity effect: a regression
discontinuity approach. Portuguese Economic Journal, 8(1):45–52.
Chetty, R. (2006a). A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion. American Economic Review,
96(5):1821–1834.
Chetty, R. (2006b). A general formula for the optimal level of social insurance. Journal of Public
Economics, 90(10-11):1879–1901.
Chetty, R. (2008). Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance. Journal
of Political Economy, 116(2):173–234.

68

Chetty, R. (2009). Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and
Reduced-Form Methods. Annual Review of Economics, 1(1):451–488.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Olsen, T., and Pistaferri, L. (2011). Adjustment Costs, Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax Records.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2):749–804.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., and Saez, E. (2012). Using Differences in Knowledge Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings. NBER Working Paper 18232, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Chetty, R. and Looney, A. (2006). Consumption smoothing and the welfare consequences of social
insurance in developing economies. Journal of Public Economics, 90(12):2351–2356.
Chetty, R., Looney, A., and Kroft, K. (2009). Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.
American Economic Review, 99(4):1145–77.
Chetty, R. and Saez, E. (2010). Optimal Taxation and Social Insurance with Endogenous Private
Insurance. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(2):85–114.
Chetty, R. and Szeidl, A. (2007). Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122(2):831–877.
Chiappori, P.-A., Jullien, B., Salanié, B., and Salanié, F. (2006). Asymmetric information in
insurance: general testable implications. RAND Journal of Economics, 37(4):783–798.
Chiappori, P.-A. and Salanie, B. (2000). Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance Markets.
Journal of Political Economy, 108(1):56–78.
Clark, A. E. (2003). Unemployment as a Social Norm: Psychological Evidence from Panel Data.
Journal of Labor Economics, 21(2):289–322.
Coate, S. (1995). Altruism, the Samaritan’s Dilemma, and Government Transfer Policy. American
Economic Review, 85(1):46–57.
Cochrane, J. H. (1991). A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance. Journal of Political Economy,
99(5):957–76.
Cohen, A. and Einav, L. (2007). Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice. American
Economic Review, 97(3):745–788.
Cohen, A. and Siegelman, P. (2010). Testing for Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets. Journal
of Risk and Insurance, 77(1):39–84.
Crocker, K. J. and Snow, A. (1985). The efficiency of competitive equilibria in insurance markets
with asymmetric information. Journal of Public Economics, 26(2):207–219.
Crépon, B., Duflo, E., Gurgand, M., Rathelot, R., and Zamora, P. (2012). Do Labor Market
Policies Have Displacement Effects? Evidence from a Clustered Randomized Experiment. CEPR
Discussion Papers 9251, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Cullen, J. B. and Gruber, J. (2000). Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd Out Spousal Labor
Supply? Journal of Labor Economics, 18(3):546–72.
69

Currie, J. (2006). The Take-up of Social Benefits. In Auerbach, A., Card, D., and Quigley, J.,
editors, Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy, pages 80–148. Russell Sage, New
York.
Currie, J. and Gruber, J. (1996a). Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
Child Health. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2):431–66.
Currie, J. and Gruber, J. (1996b). Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the
Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women. Journal of Political Economy, 104(6):1263–96.
Cutler, D. M. (2002). Health care and the public sector. In Auerbach, A. J. and Feldstein,
M., editors, Handbook of Public Economics, edition 1, volume 4, pages 2143–2243. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, North Holland.
Cutler, D. M., Finkelstein, A., and McGarry, K. (2008). Preference Heterogeneity and Insurance
Markets: Explaining a Puzzle of Insurance. American Economic Review, 98(2):157–62.
Cutler, D. M. and Gruber, J. (1996). Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private Insurance? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2):391–430.
Cutler, D. M. and Reber, S. J. (1998). Paying For Health Insurance: The Trade-Off Between
Competition And Adverse Selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2):433–466.
Cutler, D. M. and Zeckhauser, R. J. (2000). The anatomy of health insurance. In Culyer, A. J.
and Newhouse, J. P., editors, Handbook of Health Economics, edition 1, volume 1 of Handbook
of Health Economics, pages 563–643. Elsevier, Amsterdam, North Holland.
Davidoff, T., Brown, J. R., and Diamond, P. A. (2005). Annuities and Individual Welfare. American
Economic Review, 95(5):1573–1590.
de Meza, D. and Webb, D. C. (2001). Advantageous Selection in Insurance Markets. RAND Journal
of Economics, 32(2):249–62.
Deaton, A. (1991). Saving and Liquidity Constraints. Econometrica, 59(5):1221–48.
DellaVigna, S. and Paserman, M. D. (2005). Job Search and Impatience. Journal of Labor Economics, 23(3):527–588.
Devine, T. J. and Kiefer, N. M. (1991). Empirical Labor Economics: The Search Approach. Oxford
University Press, New York.
Diamond, P. A. (1977). A framework for social security analysis. Journal of Public Economics,
8(3):275–298.
Ebenstein, A. and Stange, K. (2010). Does inconvenience explain low take-up? Evidence from
unemployment insurance. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 29(1):111–136.
Eckstein, Z., Eichenbaum, M., and Peled, D. (1985). Uncertain lifetimes and the welfare enhancing
properties of annuity markets and social security. Journal of Public Economics, 26(3):303–326.
Einav, L. and Finkelstein, A. (2011). Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and Empirics in
Pictures. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1):115–38.

70

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Cullen, M. R. (2010a). Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets
Using Variation in Prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3):877–921.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Levin, J. (2010b). Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of Insurance
Markets. Annual Review of Economics, 2(1):311–336.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Pascu, I., and Cullen, M. (forthcoming). How General Are Risk Preferences? Choices Under Uncertainty in Different Domains. American Economic Review.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Ryan, S. P., Schrimpf, P., and Cullen, M. R. (2011). Selection on
Moral Hazard in Health Insurance. NBER Working Paper 16969, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Schrimpf, P. (2010c). Optimal Mandates and the Welfare Cost of
Asymmetric Information: Evidence From the U.K. Annuity Market. Econometrica, 78(3):1031–
1092.
Engen, E. M. and Gruber, J. (2001). Unemployment insurance and precautionary saving. Journal
of Monetary Economics, 47(3):545–579.
Fang, H., Keane, M. P., and Silverman, D. (2008). Sources of Advantageous Selection: Evidence
from the Medigap Insurance Market. Journal of Political Economy, 116(2):303–350.
Fang, H. and Silverman, D. (2009). Time-Inconsistency And Welfare Program Participation: Evidence From The NLSY. International Economic Review, 50(4):1043–1077.
Feldstein, M. (1978). The Effect of Unemployment Insurance on Temporary Layoff Unemployment.
American Economic Review, 68(5):834–46.
Feldstein, M. and Altman, D. (2007). Unemployment Insurance Savings Accounts. In Tax Policy
and the Economy, volume 21 of NBER Chapters, pages 35–64. National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Feldstein, M. and Liebman, J. B. (2002). Social security. In Auerbach, A. J. and Feldstein, M.,
editors, Handbook of Public Economics, edition 1, volume 4 of Handbook of Public Economics,
pages 2245–2324. Elsevier, Amsterdam, North Holland.
Feldstein, M. and Poterba, J. (1984). Unemployment insurance and reservation wages. Journal of
Public Economics, 23(1-2):141–167.
Finkelstein, A. (2004). The interaction of partial public insurance programs and residual private
insurance markets: evidence from the US Medicare program. Journal of Health Economics,
23(1):1–24.
Finkelstein, A. (2007). The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the Introduction
of Medicare. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1):1–37.
Finkelstein, A., Luttmer, E. F. P., and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2008). What Good Is Wealth Without
Health? The Effect of Health on the Marginal Utility of Consumption. NBER Working Paper
14089, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Finkelstein, A., Luttmer, E. F. P., and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2009a). Approaches to Estimating the
Health State Dependence of the Utility Function. American Economic Review, 99(2):116–21.
71

Finkelstein, A. and McGarry, K. (2006). Multiple Dimensions of Private Information: Evidence
from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market. American Economic Review, 96(4):938–958.
Finkelstein, A. and McKnight, R. (2008). What did Medicare do? The initial impact of Medicare
on mortality and out of pocket medical spending. Journal of Public Economics, 92(7):1644–1668.
Finkelstein, A. and Poterba, J. (2002). Selection Effects in the United Kingdom Individual Annuities
Market. Economic Journal, 112(476):28–50.
Finkelstein, A. and Poterba, J. (2004). Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Policyholder
Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market. Journal of Political Economy, 112(1):183–208.
Finkelstein, A. and Poterba, J. (2006). Testing for Adverse Selection with ‘Unused Observables’.
NBER Working Paper 12112, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Finkelstein, A., Poterba, J., and Rothschild, C. (2009b). Redistribution by insurance market regulation: Analyzing a ban on gender-based retirement annuities. Journal of Financial Economics,
91(1):38–58.
Finkelstein, A., Taubman, S., Wright, B., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J., Newhouse, J. P., Allen, H.,
Baicker, K., and Group, T. O. H. S. (2011). The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence
from the First Year. NBER Working Paper 17190, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Fishback, P. V. and Kantor, S. E. (1998). The Adoption of Workers’ Compensation in the United
States, 1900-1930. Journal of Law and Economics, 41(2):305–41.
Friedman, B. M. and Warshawsky, M. J. (1990). The Cost of Annuities: Implications for Saving
Behavior and Bequests. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(1):135–54.
Froot, K. A. (2001). The market for catastrophe risk: a clinical examination. Journal of Financial
Economics, 60(2-3):529–571.
Gertler, P. and Gruber, J. (2002). Insuring Consumption Against Illness. American Economic
Review, 92(1):51–70.
Geruso, M. (2011). Selection in Employer Health Plans: Homogeneous Prices and Heterogeneous
Preferences. Mimeo, Princeton University.
Glied, S. (2000). Managed care. In Culyer, A. J. and Newhouse, J. P., editors, Handbook of Health
Economics, volume 1, pages 707–753. Elsevier, Amsterdam, North Holland.
Golosov, M. and Tsyvinski, A. (2007). Optimal Taxation With Endogenous Insurance Markets.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2):487–534.
Gross, T. and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2011). Health insurance and the consumer bankruptcy decision:
Evidence from expansions of Medicaid. Journal of Public Economics, 95(7-8):767–778.
Gruber, J. (1997). The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance. American
Economic Review, 87(1):192–205.
Gruber, J. (2000). Disability Insurance Benefits and Labor Supply. Journal of Political Economy,
108(6):1162–1183.
Gruber, J. (2009). Public Finance and Public Policy. Worth Publishers, New York, edition 3.
72

Gruber, J. and Wise, D. A., editors (1999). Social Security and Retirement around the World.
NBER Book Series - International Social Security. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Hamermesh, D. S. (1982). Social Insurance and Consumption: An Empirical Inquiry. American
Economic Review, 72(1):101–13.
Handel, B. R. (2011). Adverse Selection and Switching Costs in Health Insurance Markets: When
Nudging Hurts. NBER Working Paper 17459, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hansen, G. D. and Imrohoroglu, A. (1992). The Role of Unemployment Insurance in an Economy
with Liquidity Constraints and Moral Hazard. Journal of Political Economy, 100(1):118–42.
Hartley, G. R., van Ours, J. C., and Vodopivec, M. (2011). Incentive effects of unemployment
insurance savings accounts: Evidence from Chile. Labour Economics, 18(6):798–809.
Hemenway, D. (1990). Propitious Selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(4):1063–69.
Hendel, I. and Lizzeri, A. (2003). The Role Of Commitment In Dynamic Contracts: Evidence From
Life Insurance. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1):299–327.
Hendren, N. (2012). Private Information and Insurance Rejections. NBER Working Paper 18282,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Herring, B. (2005). The effect of the availability of charity care to the uninsured on the demand
for private health insurance. Journal of Health Economics, 24(2):225–252.
Hopenhayn, H. A. and Nicolini, J. P. (1997). Optimal Unemployment Insurance. Journal of Political
Economy, 105(2):412–38.
Hosseini, R. (2010). Adverse Selection in the Annuity Market and the Role for Social Security. Mimeo. http://www.public.asu.edu/~rhossein/Roozbeh_Hosseini/Research_files/Hosseini_Annuity_SS_Final.pdf.
Hubbard, R. G., Skinner, J., and Zeldes, S. P. (1995). Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance.
Journal of Political Economy, 103(2):360–99.
Huggett, M. and Parra, J. C. (2010). How Well Does the U.S. Social Insurance System Provide
Social Insurance? Journal of Political Economy, 118(1):76–112.
Jappelli, T. and Pistaferri, L. (2010). The Consumption Response to Income Changes. Annual
Review of Economics, 2(1):479–506.
Kaplow, L. (1991). Incentives and Government Relief for Risk. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
4(2):167–75.
Karlan, D. and Zinman, J. (2009). Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries
With a Consumer Credit Field Experiment. Econometrica, 77(6):1993–2008.
Katz, L. F. and Meyer, B. D. (1990). Unemployment Insurance, Recall Expectations, and Unemployment Outcomes. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(4):973–1002.
Kling, J. R., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., Vermeulen, L. C., and Wrobel, M. V. (2012). Comparison
Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
127(1):199–235.
73

Kocherlakota, N. R. (1996). The Equity Premium: It’s Still a Puzzle. Journal of Economic
Literature, 34(1):42–71.
Kremer, M. and Miguel, E. (2004). Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the
Presence of Treatment Externalities. Econometrica, 72(1):159–217.
Kroft, K. (2008). Takeup, social multipliers and optimal social insurance. Journal of Public Economics, 92(3-4):722–737.
Kroft, K. and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2011). Should Unemployment Insurance Vary With the Unemployment Rate? Theory and Evidence. NBER Working Paper 17173, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Krueger, A. B. and Meyer, B. D. (2002). Labor supply effects of social insurance. In Auerbach, A. J.
and Feldstein, M., editors, Handbook of Public Economics, edition 1, volume 4, pages 2327–2392.
Elsevier, Amsterdam, North Holland.
Krueger, A. B. and Mueller, A. I. (2011). Job Search and Job Finding in a Period of Mass
Unemployment: Evidence from High-Frequency Longitudinal Data. IZA Discussion Paper 5450,
Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
112(2):443–77.
Lalive, R. (2003). Social Interactions in Unemployment. IZA Discussion Paper 803, Institute for
the Study of Labor (IZA).
Lalive, R. (2007). Unemployment Benefits, Unemployment Duration, and Post-Unemployment
Jobs: A Regression Discontinuity Approach. American Economic Review, 97(2):108–112.
Lalive, R. (2008). How do extended benefits affect unemployment duration A regression discontinuity approach. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2):785–806.
Lalive, R., van Ours, J. C., and Zweimüller, J. (2006). How Changes in Financial Incentives Affect
the Duration of Unemployment. Review of Economic Studies, 73(4):1009–1038.
LaLonde, R. (2007). The Case for Wage Insurance. Council Special Report 30, Council on Foreign
Relations Press.
LaLumia, S. (2011). The EITC, Tax Refunds, and Unemployment Spells. Department of Economics
Working Paper 2011-09, Department of Economics, Williams College.
Landais, C. (2011). Heterogeneity and Behavioral Responses to Unemployment Benefits over the
Business Cycle. SIEPR working paper, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research.
Landais, C. (2012). Assessing the Welfare Effects of Unemployment Benefits Using the Regression
Kink Design. PEP working paper, London School of Economics.
Landais, C., Michaillat, P., and Saez, E. (2012). Optimal Unemployment Insurance over the
Business Cycle. NBER Working Paper 16526, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lentz, R. (2009). Optimal Unemployment Insurance in an Estimated Job Search Model with
Savings. Review of Economic Dynamics, 12(1):37–57.
74

Lentz, R. and Tranas, T. (2005). Job Search and Savings: Wealth Effects and Duration Dependence.
Journal of Labor Economics, 23(3):467–490.
Lillard, L. A. and Weiss, Y. (1997). Uncertain Health and Survival: Effects on End-of-Life Consumption. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 15(2):254–68.
Lindbeck, A., Nyberg, S., and Weibull, J. W. (1999). Social Norms And Economic Incentives In
The Welfare State. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1):1–35.
Lucas, R. (1987). Models of Business Cycles. Basil Blackwell, New York.
Lustig, J. (2011). The Welfare Effects of Adverse Selection in Privatized Medicare. Mimeo, Boston
University. http://people.bu.edu/jlustig/lustig_march2011.pdf.
Maestas, N., Mullen, K. J., and Strand, A. (forthcoming). Does Disability Insurance Receipt
Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt.
American Economic Review.
Mahoney, N. (2012). Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance. NBER Working Paper 18105,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Manning, W. G., Newhouse, J. P., Duan, N., Keeler, E. B., and Leibowitz, A. (1987). Health
Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment. The
American Economic Review, 77(3):251–277.
McCarthy, D. and Mitchell, O. S. (2003). International Adverse Selection in Life Insurance and
Annuities. NBER Working Paper 9975, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mehra, R. and Prescott, E. C. (1985). The equity premium: A puzzle. Journal of Monetary
Economics, 15(2):145–161.
Metrick, A. (1995). A Natural Experiment in ‘Jeopardy!’. American Economic Review, 85(1):240–
53.
Meyer, B. D. (1990).
58(4):757–82.

Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells.

Econometrica,

Meyer, B. D., Viscusi, W. K., and Durbin, D. L. (1995). Workers’ Compensation and Injury
Duration: Evidence from a Natural Experiment. American Economic Review, 85(3):322–40.
Mitchell, O. S., Poterba, J. M., Warshawsky, M. J., and Brown, J. R. (1999). New Evidence on the
Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities. American Economic Review, 89(5):1299–1318.
Newhouse, J. P. (2002). Princing the Priceless: A Health Care Conundrum. The MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.
Newhouse, J. P. and {RAND Corporation Insurance Experiment Group} (1996). Free for All?:
Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Mass.
Nichols, A. L. and Zeckhauser, R. J. (1982). Targeting Transfers through Restrictions on Recipients.
American Economic Review, 72(2):372–77.

75

Nyman, J. (2003). The Theory of Demand for Health Insurance. Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif.
Orszag, J. M. and Snower, D. J. (2002). Incapacity benefits and employment policy. Labour
Economics, 9(5):631–641.
Oster, E., Shoulson, I., Quaid, K., and Dorsey, E. R. (2010). Genetic adverse selection: Evidence
from long-term care insurance and Huntington disease. Journal of Public Economics, 94(1112):1041–1050.
Pauly, M. V. (1974). Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The Roles of Moral Hazard
and Adverse Selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88(1):44–62.
Philipson, T. J. and Becker, G. S. (1998). Old-Age Longevity and Mortality-Contingent Claims.
Journal of Political Economy, 106(3):551–573.
Rabin, M. (2000). Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem. Econometrica, 68(5):1281–1292.
Rothschild, M. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1976). Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay
on the Economics of Imperfect Information. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4):630–49.
Rothstein, J. (2010). Is the EITC as Good as an NIT? Conditional Cash Transfers and Tax
Incidence. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(1):177–208.
Schmieder, J. F., Wachter, T. v., and Bender, S. (2012). The Effects of Extended Unemployment
Insurance Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Regression Discontinuity Estimates Over 20
Years. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2):701–752.
Shavell, S. and Weiss, L. (1979). The Optimal Payment of Unemployment Insurance Benefits over
Time. Journal of Political Economy, 87(6):1347–62.
Sheshinski, E. (2007). The Economic Theory of Annuities, volume 1 of Economics Books. Princeton
University Press.
Shimer, R. and Werning, I. (2006). On the Optimal Timing of Benefits with Heterogeneous Workers
and Human Capital Depreciation. NBER Working Paper 12230, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Shimer, R. and Werning, I. (2007). Reservation Wages and Unemployment Insurance. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122(3):1145–1185.
Shimer, R. and Werning, I. (2008). Liquidity and Insurance for the Unemployed. American Economic Review, 98(5):1922–42.
Simon, K. I. (2005). Adverse selection in health insurance markets? Evidence from state smallgroup health insurance reforms. Journal of Public Economics, 89(9-10):1865–1877.
Social Security Administration (1997). Social Security Programs in the United States. SSA Publication 13-11758.
Spinnewijn, J. (2010).
Unemployed but Optimistic:
Optimal
sign with Biased Beliefs.
Working Paper,
London School
http://personal.lse.ac.uk/spinnewi/biasedbeliefs.pdf.
76

Insurance Deof Economics.

Spinnewijn, J. (2012). Heterogeneity, Demand for Insurance and Adverse Selection. Working Paper,
London School of Economics. http://personal.lse.ac.uk/spinnewi/perceptions_welfare.pdf.
Starc, A. (2011). Insurer Pricing and Consumer Welfare: Evidence from Medigap.
http://hcmg.wharton.upenn.edu/documents/research/Astarc_pricing.pdf.

Mimeo.

Stiglitz, J. E. and Yun, J. (2005). Integration of unemployment insurance with retirement insurance.
Journal of Public Economics, 89(11-12):2037–2067.
Summers, L. H. (1989). Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits. American Economic Review,
79(2):177–83.
Sydnor, J. (2010). (Over)insuring Modest Risks. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
2(4):177–99.
Topel, R. H. (1983). On Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance. American Economic Review,
73(4):541–59.
Townsend, R. M. (1994). Risk and Insurance in Village India. Econometrica, 62(3):539–91.
van Ours, J. C. and Vodopivec, M. (2008). Does reducing unemployment insurance generosity
reduce job match quality? Journal of Public Economics, 92(3-4):684–695.
von Wachter, T., Song, J., and Manchester, J. (2009). Long-Term Earnings Losses due to MassLayoffs During the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using Longitudinal Administrative Data from
1974 to 2004. Working Paper, Columbia University.
Wang, C. and Williamson, S. (1996). Unemployment insurance with moral hazard in a dynamic
economy. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 44(1):1–41.
Werning, I. (2002). Optimal Unemployment Insurance with Unobservable Savings. Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Wilson, C. (1977). A model of insurance markets with incomplete information. Journal of Economic
Theory, 16(2):167–207.
Wolpin, K. I. (1987). Estimating a Structural Search Model: The Transition from School to Work.
Econometrica, 55(4):801–17.
Yaari, M. E. (1965). Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer. The
Review of Economic Studies, 32(2):137–150.

77

54.6
20.1

Germany

7.4

Brazil

United States
Japan

Nicaragua
Korea

2.7

Namibia
China

Malaysia
Kenya

India

Indonesia

1.0

Total Social Insurance Exp % of GDP (log scale)

Figure 1: Social Insurance vs. GDP Per Capita in 1996

$403

$1,097

$2,981

$8,103

$22,026

$59,874

GDP Per Capita (log scale)

Notes: Social Insurance statistics are from International Labour Organization (2000).
Social insurance is de…ned as total expenditures on social security, disability insurance,
unemployment insurance, insurance against work-related injuries, and government provided health insurance. GDP statistics are from the Penn World tables. GDP is measured in PPP-adjusted 1996 US dollars.

Figure 2: Adverse Selection in the Textbook Setting
Price

B
Demand curve

A
AC curve
C
Peqm
MC curve

J
G
E

D
Qeqm

F
Qmax Quantity

Source: Einav and Finkelstein (2011).
Notes: Figure 2 shows the demand (willingness-to-pay) for a high coverage H relative
to a lower coverage contract L, and the associated marginal and average incremental
cost (i.e. expected insurance claims) curves. The downward sloping marginal cost curve
indicates adverse selection. The e¢ cient allocation is for everyone to be covered by H
(since willingness to pay is always above marginal cost) but the equilibrium allocation
covers only those whose willingness to pay is above average costs, creating the classic
under-insurance result of adverse selection. The welfare loss from this under-insurance
is given by the trapezoid CDEF, representing the excess of demand above marginal cost
for those who are not covered by H in equilibrium.

Figure 3: Adverse Selection with Additional Costs of Providing Insurance
Price

A

Demand curve

B

AC curve
C

Peqm
MC curve

D

E

F

Peff
G
H
Qeqm

Qeff

Qmax Quantity

Source: Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010)
Notes: In this departure from the textbook case, we allow for the possibility of a loading factor on the insurance contract H. As a result, the marginal cost curve may now
intersect the demand curve internally, in which case it is not e¢ cient to cover all individuals with H: The e¢ cient allocation is given by point E (where demand intersects the
marginal cost curve) and the equilibrium allocation is given by point C (where demand
intersects the average cost curve). Once again there is under-insurance due to adverse
selection (Qeqm < Qef f ) and the welfare loss from this under-insurance is given by the
trianglec CDE.

Figure 4: Advantageous Selection
Price

A

Demand curve

MC curve

D

G

E

Peff

C

F

Peqm
H

B

AC curve
Qeff

Qeqm

Qmax Quantity

Source: Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010).
Notes: Advantageous selection is characterized by an upward sloping marginal cost
curve. The average cost curve therefore lies below the marginal cost curve, resulting in
over-insurance relative to the e¢ cient allocation (Qef f < Qeqm ). The welfare loses from
over-insurance is given by the shaded area CDE and represents the excess of marginal
cost over willingness to pay for people whose willingness to pay exceed the average costs
of those covered by H:

Figure 5: The “Positive Correlation” Test for Selection
Price

A

Demand curve

ACH curve

B
Peqm

C

I

MC curve

D
F

E

Peff
G
H

ACL curve

Qeqm

Qeff

Qmax Quantity

Source: Einav and Finkelstein (2011).
Notes: AC H denotes the AC curve shown in previous …gures (i.e. average costs of
those with the higher coverage contract H: The AC L curve represents the average costs
of those with the lower coverage contract L: The di¤erence in the average costs of
those with more and less insurance in equilibrium is given by the line segment CF . The
positive correlation test for asymmetric information tests whether average costs of those
who in equilibrium have more insurance (pint C) are above average costs of those who
in equilibrium have less insurance (point F ):

TABLE 1
Social Insurance: A Summary of Existing Applied Work
(1)
(2)
(3)
Testing for
Quantifying
Estimation
Selection Welfare Costs of of Benefits
Selection
Medicare / Medicaid

X

X

X

Disability Insurance

(4)
Estimation of
Moral Hazard
Costs

(5)
Calculating
Optimal Benefit
Levels

X
X

Unemp. Insurance

X

X

X

Workers’ Comp.

X

X

X

NOTES: This table lists areas where we are aware of empirical work on the topic listed in each column for five major social
insurance programs. Selected examples of this work would include the following. Column 1: Cutler and Reber (1998) on
Medicare/Medicaid (more accurately: private health insurance markets). Column 2: Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) on
health insurance markets. Column 3: Card et al. (2009) on Medicare and Finkelstein et al. (2012) on Medicaid; Gruber
(1997) and Chetty (2008) on unemployment insurance, and Bronchetti (2012) on workers compensation. Column 4: Card et
al. (2009) on Medicare and Finkelstein et al. (2012) on Medicaid; Gruber (2001) and Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2012) on
disability insurance, Meyer (1990) and Card, Chetty, and Weber (2007) on unemployment insurance, and Meyer, Viscusi, and
Durbin (1995) on workers' compensation. Column 5: Gruber (1997) and Chetty (2008) on unemployment insurance and
Bronchetti (2012) on workers compensation.

