                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CONSUMPTION INEQUALITY AND FAMILY LABOR SUPPLY

                                             Richard Blundell
                                              Luigi Pistaferri
                                           Itay Saporta-Eksten

                                          Working Paper 18445
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18445


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2012




We thank Nick Bloom, Olympia Bover, Martin Browning, Chris Carroll, Jon Levin, Gianluca Violante
and seminar participants at the 2012 ESEM, 2012 Royal Economic Society, 2012 UCL Economics
Phd Alumni Conference, 2012 UCL Conference on Labour Markets and the Welfare State, 2011 SED,
the 2011 Workshop on Stabilization Policies at the University of Copenhagen, the Bank of Italy, Venice,
Bologna, Mannheim, and Cattolica Milan for comments. Thanks to Kerwin Charles for initial help
with the new consumption data from the PSID. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the UK Economic and Social Research Council (Blundell), and the ERC starting grant 284024
(Pistaferri). All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Richard Blundell, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumption Inequality and Family Labor Supply
Richard Blundell, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten
NBER Working Paper No. 18445
October 2012
JEL No. E21,J22

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper we examine the link between wage inequality and consumption inequality using a life
cycle model that incorporates household consumption and family labor supply decisions. We derive
analytical expressions based on approximations for the dynamics of consumption, hours, and earnings
of two earners in the presence of correlated wage shocks, non-separability and asset accumulation
decisions. We show how the model can be estimated and identified using panel data for hours, earnings,
assets and consumption. We focus on the importance of family labour supply as an insurance mechanism
to wage shocks and find strong evidence of smoothing of male’s and female’s permanent shocks to
wages. Once family labor supply, assets and taxes are properly accounted for their is little evidence
of additional insurance.


Richard Blundell                                  Itay Saporta-Eksten
University College London                         Stanford University
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Gower Street                                      579 Serra Mall
London, ENGLAND                                   Stanford CA 94305
r.blundell@ucl.ac.uk                              isaporta@stanford.edu

Luigi Pistaferri
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pista@stanford.edu
1        Introduction

      The link between household consumption inequality and idiosyncratic income changes has been the

focus of a large body of recent economic research (Blundell et al., 2008; Heathcote et al., 2009).1 This

literature usually relates movements in consumption to predicted and unpredictable income changes as well

as persistent and non-persistent shocks to economic resources. One remarkable and consistent empirical

finding in most of this recent work is that household consumption appears significantly smoothed, even with

respect to highly persistent shocks.2 But what are the mechanisms behind such smoothing? This is the

question we attempt to answer in this paper.

     To do so, we set up a life cycle model that allows for three potential sources of smoothing. The first,

a traditional one in the literature, is self-insurance through credit markets. The second source is family

labor supply, i.e., the fact that hours of work can be adjusted along with, or alternatively to, spending

on goods in response to shocks to economic resources. While this is not a new channel (see Heckman,

1974; Low, 2005), the focus on family labor supply has not received much attention. As we shall see, our

empirical analysis suggests that this is a key insurance channel available to families, and hence its omission

is particularly glaring if the goal is to have an accurate view of how households respond to changes in their

economic fortunes. Finally, households may have access to external sources of insurance, ranging from help

received by networks of relatives and friends, to social insurance such as unemployment benefits and food

stamps, to formal market insurance. It is hard to model in a credible way the myriad of external insurance

channels potentially available to households. We hence choose to subsume these mechanisms into a single

parameter, measuring all consumption insurance that remains after accounting for the two "self-insurance"

sources discussed above. We use our estimates to measure how much of the consumption smoothing we find

in the data can be explained by these various forces in diﬀerent stages of the life cycle.
    1 Meghir    and Pistaferri (2011) and Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010) review the relevant theoretical and empirical literature.
    2 See   for example Krueger and Perri (2006), Primiceri and van-Rens (2009), Blundell et al. (2008), Heathcote et al. (2009),
Kaufman and Pistaferri (2009), Kaplan and Violante (2010) and Hryshko (2011). See moreover Guvenen (2007) and Guvenen
and Smith (2010) for an alternative view about the nature of the income process and its implications for the consumption-income
nexus.


                                                                  1
   >From a modeling point of view, our paper has three distinctive features. First, the labor supply of each

earner within a household is endogenous (hours are chosen to reflect preferences for work and the dynamics of

market wages), heterogeneous (spouses respond diﬀerently to wage changes), and potentially non-separable

with respect to consumption and also with respect to each other (e.g., partners may enjoy spending time

together). The focus on endogenous labor supply makes market wages the primitive source of uncertainty

faced by households; the focus on heterogeneity and non-separability agrees with most influential work on

labor supply (see Blundell and MaCurdy, 1999, for a survey). Second, we model the stochastic component of

the wage process as being the sum of transitory and permanent components - these components are allowed

to be freely correlated across spouses, reflecting for example assortative mating or risk sharing arrangements.

Finally, since our goal is to understand the transmission mechanisms from wage shocks to consumption and

labor supply, we obtain analytical expressions for consumption and labor supply as a function of wage shocks

using approximations of the first order conditions of the problem and of the lifetime budget constraint (as

illustrated in Blundell and Preston, 1998; Blundell et al., 2008). A similar goal is pursued in Heathcote et al.

(2009), but it diﬀers from ours because the authors focus on one-earner labor supply models, assume that

preferences are separable, and decompose permanent shocks into two components (measuring the fraction

of permanent shocks which is insurable). The usefulness of our approach is that gives a very intuitive and

transparent view of how the various structural parameters are identified using panel data on individual wages

and earnings (or hours), and household consumption and assets.

   But where do we find such rich data? In the US there are two sources of data that have been extensively

used, the CEX and the PSID. The CEX has complete consumption data, but lacks a long panel component

and the quality of its income, asset and consumption data has recently raised some worries. The PSID has

traditionally being used to address the type of questions we are concerned with in this paper, but until

recently had incomplete consumption data, which has meant that authors have either used just food data

(Hall and Mishkin, 1982; Zeldes, 1989), or resorted to data imputation strategies (Blundell et al., 2008).

In this paper we make use of new consumption data that as far as we know are untapped for the type


                                                       2
of questions asked here. Starting in 1999 the PSID was drastically redesigned. In particular, it enriched

the consumption information available to researchers, which now covers over 70% of all consumption items

available in the CEX. On the other hand, as part of its redesign, data are now available only every other

year. However, this can be easily accounted for in our framework.

    Our paper is related to several literatures in macroeconomics and labor economics. A large literature in

macroeconomics is devoted to understanding the response of consumption to income changes, both antici-

pated changes and economic shocks. A good understanding of how consumer respond to income changes is

of course crucial when evaluating policy changes that impacts households’ resources (such as tax and labor

market reforms), as well as for the design of stabilization, social insurance, and income maintenance policies.

Recent contributions that assume exogenous labor supply include Krueger and Perri (2006), and Blundell

et al. (2008). In contrast, Attanasio et al. (2002) Blundell and Preston (2004) and Heathcote et al. (2009),

relax the exogeneity of labor supply but either focus on a single earner, aggregate hours across spouses, or

impose restrictions on the nature and type of insurance available to consumers.3 Most of these papers find

a significant degree of consumption smoothing against income shocks, including very persistent ones.

    A related literature in labor economics asks to what extent a secondary earner’s labor supply (typically,

the wife’s) increases in response to negative wage shocks faced by the primary earner (Lundberg, 1985).

This literature, also known as the "added worker eﬀect" literature, investigates the role of marriage as a

risk sharing device focusing mostly on the wives’ propensity to become employed when their husbands exit

employment. Saving choices are typically not modeled.4
   3 More   in detail, Attanasio et al. (2002) introduce a model with a two earners’ household. They do not explicitly model
the labor supply decision of the household, but rather use Markov process for the evolution of the participation of the second
earner. Blundell and Preston (unpublished) develop a lifecycle framework with two earners modeling the simultaneous decision
on consumption and hours worked for each earner. As in Blundell and Preston (1998) they assume that permanent shocks
to earnings are fully transmitted to consumption. Finally, Heathcote et al. (2009) develop an analytical framework for the
estimation of the response of consumption to insurable and uninsurable shocks to wages in a single earner setup.
   4 The most relevant paper for our purposes is Hyslop (2001). He uses a life cycle model to look directly at the response of

hours worked by one earner to the other earners’ wage shocks, decomposing it as the response to transitory and permanent
components. He finds that the permanent shocks to wages are correlated for first and second earner, and that the relatively
large labor supply elasticity for wives can explain about 20% of the rise in household earnings inequality in the early 1980’s.
A recent paper by Juhn and Potter (2007) finds that the value of marriage as a risk sharing device has diminished due to an



                                                              3
   A somewhat distinct, but equally large and influential literature estimates the responsiveness of individual

labor supply to wage changes using micro data (see Keane, 2011, for a recent review of this literature). Most of

the papers in this literature do not consider the joint consumption-labor supply choice (with some exceptions,

Altonji 1986) and focus on the single earner case. We show how the labor elasticities of intertemporal

substitution can be identified allowing for non-separability with respect to consumption and the labor supply

of the partner. As we shall see, allowing for non-separability is important, as previously found in micro

data (Browning and Meghir, 1991). In a recent macro literature, the degree of complementarity between

consumption and hours plays an important role for explaining multiplier eﬀects (see for example Christiano

et al., 2011). Adding consumption information besides labor supply information increases eﬃciency of

estimates and imposes on the model the tougher requirement of fitting not just labor supply moments, but

also consumption moments.

   One of our contributions is to enrich and extend the theoretical framework used in previous literature. In

particular, we consider a life cycle setup in which two individuals within the family (husband and wife) make

unitary decisions about household consumption and their individual labor supply, subject to uncertainty

about oﬀered market wages. We allow for partial insurance of wage shocks through asset accumulation;

heterogeneous Frisch elasticities for husband and wife; non-separability; and diﬀerences between the ex-

tensive and intensive margins of labor supply. These extensions are not merely formal, but substantial.

Estimating a single earner model when two earners are present potentially yields biased estimates for the

level of self insurance and for the elasticity of intertemporal substitution of consumption, a key parameter for

understanding business cycle fluctuations. Studies of the “added worker eﬀect” that disregard self-insurance

through savings may find little evidence for an added worker eﬀect if couples have plenty of accumulated

assets to run down in case of negative shocks to resources. Ignoring nonseparability could yield biased es-

timates for the response of consumption to permanent wage shocks (and also distorts the measurement of

the welfare eﬀect of risk). The direction of the bias is ambiguous and depends on the substitutability or
increase in correlation of employment among couples. See also Stephens (2002).




                                                             4
complementarity of consumption and leisure. If consumption and hours are complements, the response of

consumption to permanent shocks is over estimated. If consumption and hours are substitutes the result is

reversed. A similar bias emerge in estimating the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in labor supply.

With fixed consumption costs of work, diﬀerences will naturally appear between elasticities at the extensive

and the intensive margin.

   >From the empirical side, we highlight the separate identification of Marshallian and Frisch elasticities,

obtained by looking at the response of labor supply to permanent and transitory wage shocks, respectively.

Given the life cycle focus, we allow for age-varying impact of shocks onto consumption and we also consider

the possibility that wage shocks are drawn from age-varying distributions. In this framework, the distinction

between permanent and transitory shocks is important, although in a finite horizon model the eﬀect of a

permanent shock is attenuated by the horizon of the consumer.

   Our work has important policy implications. First, most families (i.e., poor or young families) do not

have the assets that would allow them to smooth consumption eﬀectively. Without the labor supply channel

one could conclude that they have little in the way of maintaining living standards when shocks hit. For

a correct design of public and social insurance policies, it is important to know whether households can

use labor supply as an alternative insurance mechanism and to what extent they do so. Much depends on

whether labor supply is frictionlessly changeable, which can be modelled at the cost of some simplifications.

Moreover, studying how well families smooth income shocks, how this changes over the life and over the

business cycle in response to changes in the economic environment confronted, and how diﬀerent household

types diﬀer in their smoothing opportunities, is an important complement to understanding the eﬀect of

redistributive policies and anti-poverty strategies.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the life cycle model we use and develops

the two cases of interest of additive separability and non-separability; we also discuss identification and how

we estimate the parameters of interest. In Section 3 we describe the data, discuss the empirical strategy, and

the estimation problems we face. Section 4 discusses the main results (including robustness checks), while


                                                       5
Section 5 includes a discussion of intensive vs. extensive margin, labor supply elasticities, and a quantification

of the degree and importance of the various insurance channels. It also examines the eﬀect of introducing

non-linear taxation. Taxes change the interpretation of our results. In particular, we find that the Frisch

elasticities are typically larger when we explicitly account for non-linear taxes. However, the overall results

on consumption smoothing and the insurance value of family labor supply are largely unaﬀected. Section 6

concludes.



2     Two Earners Life-Cycle Model

In this section we develop the link between wage shocks, labor supply and consumption in a life cycle model

of a two earners’ household drawing utility from consumption and disutility from work. The household

chooses consumption and hours of the first and second earner to optimize expected life time utility. We

assume throughout that the hourly wage process is exogenous. For the time being we assume that the

utility function is separable in consumption and both earners’ hours. We relax this later. We maintain

the assumption of separability over time throughout the paper. We also assume decisions are made by the

two household members within a unitary framework. The diﬃculty with relaxing this is that identification

becomes particularly cumbersome in the dynamics case (see Chiappori, 1988, for a static approach).


2.1    Wage Process

For each earner within the household we adopt a permanent-transitory type wage process, assuming that

the permanent component evolves as a unit root process. We confine our analysis to the case of households

with two potential earners, husband and wife. Suppose that the log of real wage of individual  ( = 1 2) of

household  at time  can be written as


                                    log     = 0   +  +                             (1)

                                            = −1 + 




                                                          6
where  are observed characteristics aﬀecting wages and known to the household.  and  are

transitory shocks (such as short illnesses that may aﬀect productivity on the job) and permanent shocks

(such as technological shocks that make one’s marketable skills less or more valuable), respectively. We make

the following assumptions regarding correlation of shocks over time and within household:


                                                          ⎧
                                                          ⎪    2
                                                          ⎨  
                                                          ⎪               if  =  and  = 0
                                   E ( − ) =            if  6=  and  = 0                                 (2)
                                                          ⎪
                                                          ⎪
                                                          ⎩
                                                               0          otherwise
                                                          ⎧
                                                          ⎪    2
                                                          ⎨  
                                                          ⎪               if  =  and  = 0
                                   E ( − ) =            if  6=  and  = 0                                 (3)
                                                          ⎪
                                                          ⎪
                                                          ⎩
                                                               0          otherwise

and E ( − ) = 0 for all   = {1 2} and all . The shocks are not formally insurable. In one of the

robustness checks we conduct, we let the variances of the shocks vary over stages of the life cycle. This is

done to capture the possibility that there is more dispersion in shocks for older workers due, for example, to

worsening of health conditions.

    Assumptions (2) and (3) imply that the process for each shock does not vary with time and it is serially

uncorrelated. Our data do not cover a long time period (six waves, covering eleven years) and hence these

assumptions are less strong than they appear at first (the variance of wages were rather flat over the 1999-

2009 period covered by our data). We also assume that contemporary shocks (transitory or permanent) can

be correlated across spouses.5 This correlation is theoretically ambiguous. If spouses were to adopt perfect

risk sharing mechanisms, they would select jobs where shocks are negatively correlated. Alternatively,

assortative mating or other forms of sorting can imply that spouses work in similar jobs, similar industries,

and sometimes in the same firm - hence their shocks may be potentially highly positively correlated. Finally,

we assume that transitory and permanent shocks are uncorrelated within and between persons.6

    While the stochastic wage structure embedded in (1) is widely used in models of the type we are consid-
   5 This   is potentially important given the empirical findings for the correlation of labor market outcomes of married couples.
See for example Juhn and Potter (2007) and Hyslop (2001).
   6 Hryshko et al. (2011) considers the consequences of relaxing this assumption for partial insurance models.




                                                                 7
ering here, it is far from being uncontroversial. Some authors have stressed the role of superior information

issues (Primiceri and van Rens, 2009); other researchers have emphasized the importance of allowing for

growth heterogeneity (Guvenen and Smith, 2010). Nevertheless, we will show that (1) fits wage data rather

well. We also assume that the household has no advance information about the shocks and that the shocks

are observed (separately) at time .7 We provide a test of no superior information in Section 5.1.

    Given the specification of the wage process (1) the growth in (residual) log wages can be written as


                                                      ∆ = ∆ +                                            (4)


where ∆ is a first diﬀerence operator and ∆ = ∆ ln  − ∆0   (the log change in wages net of

observables). We discuss measurement error issues in Section 3.2.1.


2.2     Household Maximization Problem

Given the exogenous wage processes described above, we assume that the household’s maximization problem

is given by:
                                     
                                     X −
                            max E          + (+  1+  2+ ; +  1+  2+ )            (5)
                                     =0

subject to the intertemporal budget constraint


                                +1 = (1 + ) ( + 1 1 + 2 2 −  )                            (6)


    The time subscript on the utility function + () captures intertemporal discounting. The primary

arguments of the utility function are household consumption  , and the hours chosen by the two earners,

respectively 1 and 2 . The utility function also includes preference shifters specific to the household,

such as number of children ( ), or specific to the earner, such as his or her age (1 and 2 ). These

preference shifters can potentially include stochastic components as well. Note that we can (and will)

specialize + (+  1+  2+ ; +  1+  2+ ) to cover the case of additive separability and
   7 This   is a key assumption in the context of empirical analysis on consumption insurance. See Meghir and Pistaferri (2011)
for a discussion about the interpretation of insurance coeﬃcients when this assumption is violated.




                                                                     8
the non-separability case. We assume that + () is twice diﬀerentiable in all its primary arguments with

  0,   0,   0,    0 for  ∈ {1 2} and  (0 1  2 ) → −∞. Finally,  denotes the

assets at the beginning of period  and  is the fixed interest rate (i.e., this is a Bewley-type model in which

consumers have access to a single risk-free bond).

   There are only a few special cases for which the problem (5)-(6) can be analytically solved. One is the

case of quadratic utility and additive separability (Hall, 1978) which predicts that consumption evolves as

a random walk. Unfortunately, a quadratic utility model does not generate precautionary savings and is

therefore unrealistic. The exponential utility specification is another case for which analytical solutions exist

(Caballero, 1990). A caveat of exponential utility is that it implies constant absolute risk aversion.

   While analytical solutions are based on strong counterfactual assumptions regarding preferences, ap-

proximations for the evolution of consumption and hours can be found in the literature for more realistic

assumptions about preferences. In the following subsection we apply a two-step approximation procedure

similar to the one used in Blundell and Preston (unpublished), Blundell et al. (2008), and Attanasio et al.

(2008). The overall accuracy of this approximation under a variety of preference and income specifications

is assessed in detail in Blundell et al. (2011b).


2.3    The Dynamics of Consumption, Hours and Earnings

Our goal is to link the growth rates of consumption and hours to the wage shocks experienced by the

household. We achieve this in two steps. First, we use a Taylor approximation to the first order conditions

of the problem. This yields expressions for the growth rate of consumption and the growth rate of hours

in terms of changes in wages and an additional expectation error term (the innovation in the marginal

utility of wealth). This is a standard log-linearization approach. Second, we take a log-linearization of

the intertemporal budget constraint. This allows us to map the (unobservable) expectation error in the

consumption and hours growth equations into wage shocks.

   We discuss the two empirically relevant cases, the additive separability case first and the non-separable



                                                       9
case next.


2.3.1      The additive separability case


In the additive separability case, we write the utility function in (5) as:

                                    £                                                                               ¤
                + () = (1 + )−  (+ ; + ) −  1 (1+ ; 1+ ) −  2 (2+ ; 2+ )


    Assuming that the solution for hours is always interior,8 we approximate the first order conditions to

yield the following growth equations for household ’s consumption and for earner ’s earnings (See Appendix

1 for a proof):9




                               ∆    ' −  ∆ ln 

                                        = −  (  +  )                                                                  (7)
                                             ³           ´
                             ∆    '     1 +   ∆ ln  +    ∆ ln 
                                             ³           ´
                                        =     1 +   (∆ +  ) +    (  +  )                          (8)


where  and  are log consumption and log earnings of earner  (net of predictable taste shifters).

We decompose the growth of the marginal utility of wealth, as captured by the Lagrange multiplier on the

sequential budget constraint  , into two components. The first component,   , is a function of the interest

rate , the discount factor , and the variance in the change of marginal utility and captures the intertemporal

substitution and precautionary motives for savings. Assuming that the only source of uncertainty in this

setup is the idiosyncratic wage shocks,   is fixed over the cross-section. The second component,  ,

captures the revisions in the growth of the marginal utility of wealth. The parameter   = − 
                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                             0 is
   8 By   the properties of  () the solution for consumption is always interior. Assuming that hours are always positive is a
much stronger assumption. However, since the goal of this procedure is to derive an analytical estimation framework one can
think of correcting the distribution of observed wages, earnings and consumption for the selection to employment, rather than
to explicitly model the participation decision. See section 3.2.3 for further discussion.
   9 Given that definitionally ∆ log 
                                       = ∆ log  + ∆ log  , we will find it useful to work with log earnings rather

than log hours in what follows.



                                                                 10
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                              1
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) for consumption and    =                      
                                                                                                                0 is the EIS for
                                                                                                          


labor supply of earner , both assumed to be constant.10

    While the characterization (7)-(8) is theoretically appealing, it is empirically not very useful because we

do not know how to characterize the marginal utility of wealth and hence its innovations. To make some

progress, we follow Blundell et al. (2008), and log-linearize the intertemporal budget constraint


                             
                             X −                       
                                                        X −                        
                                                                                    X −
                                     +                  1+ 1+           2+ 2+
                                           =  +                        +                                                 (9)
                             =0
                                    (1 + )             =0
                                                                 (1 + )            =0
                                                                                             (1 + )

and then take the diﬀerence in expectations between period  and  − 1 to obtain equations that link

consumption and earnings growth of the two earners to the wage shocks they face (see Appendix 2 for the

exact derivation). From the second step of the approximation, we can write the shock to the growth in the

marginal utility of wealth  as a linear function of the change in transitory shocks (∆1 and ∆2 )

and the permanent shocks (1 and 2 ) faced by the two earners. From now on, however, we will assume

that the transitory wage shocks of either spouse (∆1 and ∆2 ) have no wealth eﬀect (which is likely

true when the horizon is suﬃciently long). The assumptions we have made yield the following equations for

consumption growth and for the growth of earnings of the two earners under additive separability:11

                                                                                               ⎛             ⎞
                             ⎛            ⎞     ⎛                                          ⎞       ∆1
                               ∆         0               0         1     2      ⎜                ⎟
                             ⎜         ⎟ ⎜                                                 ⎟⎜ ∆2        ⎟
                             ⎜ ∆1 ⎟ ' ⎜                                           ⎟⎜                ⎟
                             ⎝         ⎠ ⎝     1 1           0         1 1   1 2   ⎠⎜
                                                                                            ⎜ 1
                                                                                                             ⎟
                                                                                                             ⎟
                                                                                                                                 (10)
                               ∆2       0               2 2   2 1   2 2    ⎝                ⎠
                                                                                               2
where
  1 0 Heretofore,    measures the Frisch (marginal-utility constant) elasticity of  relative to changes in price .
  1 1 This   system of equations assume that the terms related to  are absorbed in the observables. Note also that the  para-
meters vary in principle by   . However, they only do so through   and  , which as we shall see will be "pre-estimated"
using asset and human capital data. Hence, for notational simplicity we omit the    subscripts onto the transmission
parameters .




                                                                  11
                                                                         ³             ´
                                                  (1 −   )  1 +   
                                      =                                                                                    (11)
                                                       + (1 −   )  

                                     = 1 +                                                                          (12)
                                                            ⎛                        ³             ´⎞
                                                                  (1 −   )  1 +   
                                     = 1 +   ⎝1 −                                       ⎠                           (13)
                                                                        + (1 −   )  
                                                                            ³                 ´
                                                  (1 −   ) − 1 +  − −
                                −    = −                                                  ,                               (14)
                                                           + (1 −   )  

                                                       Assets 
    In the expression above  ≈         Assets  +Human Wealth    is the "partial insurance" coeﬃcient (the higher 
                                                                            Human Wealth 
the lower the sensitivity of consumption to shocks),  ≈               Human Wealth      is the share of earner ’s human
                                                    P2                                     P2
wealth over family human wealth (with                   =1    = 1), and  =        =1       is the household’s

weighted average of the EIS of labor supply of the two earners.12 Note that Human Wealth is the expected

discounted flow of lifetime earnings of the household at the beginning of period .


2.3.2       The non-separable case


Consider now removing the assumption of separability between consumption and leisure, i.e., leave + ()

unrestricted. A direct implication of relaxing the separability assumption is that the marginal utility of

consumption now depends on hours. This changes the decision making process of the household in the sense

that it has to choose hours considering the eﬀect that this decision may have on the utility from consumption.

This implies that while in the separable case the Frisch elasticity with respect to own price and the elasticity

of intertemporal substitution coincide, in the non-separable case this is no longer the case.13 We define the
  1 2 We   use the notation "−" to indicate variables that refer to the other earner. For example, the parameter  − measures
the response of earner ’s earnings ( = {1 2}) to a permanent shock faced by the other earner.
  1 3 See for example Browning, Hansen and Heckman (1999). They show that the EIS for consumption in the nonseparable

case is the sum of the Frisch elasticities of consumption with respect to own price and with respect to wages. In the separable
case the latter is zero, therefore the Frisch elasticity and the EIS coincide.




                                                                     12
following Frisch elasticities in the context of nonseparable utility:

                                                           − −  1
                                                 = −
                                                                  ||        
                                                          − −  1
                                                = −
                                                                  ||        
                                                        − −  − 2−   1
                                               =
                                                                      ||            
                                                           − −  1
                                                = − 
                                                                 ||       
                                                         − − 1
                                          −    =
                                                              ||         

for  = {1 2} and where || =  1 1 2 2 − 2 2 21 − 1 1 22  0 is the determinant of the

Hessian of the utility function.14

    The signs of   and    determine whether consumption and hours of earner  are Frisch complements

(  0,    0) or Frisch substitutes (  0,    0), which in turn depends on the signs of

the cross derivative  . We show in Appendix 3 that the approximation to the Euler equations and the

log-linearization of the intertemporal budget constraint yield the following dynamics for consumption and

earnings of the two earners:

                                                                                                  ⎛             ⎞
                           ⎛              ⎞     ⎛                                             ⎞       ∆1
                             ∆         1             2        1     2      ⎜                ⎟
                           ⎜         ⎟ ⎜                                                      ⎟⎜ ∆2        ⎟
                           ⎜ ∆1 ⎟ ' ⎜                                                ⎟⎜                ⎟
                           ⎝         ⎠ ⎝     1 1             1 2      1 1   1 2   ⎠⎜
                                                                                               ⎜ 1
                                                                                                                ⎟
                                                                                                                ⎟
                                                                                                                                (15)
                             ∆2       2 1           2 2      2 1   2 2    ⎝                ⎠
                                                                                                  2
where, as before, the parameters  measure the response of variable  (∆ and ∆ ) to the wage

shock  (∆ and  ).

    Compared to the case of additive separability, in the non-separable case the parameters 1  2  1 2

and 2 1 are not restricted to be zero. In particular, one can show that, quite intuitively,  =  and
  1 4 Note   that with separable utility  and   are both zero. We have also assumed (just to simplify the expressions) that
 − = 0, but do not impose this restriction in the empirical analysis. For example, when  − 6= 0, the consumption
Frisch elasticity is rewritten as:
                                                                                
                                                          1 1 2 2 − 21 2  1
                                                = −
                                                                      ||             
where || =  1 1 2 2        − 22 1 1 − 21 2 2 −  21 2 + 21 2 1 2 .


                                                                     13
 − =  − for  = {1 2}. In essence, a test of non-separability between consumption and the leisure

of earner  is a test of whether consumption respond to transitory shock of that earner (shocks that do not

have, or have only negligible, wealth eﬀects). With non-separability a transitory wage shock induces a change

in hours and, through preference shifts, requires an adjustment also of consumption.15 Similarly, a test of

non-separability between the leisures of the two spouses is a test of whether earnings (that is, labor supply)

of earner  respond to the (wealth-constant) transitory shock faced by the other earner. When preferences

are separable these transitory shocks have no wealth eﬀect in the contexts considered, so no response is

expected. But in the non-separable case these shocks shift preferences (for example because spouse enjoy

leisure together), so they generate a response that depends on the degree of complementarity/separability

between the arguments of the period utility function.

    The remaining "reduced form" parameters  are - as before - complicated functions of the Frisch elas-

ticities (including those measuring the extent and sign of non-separability), partial insurance (and possibly

external insurance parameter), as well as the human wealth shares. To save space, we report the relevant

expressions in Appendix 3. Given its importance, we report here only the expression for  , the response

of consumption to a permanent shocks to earner ’s wage:16

                                      ³        ³                ´´ h             ³              ´         i
                                          −   + −      (1 −   )  +  −  
                      =    +³        ³               ´´                 ³                       ´                       (16)
                                         −   + −    + (1 −   )  + − + 

which of course collapses to  of the additive separable case if   =  − =    =  −  =  − =

−  = 0.

    Special cases are easily obtained from the more general formulation (15). If we assume that labor supply

is exogenous (which is equivalent to assuming    = 0 for  = {1 2}), that there is a single earner

( = 1), and that preferences are separable (  =  − =   =  −  =  − =  −  = 0),

then we obtain the specification of Blundell et al. (2008). The specification of Heathcote et al. (2009) can
  1 5 Of   course, the test can also reject if consumption responds to transitory shocks due to failure of self-insuring against it. As
we shall see, in this case the coeﬃcient  should be positive, while in the empirical analysis we find that   0.
 1 6 Where the notation 
                             =   1  + (1 −  )  2  , and  = {1  2  }




                                                                   14
be obtained further imposing  = (1 − ) (1 −  ) = 1.


2.3.3   Insurance above self-insurance


Expressions (11)-(14) and (16) are derived under the assumption that there is no insurance over and above

self-insurance. However, households may have access to multiple external sources of insurance, ranging from

help received by networks of relatives and friends, to social insurance such as unemployment benefits and

food stamps, to formal market insurance. It is hard to model in a credible way the myriad of external

insurance channels potentially available to households. We hence choose to subsume these mechanisms into

a single parameter (), which factors  whenever it appears. For example, the response of consumption

to a permanent shock to male wages in the separable case (11) becomes
                                                                      ³             ´
                                       (1 − ) (1 −   )  1 +   
                              =
                                              + (1 − ) (1 −   ) 

(  ,  − , and  in the non-separable case are revised accordingly).

   The parameter  measures all consumption insurance that remains after accounting for the "self-insurance"

sources represented by asset accumulation (through the risk free bond ) and labor supply of the primary

and secondary earner. Here,  = 0 means that there is no external insurance over and above self-insurance

through assets and labor supply, while   0 would imply some external insurance is present. Note that

it is also possible that   0 - which may capture the fact that consumption over-respond to shocks, for

example because assets are held in illiquid forms and transaction costs exceed the benefit of smoothing (see

for a similar argument Kaplan and Violante, 2009).


2.3.4   Interpretation


To aid in the interpretation of the parameters, let us take the case of separable preferences for simplicity

(the set of equations (10) and reduced form parameters (11)-(14)). The interpretation in the non-separable

case is similar, and we will discuss it at the end of this section.

   Let us start with labor supply responses. Because in the separable framework transitory shocks have


                                                          15
negligible or no wealth eﬀects, the earnings of a given earner do not respond to the transitory wage shocks

faced by the other earner (and vice versa) - hence the zero restrictions on  − . In contrast, each earner’s

labor supply respond to his/her own transitory wage shock to an extent that depends on his/her labor supply
                                                                                             ³            ´
EIS (and since transitory shock translate one-to-one in wage changes, the coeﬃcient   = 1 +    ).

This is almost definitional: the Frisch elasticity (which here coincides with the EIS) measures the labor

supply response to a wealth-constant wage change, which here is represented by a pure transitory shock.

    The response of earner ’s to a permanent shock to his/her own wage is informative about whether labor

supply is used as a consumption smoothing device, i.e., as a shock absorber. This depends crucially on the

traditional tension between the wealth and the substitution eﬀect of a wage change. This response is hence

unrestricted by theory, and indeed the response of earner ’s to a permanent shock to his/her own wage is

the closest approximation to a Marshallian labor supply eﬀect (as opposed to the Frisch eﬀect discussed

above). For labor supply to be used as a consumption smoothing device, we require    1 (implying that

hours move in the opposite direction as the permanent shock - they rise, or people work longer, when wages

decline permanently). This occurs when the wealth eﬀect dominates the substitution eﬀect of a permanent

wage change. In particular, to build intuition, assume there is only one earner for simplicity ( = 1). In

this case, the condition that ensures that labor supply is used as a consumption smoothing device is:



                                                 (1 − ) (1 −   ) −    0


    This condition is more likely to be satisfied when consumers have little or no accumulated assets and/or

no access to external sources of insurance ( → 0 and/or  → 0), so that labor supply appears as the

sole source of consumption smoothing available to consumers, and when consumers are highly reluctant

to intertemporal fluctuations in their consumption (  → 0), so that adjustment is delegated to declines

in leisure rather than declines in consumption.17 Finally, when the condition (1 − ) (1 −  ) −    0
  1 7 In   the more general case with multiple earners, labor supply of the primary earner is more likely to be used to smooth
consumption if the secondary earner counts little in the balance of life time earnings (2 is low, so the primary earner cannot
count on the added worker eﬀect contributing much to the smoothing of family earnings) or if her labor supply is relatively


                                                                16
holds, the consumption smoothing eﬀect of labor supply is enhanced by a high own elasticity; but when

(1 − ) (1 −   )−   0, a high own elasticity would increase the sensitivity of consumption to a permanent

shock to wages.

    The response of earner ’s to a permanent shock faced by the other earner is instead informative about

the so-called added worker eﬀect. Looking at  − , it is easy to see that the latter eﬀect is unambiguously

negative, i.e., earner  always increase her labor supply when earner  is hit by a permanent negative shocks.

Why? The reason is that a permanent negative shock faced by earner  has only a wealth eﬀect as far as

earner  is concerned, and no substitution eﬀect (the household is permanently poorer when earner  has

a permanently lower wage and hence a reduction in all consumptions, including consumption of leisure of

earner  is warranted).18

    What about consumption responses to shocks? The first thing to notice is that in the additive separability

case, and if credit markets are assumed to work well, consumption does not to respond to transitory shocks

( = 0 for  = {1 2}). This is because (for consumers with a long horizon) transitory shocks have no

lifetime wealth eﬀect (they have negligible impact on the revision of the marginal utility of wealth). As for the

response to permanent shocks, we know that in traditional analyses with e.g. quadratic utility, consumption

respond one-to-one to permanent shocks. Equations (10) shows how misleading this can be when we account

for family labor supply and precautionary behavior. This is important because neglecting these two forces

may give a misleading view of the response of consumption to, say, tax policies that change permanently

after-tax wages.

    In our framework, the response of consumption to permanent wage shocks depends on the insurance

parameters   and , on the human wealth shares  , the consumption EIS   , and the labor supply

EIS of the two earners,  1 1 and 2 2 . Interpreting the role of  is straightforward: when  is
inelastic ( 2 2 is small - for similar reasons).
  1 8 The magnitude of the added worker eﬀect response declines when 
                                                                        or  increase (i.e., when the family has more

access to alternative sources of smoothing); it declines when   increases (i.e., when consumers become less reluctant to
face intertemporal fluctuations in their consumption); and it increase with the own EIS    (because the worker is more
responsive to all wage changes).



                                                            17
large, the j-th earner’s importance (in terms of his human wealth relative to the household’s) is large, and

hence consumption responds more to the permanent wage shock faced by this earner. Ceteris paribus, the

sensitivity of consumption to the first earner’s permanent wage shock (1 ) is decreasing in the labor supply

elasticity of the other earner (because in that case the added worker eﬀect is stronger, and hence adjustment

is partly done through increasing labor supply of the other earner); and it is decreasing in the own labor

supply EIS if the response of hours of this earner to a shock is negative (i.e., if there is smoothing done

through own labor supply, as discussed above). The sensitivity of consumption to a permanent shock also

increases with   because consumers with high values of the consumption EIS are by definition less reluctant

to intertemporal fluctuations in their consumption.

   Finally, note that the sensitivity of consumption to a permanent shock is higher whenever insurance

through savings or other external sources is small (  and  are low). The intuition is that the smaller

is   (), the less assets (external insurance) the household has to smooth consumption when hit by a

permanent shock (of either spouse). It is indeed accumulation of these precautionary reserves that make

consumption smoother than household earnings.

   Let us now consider the interpretation of the coeﬃcients under the non-separable preference assumption.

Given that consumption and leisures can be complements or substitutes in utility, it is much more complicated

to derive clear-cut comparative statics of the parameters  in the non-separable case (apart from the

straightforward cases discussed above). A heuristic interpretation can be oﬀered, though. Consider the

approximation of the first order condition for consumption (see Appendix 3 for the derivation):

                            ¡                     ¢
                     ∆ '  1 + 2 −  ∆ ln  +  1 ∆1 +  2 ∆2             (17)


   As originally remarked by Heckman (1974), the dynamic response of consumption to wage changes will

depend on whether consumption and hours are complements or substitutes in utility. In particular, when

 and  are substitutes (   0), we may have "Excess Smoothing" of consumption with respect to

wage shocks; while complementarity (   0) may induce "Excess Sensitivity" (excess response to shocks


                                                        18
relative to the additive separable case). As an illustration, consider the case in which the primary earner faces

a negative transitory wage shock (for which wealth changes are neutralized, or ∆ ln  = 0): ∆1  0 and

∆2 = 0. Under additive separability (  = 0), we would record a minimal decrease in consumption

(in fact, in our set-up we imposed this to be zero) and a concurrent decrease in hours. When  and  are

substitutes ( 1  0), equation (17) shows that the consumption decrease is attenuated (it may even become

an increase). Hence, consumption is smoother (there is more "insurance") in the presence of substitutability

between consumption and hours.


2.4    Identification

There are four sets of parameters that we are interested in estimating: wage parameters, smoothing parame-

ters, preference parameters, and measurement error variances. We discuss identification of these parameters

in Appendix 4, both in terms of what moments we use and what kind of "variability in the data" we exploit

to obtain our empirical estimates.



3     Data, Estimation Issues, and Empirical Strategy

3.1    The PSID Data

We use the 1999-2009 Panel Study of Income and Dynamics (PSID) to estimate the model. The PSID

started in 1968 collecting information on a sample of roughly 5,000 households. Of these, about 3,000 were

representative of the US population as a whole (the core sample), and about 2,000 were low-income families

(the Census Bureau’s SEO sample). Thereafter, both the original families and their split-oﬀs (children of the

original family forming a family of their own) have been followed. The PSID data was collected annually until

1996 and biennially starting in 1997. A great advantage of PSID after 1999 is that, in addition to income

data and demographics, it collects data about detailed assets holdings and consumption expenditures. To

the best of our knowledge this makes the PSID the only representative large scale US panel to include both

income, consumption, and assets data. Since we need both consumption and assets data, we focus on the



                                                       19
1997-2009 sample period.

    For our baseline specification we focus on non-SEO households with participating and married male

household heads aged between 30 and 65. Whenever there is a change in family composition we drop the

year of the change and treat the household unit as a new family starting with the observation following the

change. We drop observations with missing values for state, education, race, labor earnings, hours, total

consumption and total assets. We drop observations with wages that are lower than half the minimum wage

in the state where the household resides. Finally, we drop observations for which consumption, wages or

earnings of one of the earners show extreme "jumps" most likely due to measurement error. A "jump" is

defined as an extremely positive (negative) change from  − 2 to , followed by an extreme negative (positive)

change from  to +2. Formally, for each variable (say ), we construct the biennial log diﬀerence ∆2 log ( ),

and drop observation in the bottom 0.25 percent of the product ∆2 log ( ) ∆2 log (−2 ).


3.1.1       Consumption Data19


To estimate our model we need to construct a series of household consumption. Since we do not model the

household decision on durables purchase, it is natural to focus on nondurables and services. Before 1999,

PSID collected data on very few consumption items, such as food, rent and child care. However, starting

in 1999 consumption expenditures data cover many other nondurable and services consumption categories,

including health expenditures, utilities, gasoline, car maintenance, transportation, education and child care.

A few other consumption categories have been added starting in 2005 (such as clothing), however we do not

use these categories to keep the consumption series consistent over time. The main items that are missing

are clothing, recreation, alcohol and tobacco.

    While rent is reported whenever the household rents a house, it is not reported for home owners. To

construct a series of housing services for home owners we impute the rent expenditures for home owners

using the self reported house price.20 We then aggregate all nondurable and services consumption categories
  1 9 For   detailed   list   of   consumption   categories   covered   in   the   PSID       in   diﬀerent   years   refer   to
http://psidonline.isr.umich.edu/Data/SL/ConsumptionQsinPSID_1968-2009.xls
  2 0 For our baseline measure we approximate the rent equivalent as 6% of the house price.




                                                              20
to get the household consumption series.21 Descriptive statistics on the various components of aggregate

consumption (nominal values) are reported in Table 1. A comparison of the main aggregates (total consump-

tion, nondurables, and services) against the NIPA series is oﬀered in Table 2. As shown in Table 2, taking

into account that the PSID consumption categories that we use are meant to cover 70% of consumption

expenditure, the coverage rate is remarkably good.


3.1.2      Assets Holdings, Earnings, Wages and Hours


Data on household’s assets holdings is required for the construction of   , the share of assets out of total

wealth. Starting in 1999, the PSID collects data on assets holding in each wave (between 1984 and 1999, asset

data were collected every five years). The data include detailed holdings of cash, bonds, stocks, business,

pensions, cars value, house and other real estate holdings. In addition, data is collected on household debt

including first and second mortgage and other debt. Since we are interested in the net assets holdings, our

measure of assets is constructed as the sum of cash, bonds, stocks the value of any business, the value of

pension funds, the value of any house, the value of other real estate, the value of any car, net of any mortgage

and other debts.

   In addition to consumption and assets, data on wages and earnings of the first and second earner are also

required. The survey collects data on annual labor earnings and on annual hours of work. To construct the

hourly wage we divide annual earnings by annual hours.

   Table 3 provides summary statistics on asset holdings, and on labor supply and earnings for the two

earners. It is worth noting that the female participation rate in this sample is fairly high (around 80%) and

that on average they earn about half of what males earn, partly reflecting lower hours of work (conditional

on working), and partly reflecting other factors, both explained and unexplained.
 2 1 We   treat missing values in the consumption (and asset) subcategories as zeros.




                                                               21
3.2      Estimation Issues

>From an estimation point of view, we need to take a stand on a number of diﬃcult issues. These include:

(1) Allowing for measurement error in consumption, wages, and earnings; (2) Adopting the correct inference

for our estimation procedure, and (3) Controlling for the selection into work of the secondary earner. We

discuss these problems in the rest of this section.


3.2.1     Measurement Error


Consumption, wages and earnings are most invariably measured with error. We rewrite the equations for

wage growth, consumption growth and earnings growth (here shown in the more general non-separable

preferences case) to allow for measurement errors as:

                  ⎛             ⎞    ⎛                                             ⎞                      ⎛              ⎞
                      ∆1               1         0         1          0           ⎛             ⎞        ∆ 
                                                                                                                 1
                  ⎜             ⎟ ⎜                                                ⎟       ∆1       ⎜               ⎟
                  ⎜ ∆          ⎟ ⎜     0             1         0          1       ⎟⎜                ⎟ ⎜   ∆           ⎟
                  ⎜   2     ⎟ ⎜                                                ⎟⎜                ⎟ ⎜       2     ⎟
                  ⎜             ⎟ ⎜                                                ⎟⎜      ∆2   ⎟ ⎜ ⎜               ⎟
                  ⎜ ∆       ⎟ ' ⎜           2     1      2     ⎟⎜                ⎟ + ⎜ ∆        ⎟
                  ⎜             ⎟ ⎜         1                                      ⎟⎜                ⎟ ⎜                 ⎟
                  ⎜             ⎟ ⎜                                                ⎟⎝       1   ⎠ ⎜ ∆             ⎟
                  ⎜ ∆1     ⎟ ⎜ 1 1         1 2   1 1    1 2   ⎟                                     ⎟
                  ⎝             ⎠ ⎝                                                ⎠        2       ⎝     1     ⎠
                    ∆2           2 1       2 2   2 1    2 2                           ∆ 2
                            
where           
         ,   and   are measurement errors in log wages of earner , log consumption, and log earnings


of earner .22

    In our context, there are three problems one need to confront when adding measurement errors. First,

as discussed among others in Blundell et al. (2008), adding measurement errors to models that include

a permanent/transitory decomposition (as in our wage process) creates an identification problem, in that

the distribution of the measurement error   is indistinguishable from the distribution of the economically

relevant transitory shock . Second, our wage measure is constructed as annual earnings divided by annual

hours, and therefore the measurement errors of earnings and wages are correlated (the so-called "division

bias"). Third, measurement errors are hard to distinguish from stochastic changes in preferences or shocks

to higher moments of the distribution of wages in terms of eﬀects on consumption or labor supply choices.
  2 2 Formally,                     = ∆ + ∆  for  =   , with 
                  we should write ∆                                    and  being the observed and true value of , respectively,
but this would just make notation harder to follow, and so we omit it.



                                                                    22
We make no attempt to resolve this distinction, and hence identify an aggregate of these various forces, some

statistical and some economic.

    Ignoring the variance of measurement error in wages or earnings is problematic since it has a direct

eﬀect on the estimates of the structural parameters. We thus follow Meghir and Pistaferri (2004) and use

findings from validation studies to set a priori the amount of wage variability that can be attributed to

error. We use the estimates of Bound et al. (2001), who estimate the share of variance associated with

measurement error using a validation study for the PSID (which is the data set we are using). While the

validation study they use covers only a small fraction of the PSID sample, they extrapolate their findings

to estimate the share of measurement errors in representative samples. We adopt their estimates for the

share of measurement error in log earnings ( (  ) = 004). For log hourly wages, their estimates range

from 0.072 to 0.162. We use an estimate in the middle of this range ( (  ) = 013). Finally, for log
                        ³ ´
hours they report    = 023. Note that these estimates can be used to correct all "own" moments
          ³            ´
                     2
(such as E (∆ ) , E (∆ ∆+1 ), etc.) with the only assumption (not entirely uncontroversial,

see Bound and Krueger, 1991) that measurement error is not correlated over time. However, in order to

use these estimates to correct cross equations moments (such as E (∆ ∆ )), we need to calculate the

covariance between the various measurement errors.23 By definition this covariance is non-zero, since in our

data set wage=earnings/hours. We can write the relationship between errors for log earnings, hours and

wages as
                                                                      ³ ´
                                          (  ) =  (  ) +    − 2(     )


and given the share of measurement error for earnings, hours and wages, we can back out the covariance

between measurement error of wages and measurement error in earnings as:

                                            ³         ´                 1h                 ³ ´              i
                 (     ) = (     −   ) =  (  ) −     (  ) +    −  (  )
                                                                        2

    Finally, given the martingale assumption, the variance of the measurement error in consumption is
  2 3 Assuming   that measurement error is not correlated across earners, the only four relevant cross moments that need to be
corrected are E [∆1 ∆1 ], E [∆2 ∆2 ]  E [∆1 ∆1−1 ] and E [∆2 ∆2−1 ]..


                                                                     23
directly identified from the moment E (∆ ∆+1 ) = − (  ).24 In the absence of further (and stronger)

assumptions, we will make no attempt to distinguish measurement errors in consumption from stochastic

changes in preferences or shocks to higher moments of the distribution of wages.


3.2.2        Inference


We use multiple moments, which we deal with using a GMM strategy and an identity matrix as a weighting

matrix. Given the multi-step approach, and the fact that we use longitudinal data, (unless explicitly noted)

we compute the standard errors of our estimated parameters using the block bootstrap (see Horowitz, 2001).

In this way we account for serial correlation of arbitrary form, heteroskedasticity, as well as for the fact that

we use pre-estimated residuals.25


3.2.3        Selection into work by the second earner


Above, we have derived the expressions for earnings and hourly wage growth assuming interior solutions for

labor supply for both spouses. A major concern when modeling labor supply is endogenous selection into

work and therefore the need to distinguish between the intensive and the extensive margin of employment.

Male participation is very high (for example in our sample, before conditioning on working, men between the

age of 30 and 65 have average participation rates of 93%). This justifies our decision to focus on a sample

of always-employed males. As for wives, their participation is 80% on average, and hence it is potentially

important to account for their selection into work (see table 3).

    One approach is to explicitly model the decision to participate of the secondary earner. While appealing

from a theoretical point of view, it makes the solution of the life cycle problem much more diﬃcult - in fact,

it would make our approximation procedure infeasible. We therefore decide to adopt a solution that is more

statistical in nature, and in particular derive an empirical correction for the sample selection in the spirit of

Low et al. (2010). We use “conditional covariance restrictions” rather than unconditional ones as done in
  2 4 This   is the case for separable preferences. For the non-separable case, a suﬃcient condition for − (  ) to be an upper
bound on the measurement error is that  (1 ) =  (2 ).
  2 5 To avoid the standard errors being aﬀected by extreme draws, we apply a normal approximation to the inter-quartile range

of the replications.


                                                                 24
most of the literature. Finding exclusion restrictions is the challenging part of this exercise. We use a set

of state-year dummies intended to capture labor market related policy changes at the state level and the

presence of first and second mortgage. There is some evidence showing that female participation rises when

households move into home ownership (see Del Boca and Lusardi, 2003).

    To illustrate the strategy we adopt, suppose that the participation decision 2 = {0 1} of the secondary

                                        ∗
earner depends on some latent variable 2 , which can be written as




                                                    ∗
                                                   2   = 0  +  
                                                              ⎧
                                                              ⎨ 1 if  ∗ ≥ 0
                                                                            
                                                  2    =
                                                              ⎩ 0 otherwise

       ∗
where 2 is a latent variable, 2 is the observed choice, and  is a vector of observed characteris-

tics. 2 = 1 for participation and zero otherwise. Assuming that the shocks are normally distributed
                   ¡       ¢
Pr (2 = 1) = Φ 0  and assuming
                                                            ⎧
                                                            ⎨             if  = ,  = {1 2}
                                                                 
                                        E (   ) =
                                                            ⎩ 0                  otherwise
                                                            ⎧
                                                            ⎨             if  = ,  = {1 2}
                                                                 
                                        E (   ) =
                                                            ⎩ 0                 otherwise

and the variance of  is normalized to be 1. Assuming the four correlations 1   2   1  and 2  can be

identified, the identification strategy presented in the last section remains unchanged. However, the moment

conditions are corrected for sample selection using formulae for the multinomial truncated normal case (see

Tallis, 1961). To see how this correction works, consider for example the second moment of the secondary

earner’s growth in wages:26

                                  ³                                  ´       ¡                        ¢
                                 E (∆2 )2 |2 = 2−1 = 1 =  21 1 − 21  Λ 0 

                   (0 )
where Λ =       Φ(0 )
                                . The other moments can be corrected in a similar fashion.27
  2 6 Writing   these moments this way ignores that since the truncated shocks are not mean zero anymore, the expectation of the
product of any of these shocks is not zero. We assume that the expectation of these products can be neglected.
  2 7 See Appendix 4. A discussion of the identification of the correlations 
                                                                              1   2   1  and 2  is available on request.



                                                                   25
3.3    Empirical Strategy

The following steps summarize our empirical strategy:


  1. Regress the log diﬀerence of   1  1 ,2 and 2 onto observable characteristics and con-

      struct the first-diﬀerenced residuals ∆  ∆1 , ∆1  ∆2 , ∆2 . The observable character-

      istics in the wage equation include year, year of birth, education, race, state and large city dummies

      as well as education-year, race-year and large city-year interactions. For consumption and earnings

      we also add dummies for number of kids, number of family member, employment status (at the time

      of interview), income recipient other than head or wife in the household and whether the couple has

      children not residing in the household. For observables which are not fixed over time we use both the

      level and the change. Note that the wage and earnings regressions use only workers;


  2. Estimate the wage variances and covariances using the second order moments for ∆1 and ∆2 ;


  3. Estimate the smoothing parameters  and 1 using asset and (current and projected) earnings

      data;


  4. Estimate the preference parameters using the second order moments for ∆1 , ∆2 and ∆

      conditioning on results (wage variances, covariances, and smoothing parameters) obtained in steps 2

      and 3.


   Our baseline specification uses only workers and does not correct for selection into work. In the robustness

section we show that the correction for selection makes little diﬀerence. When we apply the sample selection

correction described in section 3.2.3, we run the regressions that calculate residual measures for the wife’s

wages and earnings equations (step 1) controlling for selection into work (which is done by preliminarily

running female employment probits and then constructing conventional Mills ratio terms). As said above,

the exclusion restrictions we use are a set of state-year dummies intended to capture labor market related

policy changes at the state level, and the presence of first and second mortgage.


                                                         26
4     Results

4.1    Estimating   and 1

                                         Assets                         Human Wealth 
The calculations of  ≈   Assets  +Human Wealth    and  =   Human Wealth      require the knowledge of

assets, which we take directly from the data, and of expected human wealth at time  for both earners, i.e.:



                                                                    E (+1 )
                                Human Wealth =  +                       + 
                                                                        1+

    Note that the measure of assets we use is defined "beginning-of-period" (i.e., before any consumption

decisions are taken), so no endogeneity issues arise. The major diﬃculty is to form estimates of expected

future earnings. For males, we start by pooling earnings for all years and ages. We then regress earnings on

characteristics (  below) that either do not change over time (such as race and education) or characteristics

(  ) that change in a perfectly forecastable way (such as a polynomial in age, and interaction of race and

education with an age polynomial). That is, we regress:



                                                             
                                         1 = 1  1 + 1  2 + 1


    To obtain an estimate of expected earnings at  +  given information at  (i.e., E (1+ )) we simply

use b1+ = 1 
                     b1 +1+ 
                                  b2 . We assume that agents are working until the age of 65 and that discounting

rate is the same as the interest rate, and set the annual interest rate to 2%.

    The same idea is applied to calculate expected human wealth for the secondary earner. However, since

we allow for non-participation of the second earner, we run the earnings regressions controlling for selection

using the Heckman correction. Moreover, to control for participation in the prediction of earnings, we use

a probit specification with education, race, polynomial in age and interactions to predict the probability of

participation for each second earner. The expected earnings for the wife at time  +  are then the product

of the predicted oﬀered wages in period  +  and the probability of being employed in that same period.

    As said above, we (pre-)estimate   using asset and human capital data. The average value of these


                                                            27
estimates is  ( ) = 018; the age-specific averages are reported in Figure 1 (on the left axis), together

with the life-cycle evolution of the household’s total assets (on the right axis). These trends remain very

similar if we use medians rather than means.

   The estimates of   conform to expectations. The degree of self-insurance warranted by asset accu-

mulation is negligible at the beginning of the life cycle (all permanent shocks pass more or less through

consumption), but the combination of asset accumulation due to precautionary and life cycle motives (vis-

ible from the evolution of the right axis variable) and the decline of expected human capital due to the

shortening of the time horizon imply an increase in   as time goes by, and hence the household’s ability

to smooth permanent wage shocks also increases over time. As the household head nears retirement, the

average value of   is as high as 0.5. What needs to be noted, however, is that this estimate - reflecting "ac-

tual" saving decisions of households - embeds all forms of insurance (or constraints to them) that households

have available. In other words, there is no obvious way to benchmark the pattern shown in Figure 1. The

closest equivalent is the hypothetical pattern presented by Kaplan and Violante (2011). We also estimate

the pattern of  by terciles of the asset distribution and find that the average value of   increases with

the rank in the wealth distribution, suggesting greater ability to smooth consumption among the wealthier,

a result also found by Blundell et al. (2008).

   Our estimate of 1 (the ratio of the husband’s human wealth to total household human wealth) are

plotted in Figure 2 against the head’s age. These estimates can be interpreted as the life cycle evolution of

the distribution of earnings power within the household. On average, the husband commands about 2/3 of

total household human wealth. His weight rises initially due to fertility choices made by his wife. His weight

declines at the end of the life cycle due to early retirement choices coupled with age diﬀerences within the

household.




                                                       28
4.2      Main results
4.2.1     Wage variances


The estimates of the wage variances are presented in Table 4. Three things are worth noting. Estimates of

"wage instability", typically associated with the variance of the transitory component (see Gottschalk and

Moﬃtt, 2008) are larger for males, perhaps reflecting a larger influence of turnover, etc. The variance of the

more structural component (the variance of permanent shocks) is similar for males and females, although

slightly higher for females, perhaps reflecting greater dispersion in the returns to unobserved skills etc.

Finally, the transitory components of the two spouses are positively correlated, and (to a less extent) the

permanent shocks as well, most likely reflecting the fact that (due perhaps to assortative mating) spouses

tend to work in sectors, occupations, or even firms that are subject to similar aggregate shocks. These

estimates are fairly noisy, however.


4.2.2     Consumption and Labor Supply Parameters


Table 5 reports the estimates of preference parameters. We start with the separable case in column 1. The

elasticity of intertemporal substitution in consumption (  ) is estimated to be 0.2, implying a relative risk

aversion coeﬃcient of around 5, which is fairly high, although in the ballpark of previous estimates from

the literature. The elasticity of intertemporal substitution in male labor supply is smaller than that for

female labor supply, again supporting previous evidence and intuition. For males, we estimate a Frisch

elasticity  1 1 = 04; for females, we estimate 2 2 = 08. Our estimate of men’s Frisch elasticity sits in

the upper range of MaCurdy’s (1981) estimates (0.1-0.45) and Altonji’s (1986) estimates (0.08-0.54), which

vary depending on the specification or set of instruments used. Keane (2011) surveys 12 influential studies

and reports an average estimate of the EIS of 0.83 and a median estimate of 0.17.28 For women, Heckman

and MaCurdy (1980) report an elasticity of substitution of 1 (p. 65), which is close to our estimate. The

literature surveyed in Keane (2011) confirms, with a few exceptions, the finding of high Frisch elasticities for
 28 A   number of other papers have challenged the notion of that the Frisch labor supply elasticity for males is close to zero.
See for example Lee (2001), Domeji and Floden (2006) and Wallenius (2011).



                                                               29
women.

    Finally, we estimate  = 074, implying quite a large amount of "external" insurance over and above

self-insurance. This estimate implies that there is very little responsiveness of consumption to permanent

wage shocks even early on in the life cycle. This can be seen more clearly by looking at the estimated loading

factor matrix from (10):

                          ∆     '                                       013 1    + 007 2
                                                                           (0060)           (0040)

                         ∆1    '    143 ∆1                     + 115 1    − 016 2
                                        (0097)                             (0067)          (0057)

                         ∆2    '                     183 ∆2    − 054 1    + 153 2
                                                         (0133)            (0206)          (0101)

    where some parameters are averaged across the life cycle of the household since they embed   and 

which vary with age. These estimates show that theoretical restrictions are satisfied: the Frisch elasticities

are positive and exceed the Marshallian elasticities, and the cross-labor supply elasticities are negative as

they reflect only wealth eﬀects. Nevertheless, there are two warning flags suggesting that this model may

be misspecified. The first is that the estimate of  implies an "excessive" degree of excess smoothing. The

second is that the fit of the model is far from being perfect. While the fit is excellent for hourly wage

moments, we find that the variance of consumption growth is understated, the covariance of consumption

growth and wages is overstated, and that the zero-restriction test on omitted moments rejects the null with

a p-value of 0.014.29

    Next, we relax the assumption of separability and report the results in column 2 of Table 5. Allowing for

non-separability introduces six new parameters into the analysis: the (-constant) elasticity of substitution of

consumption with respect to the price of labor of the two spouses ( 1 and  2 ), which is informative about

the possibility that consumption and leisure are non-separable; the (-constant) elasticity of substitution

of the earner i’s labor supply with respect to the price of j’s labor supply (1 2 and 2 1 ), which is

informative about the possibility of non-separability between the leisure of the two spouses; and the (-
  2 9 These   results remain overall fairly similar when we consider (i) correcting for the wife’s non-participation decision as
described in Section 3.2.3; when we change (ii) age selection criteria; or when we use (iii) individual rather than average assets
when constructing   , and (iv) diﬀerent weighting matrices in the GMM estimation procedure. These results are fully fully
shown in Appendix 6.


                                                                30
constant) elasticity of substitution of each earner’s labor supply with respect to price of consumption (1 

and  2  ).

    To increase eﬃciency of our estimates, we impose symmetry of the Frisch substitution matrix. Following

Phlips (1974) and others, one can show that the "fundamental" substitution eﬀects matrix (evaluated at

 = 0 - i.e., considering -constant demand functions) is:


                             ⎛                        ⎞    ⎛                                         ⎞−1
                                                               2         2        2 
                                       1    2                  2        1      2
                             ⎜                        ⎟    ⎜         2         2        2 
                                                                                                     ⎟
                             ⎜    1    1    1   ⎟ = ⎜                                         ⎟         (18)
                             ⎝         1    2   ⎠    ⎝        1        12      1 2   ⎠
                                  2    2    2                  2         2        2 
                                       1    2                 2       2 1     22

where all subscripts have been omitted for simplicity. In terms of the consumption/hours elasticities (and

noting that   = −   for a generic price ), the matrix of behavioral responses can be written as:

                        ⎛                       ⎞     ⎛                                                    ⎞
                                       
                                 1    2                            1 1          2 2
                        ⎜                       ⎟ ⎜                                                      ⎟
                        ⎜   1    1    1   ⎟ = ⎜ − 1                           1
                                                                             − 1 1                1 ⎟
                                                                                             − 1 2 
                        ⎝        1    2   ⎠ ⎝      1                          1               2 ⎠
                            2    2    2
                                 1    2         − 2  2                     2
                                                                             − 2 1 1
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                             − 2 2 2
    We impose symmetry of elasticities in the following sense:    = −  
                                                                                 
                                                                                     ( = 1 2) and  2 1 =

1 2 1 1
       2 2 .


    In Table 5, column 2, there are a number of results that are of some interest. First, additive separability

is strongly rejected, as four of the new parameters are individually statistically significant. In particular, we

find evidence of complementarity of husband and wife leisure (spouses enjoy spending time together), and

we also find that both husband’s and wife’s leisure are complements with respect to household consumption.

Second, the own-price Frisch elasticities are estimated to be larger than in the separable case. In particular,

 increases to 0.44. The labor supply elasticities also slightly rise. Finally, we no longer find evidence of

"excess" outside insurance - the estimate of  is actually negative (-0.12), although statistically insignificant.

Column 3 of Table 5, reports the results imposing that  = 0. The estimated parameters are very similar to

the unrestricted case (often with smaller standard errors), stressing the small role played by  once allowing

for non-separability.



                                                            31
    The loading factor matrix from (15) is:

                         ∆    ' − 014 ∆1         − 014 ∆2      + 038 1     + 021 2
                                         (0051)             (0139)             (0057)           (0037)

                        ∆1   '      151 ∆1      + 013 ∆2      + 098 1     − 023 2
                                        (0150)              (0051)             (0131)           (0048)

                        ∆2   '      026 ∆1      + 203 ∆2      − 081 1     + 132 2
                                        (0103)              (0265)             (0180)           (0087)

    There are a few things to note. As before, the Frisch elasticities are positive and exceed the Marshallian

elasticities and the cross-labor supply elasticities are negative (although they now reflect both wealth eﬀects

and non-separability with respect to the spouse’s leisure). We also find larger consumption responses to

permanent shocks (we oﬀer an interpretation of these numbers in the next Section). Finally, there may be

some worry that the response of consumption to transitory shocks reflect liquidity constraints rather than

non-separability. However, with liquidity constraints the estimates of  would be positive, not negative

as we find. If liquidity constraints explain the behavior of consumption, then the implication is that we are

even underestimating the degree of complementarity between consumption and leisure.30

    In terms of fit of the model, it improves substantially. The fit of wage moments is of course unchanged as

they are estimated "outside" the model. We fit better the consumption variance and the covariance between

earnings of the two spouses; however, there is no discernible improvement with respect to consumption

covariances with the spouses’ hourly wages. The model implies symmetries which are not rejected for the

female parameters (p-value 0.31) while for the male parameters the p-value is borderline (0.06).

    Finally, we recover Marshallian elasticities of labor supply for the husband and wife, and compare these to

the Frisch elasticities. As mentioned above, in our estimation framework, recovering Marshallian elasticities

is direct as these are given by the responses of hours to permanent shocks to wages (  − 1).31 Allowing

for non-separability (as in Table 5, column 2) the average Marshallian elasticity for males is very close to

zero (-0.02 with a standard error of 0.13). We find a larger average elasticity of 0.32 for females (with

a standard error of 0.09). As expected, these Marshallian elasticities are smaller than the corresponding

Frisch elasticities. One advantage of recovering the Marshallian elasticities from the responses of hours
  3 0 In   Appendix 7 we formally test the hypothesis that preferences are quasi-concave.
  3 1 The   theoretical relation between Marshallian and Frisch elasticities is well known. See for example Keane (2011), for a
derivation in a constant elasticities set-up. The derivation in our setup is very similar, allowing for 2 earners and non-separability.


                                                                  32
to permanent shocks is that we can allow for heterogeneity in the elasticities as a function of household

human and financial wealth (as reflected in   and  ). Figure 3 plots the Marshallian elasticities for both

the husband and the wife against age. As is clear from the graph, late in the life cycle, as the household

accumulate wealth, the role of the income eﬀect is decreasing, driving the Marshallian elasticities up.32


4.2.3      Robustness


We conducted a number of additional empirical exercises with the goal of assessing how robust our results

are to some changes in sample selection and specification. The results are reported in Table 6. First, we

focus on a sample that excludes older workers, focusing on heads aged 30-55. Second, we restrict our analysis

to the high education group. Third, we allow for age-varying variances. Since transitory shocks do not play

an important role on consumption, we allow only the distribution of permanent shocks to vary with age.

Finally, we apply the selection correction, described in section 3.2.3.

   In column (1), the estimates show that the degree of partial insurance accounted for by asset accumu-

lation declines when we focus on a sample of younger workers who have had less time to accumulate assets

(the estimate of   on average decreases relative to the baseline case). The estimates of the other para-

meters remain very similar. In column (2), the estimate of   increases on average reflecting more asset

accumulation among the highly educated. We also find that men’s labor supply is slightly more elastic and

women’s slightly less elastic than the baseline. Allowing for age-varying variances in column (3), does not

aﬀect our conclusions much. Estimates of the permanent shock variances reveal that dispersion tends to

increase with age, perhaps reflecting the growing incidence of health shocks. Finally, the estimates with

selection correction, reported in column (4), are very similar to the results is the non-separable case without

the correction (column (2) of Table 5).
 3 2 As    → 1 the Marshallian elasticities are converging to their Frisch counterparts.




                                                                 33
5      Discussion

In this section we discuss our empirical findings. In particular, we focus on three issues: (a) advance

information; (b) extensive and intensive margin in labor supply; (c) measuring how much of the insurance

we estimate from the data can be explained by the various channels we allow for in our model, and (d) the

role of non-linear taxation.


5.1      Advance Information

Some of the muted response of consumption to wage shocks may be due to wage changes not being shocks

at all. In other words, consumers may have some advance information about shocks, and may have therefore

adapted their consumption in advance of the shocks themselves. To test whether this is an explanation of

our findings, we present a test of "superior or advanced information". We follow the intuition of Cunha et al.

(2005) that with advanced information we should find that future wage growth predicts current consumption

growth. We hence compute the covariances  (∆ ∆+ ) for  = {2 4 6} (as our panel is biennial) and

test whether they are jointly insignificant (the null of no advanced information). The test does not reject

the null of zero correlation with a p-value of 13%. We conclude that superior or advance information do not

appear to be responsible for our findings.33


5.2      Extensive vs Intensive Margin

In general, whether consumption and leisure are Frisch complements or substitutes is an empirical question.

In this paper we find that there is evidence for complementarity: keeping constant the marginal utility of

wealth, consumption and leisure tend to move in parallel. In the literature, evidence for complementarity has
  3 3 There   are two problems with this test. First, suppose that the true income process is a heterogeneous growth model and
that the individual growth rate is known at time 0. In this case the correlation between current consumption growth and
future consumption growth is going to be zero. However, this model would predict that also the correlation between current
consumption growth and current income growth is zero, something that is clearly violated in our data. Second, the test is weak
due to the fact that changes in income may reflect measurement error. It is worth noting, however, that if there is advance
information about the permanent shocks, then the test will still be valid. Moreover, we are pre-adjusting our measure of income
growth to account for measurement error.




                                                               34
been rare (Browning et al., 1985). A more frequent finding is that of substitutability (see e.g., Aguiar and

Hurst, 2005). However, it is worth noting that this evidence comes primarily from studying the relationship

between changes in consumption and large changes in hours, often associated to events like retirement or

unemployment, i.e., extensive margin shifts. For example, it is frequently found that consumption falls at

retirement (when leisure increases dramatically in an anticipated manner). In this paper, in contrast, we

have mainly focused on the relationship between changes in consumption and small changes in hours (i.e.,

intensive margin shifts).

   Can we reconcile our "intensive margin" complementarity findings with the evidence of "extensive margin"

Frisch substitutability in the literature? Consider the following example. Suppose that there are fixed costs

associated with employment (i.e., when the extensive margin becomes active). For example a worker needs

to buy a suit in order to show up at work; or pay a monthly road transit fee to travel to work. These costs

exists independently of the number of hours worked - a suit is needed regardless of whether the worker works

1 or 40 hours, and the road transit fee must be paid regardless of whether the worker commutes 1 or 28

days a month to work. This is an example where consumption is substitute with respect to leisure (on the

extensive margin). But the consumer’s budget may include other goods that are Frisch complements with

respect to leisure, such as utilities. The use of electricity or gas at home depends on the number of hours

the worker actually spends at home or at work. Blundell et al. (2011a) derive a model with both margins.

   To test in an informal way whether this story holds up in our data, we estimate "conditional" Euler

equations, controlling for growth in hours (the intensive margin) and changes in participation (the extensive

margin) - and instrumenting the two appropriately. The results are presented in Table 7. In the first column

we use the PSID sample without conditioning on male participation, so we control for the growth in hours

and the changes in participation of both spouses. To avoid the issues of zeros in hours for non-participant,
                                                                        −−1
we approximate the growth in hours with the expression ∆ ln  ≈    (12)( +−1 ) .   We use lagged (hours and

participation) instruments dated  − 2 and  − 4 (recall the biennial nature of the PSID). The results seem

consistent with the story above. For both males and females there is evidence of Frisch complementarity with


                                                     35
leisure on the intensive margin (consumption falls when hours grow), confirming the results of the previous

sections; however, consistent with most findings in the literature, we also find evidence that consumption and

leisure are substitute at the extensive margin (consumption rises when participation rises). The estimates

are more precise for females and remain so even when we focus on our estimation sample (always-working

husbands), as shown in column 2. Reassuringly, the signs of the estimate do not change. If hours or

participation are measured with errors, the estimates are biased downward. In column 3 we tackle the issue

of measurement error using only instruments dated t-4. The point estimates are similar but the instruments

are less powerful (information on the power of instrument is given in the last three columns of the table)

resulting in less precise estimates overall. In conclusion, while some of these estimates are noisy, it appears

to be able to reconcile the internal evidence of the previous sections with the external evidence coming from

most of the literature once allowance is made for the distinction between intensive and extensive margin, a

crucial one as such.


5.3     How much insurance?

The response of household earnings to a permanent shock to the male’s hourly wage can be decomposed as

follows:



                                       ∆    ∆1           ∆2
                                           =      + (1 − )
                                       1     1            1

    Empirically, a 10% permanent decrease in the male’s wage rate (1 = −01) induces a 4.4% decline in

household earnings, since:

                          ∆                ∆1                           ∆2
                              = |{z}
                                  ∗                       + (1 − ) ∗                    = 044
                          1                              | {z }          
                                  =069
                                            | {z1 }         1−
                                                               =031
                                                                            | {z1 }
                                           1 1 =098
                                                                        2 1 =−081
                                                                         


    We can decompose this overall change into three eﬀects: (a) earnings distribution within the family ();

(b) behavioral response of the main earner ( ∆
                                              1 ); and (c) behavioral response of the secondary earner
                                                 1




( ∆
   1 ).
      2




                                                            36
    If the husband were the sole source of income ( = 1) and if there were no behavioral response in terms of

his labor supply (1 1 = 1), then a 10% permanent decrease in male wages will induce a fall in household

earnings of the same amount. Introducing earnings distribution within the family ( 6= 1) (but still assuming

away behavioral responses, i.e., 1 1 = 1 2 1 = 0) would reduce the eﬀect to 6.9%. Hence the mere

presence of an additional earner, albeit supplying labor inelastically, acts as a significant source of income

smoothing. Allowing for behavioral responses by the primary earner (1 1 6= 1) makes little diﬀerence

(household earnings decline by 6.8%), because the husband’s labor supply to a permanent decline in wages

is fairly inelastic (the substitution eﬀect is approximately the same as the wealth eﬀect). Finally, allowing

for behavioral responses in female labor supply gives the baseline result (i.e., a 10% permanent decrease

in the male’s wage rate induces a 4.4% decline in household earnings). This comes from the fact that the

women works more when the male’s wage falls permanently, a pure wealth eﬀect. Clearly, this is a significant

"insurance" channel in terms of household earnings.

                                                                                                     ∆
    What about the eﬀect on consumption? From the empirical estimates, we know that                  1    b1 = −038,
                                                                                                           =

implying that a 10% permanent decrease in the male’s wage rate decreases consumption by 3.8%. This

insurance is for the most part coming from family labor supply (as we have just shown) and partly from self-

insurance through savings and external sources. In fact, we can decompose the response of consumption into

three steps: (a) with fixed labor supply and no savings or transfers, household earnings would fall by 6.9% as

the male’s wage falls permanently by 10%, and the fall in consumption would be of the same magnitude given

the absence of self-insurance through savings etc.; (b) with the family labor supply insurance channel active,

the fall in household earnings would be only 4.4% and again, so would be the consumption decline; (c) finally,

with both insurance channels active, the fall in household earnings is 4.4%, but the fall in consumption is

further attenuated, to 3.8%. In other words, of the 31 cents of consumption "insured" against the shock to

the male’s wage,34 25 cents (81% of the total insurance eﬀect) come from family labor supply (she works,
  3 4 The   figure 31 cents is derived from the diﬀerence between the response of consumption with insurance and labor supply
response (a 3.8% decline) and without insurance and without labor supply response (but taking into account that 1 = 069),
i.e., a 6.9% decline.



                                                              37
hence reducing , and she increases her labor supply when his wage fall permanently) and only 6 cents (19%

of the total insurance eﬀect) comes from self-insurance.

   In contrast, we find that the husband’s labor supply is a relatively poorer insurance channel against

shocks to the wife’s wages. We can go through the same decomposition exercise, but this time considering

a 10% permanent decline in the wife’s wage (and focusing on the intensive margin response).

   As before, the response of consumption can be decomposed working through three steps. First, with

fixed labor supply and no savings or transfers, household earnings would fall by 3.1% as the woman’s wage

falls permanently by 10% (since her “weight" on total household earnings is (1 − ) = 031). The fall

in consumption would be of the same magnitude given the absence of self-insurance through savings etc.

Second, with the family labor supply insurance channel active, the fall in household earnings would be only

slightly smaller (2.5%). This is for two reasons. First, the woman’s labor supply declines a lot given her

larger behavioral response. Second, although the husband’s labor supply increases, this is not enough to

keep household earnings stable due to his low behavioral responses (and despite his larger share in household

earnings). Finally, with both insurance channels active, the fall in household earnings is 2.5%, but the fall

in consumption is 2.1%. In other words, of the 10 cents of consumption "insured" against the shock to her

wage, about 40% can be attributed to conventional insurance sources (savings and transfers) and 60% to

family labor supply eﬀects.

   In Figure 4 we oﬀer a graphical representation of the decomposition exercise focusing on the life cycle

aspects. We focus on the experiment in which we let the permanent wage of the husband decline by 10%.

Early on in the life cycle, essentially all consumption insurance (the "triangles" line) can be explained by

labor supply responses (the "circle" line) as households do not have enough assets to smooth consumption

through savings. As assets start to cumulate, though (after age 50), some of the insurance is taken up by

saving, and the role of labor supply as an insurance device declines in importance.

   How do our estimates compare to Blundell et al. (2008)? They consider the impact of (transitory and

permanent) shocks to disposable income on consumption. In this paper, instead, we have looked at the


                                                     38
impact of (transitory and permanent) shocks to hourly wages on consumption. In Blundell et al. (2008), a

10% permanent shock to disposable income induces a 6.5% decline in consumption. Suppose that disposable

income includes only household earnings. We know that a 10% permanent shock to the male’s hourly wage

reduces household earnings by 4.4% and consumption by 3.8%. It follows that these estimates imply that

a 10% permanent shock to household earnings would reduce consumption by 8.7% with a standard error of

2.35%. One way to get this result is to divide the consumption response, 0.38, by the household earnings

                     ∆1
response, 0.44 (or   ∆1 ).   While our estimate is higher compared to the estimate reported by Blundell et

al. (2008), their estimate falls well within the 95% confidence interval of our estimate. Note, however, that

these estimates are not strictly comparable. A decline in household earnings most likely reduces disposable

income by less than 10% (due to taxes and transfers attenuating the fall in earnings). The next section

addresses the impact of taxes in more detail.


5.4    Non-linear Taxes

So far, we have neglected any discussion of the impact of taxes on behavior. Introducing a proportional tax

system will have little impact on our results, but non-linear progressive taxation may aﬀect our estimates and

interpretations because the optimal choice of consumption and hours of work is now done under a convex,

non-linear budget set. Hence, the (after-tax) price of leisure changes with the amount of hours worked,

inducing feedback eﬀects and dampening the overall hours response to an exogenous shock to (before-tax)

wages. The complications are exacerbated when considering the labor supply choice of a married couple

that files for taxes jointly. In this case, variation in one earner’s labor supply may change the marginal tax

rate (and hence the return to work) faced by the other earner even in the presence of separable preferences

between spouses’ leisures.

   Nonlinear progressive tax system induces kinks in the budget constraint. Taking fully into account

tax progressivity in our framework is infeasible - as long as the goal is to study the transmission of wage

shocks onto choices in a tractable manner (which we achieved through log-linear approximations of first



                                                         39
order conditions and lifetime budget constraint). To partly account for tax progressivity, we adopt a further

approximation procedure. In particular, we consider approximating the tax schedule faced by individuals

using a continuous mapping from before- to after-tax earnings.35 The mapping we use is:



                                           e = (1 −  ) (1 1 + 2 2 ) 
                                                                                    1−
                                                                                                                           (19)


where the parameters  and  vary over time to reflect changes in the degree of progressivity of the tax

system, and e is after-tax family earnings (see Heathcote et al., 2011; Benabou, 2002). In a proportional

tax system  will be zero and  will represent the proportional tax rate. Researchers have proposed a

number of alternative mappings (see Carroll and Young, 2011, and the references therein). We prefer this

mapping because it provides a simple log-linear relationship between after- and before-tax income.36

    In Appendix 5 we show that the lifetime budget constraint is rewritten with e used in place of

(1 1 + 2 2 ). We can use assumption (19) and thus extend our previous analysis to account for

progressive taxation. In particular, the approximated first order conditions of the problem (equivalent to

equations (7) and (8) in the non-separable case) are:




                               ¡                         ¢
                 ∆+1     '       −  + 1 + 2 ∆ ln +1 +  1 ∆1+1 +  2 ∆2+1                      (20)
                                    ¡               ¢
                               −+1  1 +  2 ∆+1
                               ³                               ´
               ∆+1     '          +   +  − ∆ ln +1 +    ∆+1 +  − ∆−+1           (21)
                                    ³                  ´
                               −+1   +  − ∆+1


for  = {1 2}.
  3 5 This   mapping is a simple algoritm for calculating the amount of taxes due, and hence after-tax income, starting from
information on before-tax income. To provide an example, TAXSIM is another, albeit very sophisticated, mapping. To perform
our mapping, we disregard income from sources other than labor (apart from EITC payments). Given this information, we
calculate  using information on the tax schedule for the various tax years. Hence, what we do is akin to a log-linearization
of the tax system.
  3 6 In Appendix 5 we show this mapping to provide an accurate approximation.




                                                               40
    These equations show very clearly the feedback eﬀect of taxes. To make the discussion more transparent,

consider the labor supply equilibrium condition in the single-earner case and assume for simplicity that the

tax system is stationary:


                         ³                 ´
                ∆+1 '   +    ∆ ln +1 +    ∆+1 −    (∆+1 + ∆+1 )


    Consider first the case  = 0. In this case there is no distinction between after-tax and before-tax

earnings (as it would happen if individual behavior was unaﬀected by the progressivity of taxes). Hence,

the equilibrium conditions in the progressive tax case collapse to those we have been using so far. However,

in the more realistic case   0, the response of hours to own wage shocks is no longer given by the Frisch
                                                              (1−)
elasticity    , but by the parameter e
                                              =       1+       (with e
                                                                                     ≤    for 0 ≤  ≤ 1), which we

call the Frisch elasticity with respect to before-tax wage changes. Clearly, when  increases, the elasticity

of labor supply with respect to before-tax wage changes is dampened relative to the no-tax or flat-tax case,

because any labor supply increase induced by an exogenous increase in before-tax wages would be attenuated

by a decrease in the return to work as people cross tax brackets (which they do "continuously" in our case).37

    In the consumption case, one can calculate that the response of consumption to a before-tax transitory

wage shock is no longer   (which was identifying the extent of non-separability between consumption
                             1 (1−)
and leisure) but equals      1+1 1 ,   and hence it is also dampened (in absolute value). The reason is that this

coeﬃcient captures the extent of consumption co-movement with hours, but in the case with taxes hours

move less and this lower sensitivity of hours to wage shocks spills over to a lower sensitivity of consumption

to wage shocks induced by preference non-separability.

    We re-run our approximation procedure accounting for taxes and obtain the equivalent of (15). See

Appendix 5 for full details. The transmission parameters,  in equation (15), change because both 

and  change as a consequence of introducing taxes into the picture. However, the changes are negligible
  3 7 When   the tax system changes over time and we allow for multiple earners, the elasticity to before-tax wage changes 
                                                                                                                            will
vary to reflect time and individual characteristics (earnings share within the household). In Tables 5 and 8, we report a value
of 
    averaged across all periods and individuals.



                                                                41
and are discussed in Appendix 5. The estimates of the Frisch elasticities (which are now capturing the

response of labor supply with respect to after-tax wage changes), of the average , and of  are reported in

column 4 of Table 5. The estimates of the Frisch elasticities are typically larger (in absolute values) than in

the flat tax case (column 2), because those that we estimated without accounting for taxes were downward

biased - the feedback eﬀect of taxes was already there, but we interpreted it instead as a low elasticity of

response. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that introducing taxes does not aﬀect our qualitative results and

the amount of bias is small.

    Researchers interested in the eﬀect of taxes on labor supply may want to distinguish between the Frisch

(Marshallian) elasticity of labor supply with respect to before-tax changes in wages e
                                                                                      and the Frisch (or

Marshallian) elasticity of labor supply with respect to after-tax changes in wages  (MaCurdy, 1983). In the

simple single-earner case, these objects are linked through the relationship:



                                                    e
                                                    
                                                            =
                                              1 −  (1 + e
                                                         )

    We compare the before- and after-tax elasticities in Table 8, both for the Frisch and the Marshallian

case. None of our conclusions are materially aﬀected by the introduction of progressive taxation. There

is, however, an important change of interpretation. Non-linear progressive taxation eﬀectively attenuates

the impact of wage shocks and consequently, when non-linear taxation is ignored, the Frisch elasticities are

underestimated. Nevertheless, the before-tax elasticities and the smoothing parameters change very little.


6     Conclusions

This paper estimate a life cycle model with two earners making consumption and labor supply decisions.

We allow for flexible preferences (possibly non-separable among all arguments of the utility function, con-

sumption and leisure of the two spouses), correlated wage shocks, and utilize approximations of the first

order conditions and the lifetime budget constraint to derive expressions linking changes in consumption and

hours to wage shocks. The sensitivity of consumption and hours to shocks depend on the structural parame-

                                                      42
ters of the problem (Frisch elasticities and cross-elasticities), as well as terms that measure the relevance of

self-insurance, insurance through external channels, and through family labor supply. We reject separability.

We also reject advance information as an explanation for consumption smoothing relative to wage shocks.

Once we allow for nonseparable preferences, we find no evidence of additional insurance channels. Most of

the consumption smoothing we observe can be explained by decision that are within the boundaries of the

household, i.e., an extended view of self-insurance. We find a particularly important role for family labor

supply, and calculate that of the 31 cents of consumption "insured" against the shock to the male’s wage, 81%

come from family labor supply and only 9% comes from self-insurance. We find a more reduced insurance

role for the husband’s labor supply, calculating that of the 10 cents of consumption "insured" against the

shock to her wage, about 40% can be attributed to conventional insurance sources (savings and transfers)

and 60% to family labor supply eﬀects.

   Our work could be fruitfully extended in a number of directions. Here we suggest a few avenues. First, it

is important to understand the role played by liquidity constraints in aﬀecting consumption and labor supply

choices. In our framework, consumption responds to transitory shock, but while liquidity constraints predict

a positive response to transitory shocks, we find that the response is negative and interpret this as evidence

for complementarity between leisure and household consumption. It is possible that complementarity is even

higher and this masks a role for liquidity constraints (perhaps concentrated among low wealth households).

Future work should aim at disentangling these two distinct forces. Second, we need to understand the role

of nonseparability of consumption and hours separately from the eﬀect of fixed cost of work. Third, intra-

family allocation issues have been neglected. This is not because we think they are unimportant, but because

identification is extremely challenging and is only now started to being confronted with more appropriate

data (i.e., spending on "exclusive" goods) and methodologies. Finally, we have assumed that hours can be

freely adjusted in response to wage shocks, but with adjustment costs in hours this is less obvious. Our

results, suggesting an important role for family labor supply in self-insuring household consumption against

wage shocks would be presumably even more prominent if adjustment costs in labor supply were important.


                                                      43
References

 [1] Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2005), "Consumption vs. Expenditure", Journal of Political Economy,

    113(5), 919-948


 [2] Altonji, Joseph (1986), "Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from Micro Data,"

    Journal of Political Economy 94(3 Part 2), S176-S215.


 [3] Attanasio, Orazio, Gabriella Berloﬀa, Richard Blundell and Ian Preston (2002), "From Earnings In-

    equality to Consumption Inequality." Economic Journal, 112(478), C52-C59.


 [4] Attanasio, Orazio, Hamish Low and Virginia Sanchez-Marcos (2008), "Explaining changes in female

    labour supply in a life-cycle model”, American Economic Review, 98(4), 1517-1552.


 [5] Benabou, Roland (2002), "Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous Agent Economy: What Levels

    of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Eﬃciency?" Econometrica, 70(2), 481-517.


 [6] Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy (1999), "Labor supply: A review of alternative approaches",

    Handbook of labor economics 3, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (Eds.), 1559-1695.


 [7] Blundell, Richard, and Ian Preston (1998), “Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty.” Quar-

    terly Journal of Economics, 113(2), 603-640.


 [8] Blundell, Richard and Ian Preston (2004), “Consumption inequality and income uncertainty: The case

    with endogenous family labor supply”, unpublished manuscript, University College London.


 [9] Blundell Richard, Luigi Pistaferri and Ian Preston (2008), “Consumption inequality and partial insur-

    ance.”American Economic Review, 98(5), 1887-1921.


[10] Blundell, Richard, Antoine Bozio and Guy Laroque (2011a). “Labor Supply and the Extensive Mar-

    gin.”American Economic Review, 101(3), 482-86.




                                                   44
[11] Blundell, Richard, Hamish Low and Ian Preston (2011b). “Decomposing Changes in Income Risk Using

    Consumption Data”, IZA Working Papers, 6125.


[12] Bound John, Charles Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz (2001), “Measurement Error in Survey Data.” In

    Handbook of Econometrics 5, J. Heckman and E. Leamer (Eds), 3705—3843.


[13] Bound, John and Alan B. Krueger (1991), "The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal Earnings

    Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?", Journal of Labor Economics, 9(1), 1-24.


[14] Browning, Martin, Angus Deaton, and Margaret Irish (1985), "A Profitable Approach to Labor Supply

    and Commodity Demands over the Life-Cycle", Econometrica, 5(3), 503-44.


[15] Browning, Martin, Lars P. Hansen, and James Heckman (1999), “Micro Data and General Equilibrium

    Models.” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, 1A: 543-633.


[16] Browning, Martin and Costas Meghir (1991), "The Eﬀects of Male and Female Labor Supply on Com-

    modity Demands," Econometrica, 59(4), 925-51.


[17] Caballero, Ricardo (1990), “Consumption Puzzles and Precautionary Savings.”Journal of Monetary

    Economics, 25(1), 113-136.


[18] Carroll, Daniel R. and Eric R. Young (2011), "The long run eﬀects of changes in tax progressivity,"

    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 35(9), 1451-1473.


[19] Chiappori, Pierre-Andre (1988), "Rational household labor supply", Econometrica, 56(1), 63-90.


[20] Christiano, Larry J, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2011), "When is the Government Spending

    Multiplier Large?." Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), 78-121.


[21] Cunha, Flavio, James Heckman and Salvador Navarro (2005), "Separating Uncertainty from Hetero-

    geneity in Life Cycle Earnings", Oxford Economic Papers, 57(2), 191-261.




                                                   45
[22] Del Boca, Daniela and Annamaria Lusardi (2003), "Credit market constraints and labor market deci-

    sions." Labour Economics, 10(6), 681-703.


[23] Domeij, David and Martin Floden (2006). "The Labor-Supply Elasticity and Borrowing Constraints:

    Why Estimates are Biased", Review of Economic Dynamics, 9(2), 242-262.


[24] Gottschalk, Peter and Robert A. Moﬃtt (2008), "Trends in the Transitory Variance of Male Earnings

    in the U.S., 1970-2004". Boston College Working Papers 697.


[25] Guvenen, Fatih. (2007), “Learning your Earning: Are Labor Income Shocks Really Very Persistent?”

    American Economic Review, 97(3), 687-712.


[26] Guvenen, Fatih and Anthony Smith (2010), “Inferring Labor Income Risk from Economic Choices: An

    Indirect Inference Approach.”Staﬀ Report 450, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.


[27] Hall, Robert E. (1978), “Stochastic Implications of the Life-Cycle Permanent Income Hypothesis: The-

    ory and Evidence.”Journal of Political Economy, 86(2), 971-87.


[28] Hall, Robert, and Frederic Mishkin (1982), “The sensitivity of consumption to transitory income: Esti-

    mates from panel data of households”, Econometrica, 50(2), 461-81.


[29] Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten and Giovanni L. Violante. (2009). "Consumption and labor

    supply with partial insurance: An analytical framework". Mimeo, New York University.


[30] Heckman, James J. (1974), "Life Cycle Consumption and Labor Supply: An Explanation of the Re-

    lationship between Income and Consumption Over the Life Cycle", The American Economic Review,

    64(1), 188-194.


[31] Heckman, James J. and Thomas E. Macurdy (1980), "A Life Cycle Model of Female Labour Supply",

    The Review of Economic Studies, 47 (1), 47-74.




                                                    46
[32] Horowitz, Joel L. (2001). "The Bootstrap", In Handbook of Econometrics,edition 1, volume 5, J. Heck-

    man and E. Leamer (Eds).


[33] Hyslop, Dean R. (2001). “Rising U.S. Earnings Inequality and Family Labor Supply: The Covariance

    Structure of Intrafamily Earnings.”American Economic Review, 91(4), 755-77.


[34] Hryshko, Dmytro (2011). “Excess Smoothness of Consumption in an Estimated Life Cycle Model.”

    Mimeo, University of Alberta.


[35] Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri. (2010). “The Consumption Response to Income Changes.” Annual

    Reviews in Economics, 2, 479-506.


[36] Juhn, Chinhui and Simon Potter (2007). "Is There Still an Added Worker Eﬀect?". Federal Reserve

    Bank of New York. Staﬀ Report no. 310.


[37] Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni Violante (2010), “How Much Consumption Insurance Beyond Self-

    Insurance.”American Economic Journal, 2(4), 53-87.


[38] Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni Violante (2011), "A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal Stimulus

    Payments," NBER Working Papers 1733.


[39] Kaufmann, Katja and Luigi Pistaferri (2009). “Disentangling Insurance and Information in Intertem-

    poral Consumption Choices.”American Economic Review, 99(2), 387-92


[40] Keane, Michael P. (2011). “Labor Supply and Taxes: A Survey.” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(4),

    961-1075.


[41] Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri. (2006). “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality?

    Evidence and Theory.” Review of Economic Studies, 73(1), 163-193.




                                                   47
[42] Lee, Chul-In, (2001). "Finite sample bias in iv estimation of intertemporal labor supply models: is

    the intertemporal substitution elasticity really small?", The Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(4),

    638—646


[43] Low, Hamish (2005), "Self-insurance in a life-cycle model of labour supply and savings”" ,Review of

    Economic Dynamics 8(4), 945-975.


[44] Low, Hamish, Costas Meghir and Luigi Pistaferri, (2010), “Wage Risk and Employment Risk over the

    Life Cycle.” American Economic Review, 100(4), 1432-67.


[45] Lundberg, Shelly (1985), “The Added Worker Eﬀect”, Journal of Labor Economics, 3(1), 11-37.


[46] MaCurdy, Thomas E. (1981), "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting", The

    Journal of Political Economy, 89(6), 1059-1085.


[47] MaCurdy, Thomas E. (1983), "A simple scheme for estimating an intertemporal model of labor supply

    and consumption in the presence of taxes and uncertainty", International Economic Review, 24(2),

    265-289.


[48] Meghir, Costas and Luigi Pistaferri (2004), “Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity”, Economet-

    rica 72(1), 1-32.


[49] Meghir, Costas and Luigi Pistaferri. (2011). “Earnings, consumption and lifecycle choices”, Handbook

    of Labor Economics , 4( B), 773-854.


[50] Phlips, Louis (1974), Applied consumption analysis, Amsterdam: North Holland.


[51] Primiceri , Giorgio E. and Thijs van Rens. (2009) "Heterogeneous life-cycle profiles, income risk and

    consumption inequality", Journal of Monetary Economics. 56(1), 20-39


[52] Stephens, Mel (2002), "Worker Displacement and the Added Worker Eﬀect", Journal of Labor Eco-

    nomics, 20(3), 504-537.

                                                      48
[53] Tallis, G.M. (1961) “The Moment Generating Function of the Truncated Multi-normal Distribution.”

    Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological), 23(1), 223-229.


[54] Wallenius, Johanna, (2011). Human capital accumulation and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution

    of labor: How large is the bias? Review of Economic Dynamics, 14(4), 577—591


[55] Zeldes, Steven P. (1989), "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation", Jour-

    nal of Political Economy, 97(2), 305-46.




                                                    49
                            Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Consumption




                                               PSID Consumption
                                                   1998    2000           2002       2004       2006       2008
Consumption                                       27,290  31,973         35,277     41,555     45,863     44,006
  Nondurable Consumption                           6,859   7,827          7,827      8,873      9,889      9,246
    Food (at home)                                 5,471   5,785          5,911      6,272      6,588      6,635
    Gasoline                                       1,387   2,041          1,916      2,601      3,301      2,611
  Services                                        21,319  25,150         28,419     33,755     36,949     35,575
    Food (out)                                     2,029   2,279          2,382      2,582      2,693      2,492
    Health Insurance                               1,056   1,268          1,461      1,750      1,916      2,188
    Health Services                                 902    1,134          1,334      1,447      1,615      1,844
    Utilities                                      2,282   2,651          2,702      4,655      5,038      5,600
    Transportation                                 3,122   3,758          4,474      3,797      3,970      3,759
    Education                                      1,946   2,283          2,390      2,557      2,728      2,584
    Child Care                                      601     653            660        689        648        783
    Home Insurance                                  430     480            552        629        717        729
    Rent (or rent equivalent)                      8,950  10,645         12,464     15,650     17,623     15,595

Observarions                                       1,872      1,951       1,984      2,011      2,115      2,221

Notes: PSID data from 1999-2009 PSID waves. PSID means are given for the main sample of estimation: married
couples with working males aged 30 to 65. SEO sample excluded. PSID rent is imputed as 6% of reported house value
for homeowners. Missing values in consumption and assets sub-categories were treated as zeros.




                                                      50
                        Table 2: Comparison of PSID data with NIPA




                                 1998       2000        2002        2004        2006        2008
PSID Total                      3,276       3,769       4,285       5,058       5,926       5,736
NIPA Total                      5,139       5,915       6,447       7,224       8,190       9,021
ratio                           0.64         0.64        0.66        0.7         0.72       0.64
PSID Nondurables                 746         855         887        1,015       1,188       1,146
NIPA Nondurables                1,330       1,543       1,618       1,831       2,089       2,296
ratio                            0.56        0.55        0.55        0.55        0.57        0.5
PSID Services                   2,530       2,914       3,398       4,043       4,738       4,590
NIPA Services                   3,809       4,371       4,829       5,393       6,101       6,725
ratio                            0.66        0.67        0.7         0.75        0.78       0.68

Note: PSID weights are applied for the non-sampled PSID data (47,206 observations for these
years). Total consumption is defined as Nondurables + Services. PSID consumption categories
include food, gasoline, utilities, health, rent (or rent equivalent), transportation, child care,
education and other insurance. NIPA numbers are from NIPA table 2.3.5. All numbers are
nonminal




                                               51
                      Table 3: Descriptive Statistics for Assets, Hours and Earnings




                                          PSID Assets, Hours and Earnings
                                                     1998       2000      2002        2004        2006       2008
Total assets                                       332,625 352,247 382,600           476,626    555,951    506,823
  Housing and RE assets                            159,856 187,969 227,224           283,913    327,719    292,910
  Financial assets                                 173,026 164,567 155,605           192,995    228,805    214,441
Total debt                                          72,718     82,806    98,580      115,873    131,316    137,348
  Mortgage                                          65,876     74,288    89,583      106,423    120,333    123,324
  Other debt                                         7,021      8,687     9,217       9,744      11,584     14,561

First earner (head)
  Earnings                                          54,220     61,251     63,674     68,500     72,794     75,588
  Hours worked                                      2,357       2,317     2,309      2,309       2,284     2,140

Second earner (wife)
  Participation rate                                 0.81        0.8       0.81       0.81       0.81        0.8
  Earnings (conditional on participation)           26,035     28,611     31,693     33,987     36,185     39,973
  Hours worked (conditional on participation)       1,666       1,691     1,697      1,707       1,659     1,648

Observarions                                         1,872      1,951      1,984      2,011      2,115      2,221

Notes: PSID data from 1999-2009 PSID waves. PSID means are given for the main sample of estimation: married couples
with working males aged 30 to 65. SEO sample excluded. PSID rent is imputed as 6% of reported house value for
homeowners. Missing values in consumption and assets sub-categories were treated as zeros.




                                                       52
           Table 4: Variance Estimates


Sample                                          All
Males                      Trans.     21      0033
                                                (0008)

                           Perm.      21      0032
                                                (0005)

Females                    Trans.     22      0012
                                                (0006)

                           Perm.      22      0043
                                                (0005)

Correlation of shocks      Trans.     1 2   0244
                                                (0164)

                           Perm       1 2   0113
                                                (0082)

Observations                                    8,191
Notes: Wage process parameters estimated using GMM.
Baseline sample is applied (see section 3.1 for details).
Standard errors are bootstrapped.




                            53
                                                            Ta ble 5: Parameters Estimates


                (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)                           (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)
             Additive           Non-              Non-         Nonlinear                      Additive           Non-             Non-          Nonlinear
           separability      separability     Separability         taxes                     separability   separability      Separability         taxes
                                                  =0                                                                             =0
,  and own elasticities:                                                         Cross-elasticities:
 ()          0181             0181            0181            0193           1          -.-           −0141            −0141          −0186
               (0008)          (0008)           (0008)         (0005)                                        (0051)          (0053)          (0067)

              0741            −0120              0             −0140           1          -.-            0082            0082            0108
               (0165)          (0298)                           (0351)                                        (0030)          (0031)          (0039)

           0201             0437            0448            0495           2          -.-           −0138            −0158          −0175
               (0077)          (0124)           (0126)         (0151)                                        (0139)          (0121)          (0146)

1 1        0431             0514            0497            0621           2          -.-            0162            0185            0206
               (0097)          (0150)           (0150)         (0176)                                        (0166)          (0145)          (0176)

2 2        0831             1032            1041            1133           1 2        -.-            0128             012            0197
               (0133)          (0265)           (0275)         (0289)                                        (0052)          (0064)          (0061)

                                                                                   2 1        -.-            0258            0242            0397
                                                                                                                 (0103)          (0119)          (0127)

Observ.        8,191             8,191            8,191            8,191
Notes: Parameters estimated using GMM. Baseline sample is applied (see section 3.1 for details). Column 1 reports the estimates for the additive separable
case. Column 2 allows for non-separability of hours of the two earners and for non-separability of hours and consumption. Column 3 is similar to column 2,
restricting for no insurance over and above savings ( = 0). Column 4 is similar to column 2 but allowing for non-linear taxes (see section 5.4). Standard
errors are bootstrapped.




                                                                              54
                                          Table 6: Robustness Checks


             (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)                       (1)         (2)       (3)             (4)
             Age       Some      Flexible     Selection                   Age         Some     Flexible      Selection
            30-55     college    variance     Correction                 30-55       college   variance      Correction
                      or more     by age                                             or more   by age
,  and own elasticities:                                     Cross-elasticities:
 ()       0142      0202       0181        0176           1    −0113      −0162     −015          −015
                                                                         (0018)     (0022)    (0018)        (0017)

          −0177      0117      −0109       −0129          1     0065        0087     0087           088
            (0089)    (0072)     (0077)      (0076)                   (001)     (0012)    (001)          (001)

        0465      0368       042         0473          2     −0083      −0142     −011         −0122
            (0044)    (005)      (0037)      (0041)                  (0029)     (0032)    (0026)        (0028)

1 1     0467      0542       0575        0509          2     0097        0169     0129          0143
            (0036)    (0045)     (004)       (0038)                  (0034)     (0038)    (0038)        (0033)

2 2     1039      0858       1005        1095          1 2   0101        0115     0141          0125
            (0099)    (0097)     (0086)      (0092)                  (0011)     (0012)    (0011)         (001)

                                                               2 1   0205        0255     0285          0253
                                                                         (0022)     (0027)    (0022)        (0021)

Observ.     6,942      5,014       8,191        8,191
Notes: Parameters estimated using GMM. All columns allow for non-separability of hours of the two earners and for
nonseparability of hours and consumption. In column 1 the sample is restricted to households with heads aged 30-55. In
column 2 the sample is restricted to households with heads that have at least some college education. In column 3, the
baseline sample is applied (see section 3.1 for details), and the variance of the permanent shock is allowed to change
by age (allowing five age groups). Column 4 uses the baseline sample and applies the participation correction (see
section 3.2.3). Second stage GMM Standard errors are reported.




                                                          55
                                     Table 7: Conditional Euler Equations



                                          Regression results                              First stage F-stats
                             (1)                 (2)                    (3)        (1)     (2)            (3)
∆  ( )            0144                                                    23.4
                          (0369)

∆ ( )              −0073              −0013                   −0014       26.3   135.5           6.0
                          (0175)             (0021)                  (0064)

∆  ( )          0456               0362                    0232       98.4   91.2           12.6
                          (0199)             (0186)                  (0892)

∆ ( )            −0220              −0171                   −0128       86.5   77.7           18.5
                          (0100)             (0094)                  (0314)

Sample                       All          EMP (Male)=1            EMP (Male)=1
                                           
Instruments            2 ,4        lags    2 ,4        lags           4 lag
Observations              7,247               6,678                    6,678
Notes: The table reports “conditional” Euler equations estimates. ∆ is defined as ( − −1 )  [05 ( + −1 )].
In columns 1 and 2, hours growth and change in employment are instrumented using the second and the fourth
year lags of hours and employment, as well as the two year change in average wages by cohort, education and
year and the second lag of this change. In column 3 the two year lag of hours and participation is omitted. All
columns also control for year eﬀects, change in family size, number of kids, supported kids outside the household,
extra earner and leaving in big city. Column 1 does not condition on heads employment, (but does condition on
non-missing lagged instruments). Columns 2 and 3, also condition on head’s employment. Standard errors are
clustered at the household level.




                                                              56
Table 8: The eﬀect of taxes on labor supply elasticities


                  (1)                  (2)              (3)
              No taxes         Before-tax           After-tax
           accounted for         response            response
1 1          0514                0621            0530
                 (0150)           (0176)             (0147)

2 2          1032                1133            1033
                 (0265)           (0289)             (0260)

1 2          0128                0197            0143
                 (0052)           (0061)             (0055)

2 1          0258                0397            0228
                 (0103)           (0127)             (0100)

1           −0141            −0186              −0146
                 (0051)           (0067)             (0052)

2           −0138            −0175              −0152
                 (0139)           (0146)             (0136)



Marshallian Elasticities (w.r.t. own wage shocks)
Head            −0018            −0011              −0010
                 (0131)           (0129)             (0123)

Wife             0322                0322            0370
                 (0087)           (0058)             (0078)



Observ.          8,191                8,191            8,191
Notes: Parameters estimated using GMM. Baseline sample is
applied (see section 3.1 for details).Column 1 reports the
elasticities for the nonseparable case not accounting for taxes
(as in Table 5, column 2). Column 2 reports the before-tax
elasticities for the nonseparable case (as in Table 5, column
4). Column 3 reports the after-tax elasticities for the nonseparable
case.




                                 57
                                  Figure 1:    by Age of Head of Household




                                                                                                        800
           .5
           .4




                                                                                                                                         600
                                                                                                        Total Assets (Thousands of Dollars)
           .3




                                                                                                                             400
      Pi
           .2




                                                                                                                   200
           .1
           0




                                                                                                         0
            30-34         35-39          40-44      45-49      50-54             55-59         60-65
                                         Age of household head

                                    Pi              Total Assets (Thousands of Dollars)




   Notes: The …gure plots the average value of    and the average Total assets by age categories. Baseline sample is

applied (see section 3.1 for details).




                                                        58
                             Figure 2:  by Age of Head of Household



         .7
         .68
         .66
     s
         .64
         .62
         .6




          30-34         35-39          40-44      45-49      50-54                  55-59          60-65
                                       Age of household head




Notes: The …gure plots the average value of s. Baseline sample is applied (see section 3.1 for details).




                                                      59
                                  Figure 3: Marshallian Elasticities by Age


                                                Marshallian Elasticities
      .4
      .3
      .2
      .1
      0
      -.1




            30-34        35-39                  40-44       45-49       50-54                        55-59              60-65
                                                    Age of household head

                                                            Wife's Marshallian Elasticity
                                                            Head's Marshallian Elasticity



   Notes: The …gure plots the average Marshallian elasticities of labor supply for the head and for the wife by age,

where Marshallian elasticities   1 1   and    2 2 .   Baseline sample is applied (see section 3.1 for details).




                                                                   60
                      Figure 4: Decomposition of consumption smoothing by age




                        Response of Consumption to a 10% Permanent
                             Decrease in the Male’s Wage Rate
    -2
    -3
    -4
    -5
    -6
    -7




         30-34           35-39             40-44        45-49       50-54                     55-59                60-65
                                                Age o f household head

                                   fixed labor supply and no insurance
                                   with family labor supply adjustment
                                   with family labor supply adjustment and other insurance




   Notes: The response of consumption for the case of …xed labor supply and no insurance ("diamonds"), is calculated

as  multiplied by the shock (-10). The response of consumption for the case of family labor supply adjustment only

("circles") is calculated as the response of household earnings to the shock multiplied by the shock. The response of

consumption for the case of family labor supply adjustment and other insurance is calculated as   1 ,   multiplied by

the shock. Baseline sample is applied (see section 3.1 for details).




                                                           61
Appendix 1: Approximation of the First Order Conditions

We start by showing how to derive equations (7) and (8) in the text using approximations for the first order

conditions of the life cycle problem. >From the first order condition for assets

                                                                              1+
                                                              (+1 ) =       
                                                                              1+

                                  1+
Define  such that  =           1+ ,   and apply a second order Taylor approximation to (ln +1 ) around ln  + 

                                                  ∙                                           ¸
                                                                          1
                                  +1 '   1 + (∆ ln +1 − ) + (∆ ln +1 − )2
                                                                          2

Taking expectations with the information set at time 

                                                                       1                     2
                                                 [∆ ln +1 ] '  −  (∆ ln +1 − )
                                                                       2

which in turn can be written as

                                                           ∆ ln +1 =  +1 + +1                             (A1.1)

                                                       2
where  +1 =  − 12  (∆ ln +1 − ) is assumed to be fixed in the cross section and  (+1 ) = 0 by

definition of an expectation error.
                         0                         ¡            ¢   ³     ´
  Define  e =                                 
                                , and suppose that       = e Apply a first order Taylor approxi-
              ³      ´               ³ ´
mation for 0 ̃+1 around ln ̃ :

                                       ³        ´               ³     ´                  ³     ´
                                     0 ̃+1         '     0 ̃ + ∆ ln ̃+1 00 ̃ ̃               (A1.2)
                                                                ³       ´               1
                                                       ⇒ ∆ ln 0 ̃+1 ' −                  ∆ ln ̃+1
                                                                                     

                            0 (̃ )
      where   =               is the absolute value of the EIS of consumption. Assuming constant elastic-
                          00   (̃ )̃
                                                                              ³   ´ 0
ities     =  . From the first order condition for consumption 0 ̃    =  , therefore using

equations (A1.1) and (22) we derive equation (7) from the main text:



                                                ∆ ' −  (∆ ln  ) ' −  (  +  )


                                                                       62
                                   0
 where ∆ = ∆ ln ̃ −      . Similarly for hours of earner  (assuming constant elasticities),
         ³         ´                              ³      ´  0
                                                                
∆ ln  0 ̃+1 '  1 ∆ ln ̃+1 and  0 ̃    =  ̃ therefore
                           




                                      ∆      '   (∆ ln  + ∆ ln  )

                                                   '   (  +  + ∆ +  )
                          h                                             i
                                         0                   0
where ∆ = ∆̃ −   ∆ ln    −   ∆    and as ∆ = ∆ + ∆ we get

equation (8) in the main text.


Appendix 2: Approximation of the Intertemporal Budget Con-
straint

We now show how to derive equations (10)-(14) in the main text. We do so by applying a Taylor approxima-

tion to the intertemporal budget constraint given in equation (9) in the main text. From now on we omit all

subscript  for the household to reduce clutter. The general approximation rule is (see for example Blundell,

Low and Preston, 2005):38
              "  −          #       −             −
                  X                  X               X        exp  0    ¡               ¢
            ln      exp     = ln      exp  0 +      P −         0
                                                                               −  0
                  =0                =0             =0     =0 exp  
                                        −  −
                                                     Ã       "    −
                                                                               #                     !
                                     1 XX               2       X               ¡         0
                                                                                             ¢¡   0
                                                                                                    ¢
                                  +                         ln       exp ̃    −     −  
                                     2                  
                                                    =0 =0                   =0

where   is the series we wish to approximate,           0   is the series we are approximating around, and ̃ is a vector

chosen such that the Taylor expansion is accurate. We neglect the second order term from here on (for an

accurate derivation of the order of magnitude of this term see Blundell, Low and Preston, 2005).

   Plug the left hand side of the budget constraint into the approximation by defining   = ln + −

 ln (1 + ) and  0 = −1 ln + −  ln (1 + ) to get:
         "  −            #          −
             X +                  X
       ln              
                              =   ln      exp [−1 ln + −  ln (1 + )]
             =0 (1 + )             =0
                                          
                                          X −
                                                   exp [−1 ln + −  ln (1 + )]
                                      +          P −                                  ( ln + − −1 ln + )
                                          =0     =0 exp [−1 ln + −  ln (1 + )]
 3 8 To   make notation more compact, the household subscript is omitted from now on in this appendix.


                                                                   63
                         exp[   ln + − ln(1+)]
Defining + =         − −1                                the more compact notation can be used:
                        =0 exp[−1 ln + − ln(1+)]
                                   "    −
                                                         #               −
                                       X       +                     X
                                ln                          ' ln             exp [−1 ln + −  ln (1 + )]
                                       =0    (1 + )                  =0
                                                                        
                                                                        X −
                                                                    +          + ( ln + − −1 ln + )
                                                                        =0

Note that + is non-random (since we are taking expectations dated  − 1). To simplify the expression

above note that ln + = ln +−1 −    + −  + . Therefore, defining  = :39



                                                      
                                                      X −
                                                             + ( ln + − −1 ln + )
                                                      =0
                                                          Ã −           !
                                                           X
                                                ' −                +          = −  
                                                             =0
                                                  ³P          ´
                                                      −
where the last equality comes from the identity      =0  + = 1. Now, take the diﬀerence:
                            "  −             #        "  −            #
                                 X +                     X +
                           ln              
                                                 − −1 ln              
                                                                            ' −                                              (A2.1)
                                 =0 (1 + )                =0 (1 + )

    We apply the same approach to the right hand side of the intertemporal budget constraint. The series

for the right hand side is given by:

                                = ln 1+ 1+ −  ln (1 + )                                           = 0   − 
                        0   = −1 ln 1+ 1+ −  ln (1 + )                                          = 0   − 
      = ln 2+−( −+1) 2+−( −+1) − [ − ( −  + 1)] ln (1 + )                           =  −  + 1  2 ( −  + 1)
  0 = −1 ln 2+−( −+1) 2+−( −+1) − [ − ( −  + 1)] ln (1 + )   =  −  + 1  2 ( −  + 1)
                                        2( −+1)+1     = ln 
                                     0
                                    2( −+1)+1 =     −1 ln 
We also define
                                                   
                                                   X −
                                       1     =           exp [−1 ln 1+ 1+ −  ln (1 + )]
                                                   =0
                                                   
                                                   X −
                                       2     =           exp [−1 ln 2+ 2+ −  ln (1 + )]
                                                   =0

                                       3     = exp −1 ln 
  3 9 There   is no need to keep track of the diﬀerence in taste shifters, as these are assumed to be in the household information
set, and hence they are going to be dropped when taking diﬀerences in expectations. Similarly, we do not need to keep track
of  as it does not contain any stochastic elements.


                                                                          64
and

                                                    exp [−1 ln  ]
                                             =
                                                    1 + 2 + 3
                                                      1
                                             =
                                                    1 + 2
                                                    exp [−1 1+ 1+ −  ln (1 + )]
                                     1+    =
                                                                      1
                                                    exp [−1 2+ 2+ −  ln (1 + )]
                                     2+    =
                                                                      2

Taking diﬀerences in expectations of both sides of the budget constraint as in the single earner case, and

using equation (A2.1):

                                              £¡            ¢      ¡           ¢                         ¤
             −      = (1 −  )          1 +  1 1 1 + 1 + 1 1  1 1 +  1 1 
                                                       £¡           ¢      ¡           ¢                         ¤
                             + (1 −   ) (1 −  )      1 + 2 2 2 + 1 + 2 2  2 2 +  2 2 


which implies that  can be written as



                                   ¡            ¢                      ¡            ¢
                      (1 −   )  1 + 1 1           (1 −   )  1 + 1 1  1
                = −                             1 −                                   1
                          + (1 −   )                   + (1 −  ) 
                                          ¡            ¢                            ¡            ¢
                      (1 −   ) (1 −  ) 1 + 2 2          (1 −   ) (1 −  ) 1 + 2 2
                    −                                    2 −                                     2 2
                             + (1 −   )                        + (1 −   )  

where   =  1 1 − (1 −  ) 2 2 . Assuming that   is small and can be neglected (i.e., transitory

shocks have negligible wealth eﬀect) this becomes
                                             ¡            ¢                           ¡            ¢
                                 (1 −  )  1 + 1 1          (1 −  ) (1 −  ) 1 + 2 2
                         = −                              1 −                                   2            (A2.2)
                                    + (1 −  )                    + (1 −   )  

Plugging the expression for  from equation A2.2 to equations (7) and (8) in the main text, and noting that

  in these equations is going to be absorbed by year eﬀects, yields equations (10) to (14) in the main text.


Appendix 3: Approximations for the Non-Separable Case

In this appendix we show how to derive equations (15) and (16) in the main text, as well as provide the full

set of dynamics of consumption and earnings that are omitted from the main text for brevity.

                                                                 65
    Suppose that the utility function is separable over time, but not over hours of work. Suppose that the
                                ³                                  ´    ³                   ´
felicity function is given by    1  2    1  2 =       e 2  
                                                                          e         e 1 . The first order conditions

w.r.t. consumption and hours are

                                               ³                    ´
                                                   e 1  
                                                 e         e 2   = 
                                              ³                    ´
                                          −1      e 1  
                                                e         e 2   =  1
                                              ³                    ´
                                          −2      e 1  
                                                e         e 2   =  2


Applying a Taylor approximation similar to the one applied for equation (22) above for each of the first

order conditions yields the following dynamic equations for consumption and hours in terms of wages and

revisions to the marginal utility of wealth ( )

                                ¡                     ¢
                     ∆   '      1 + 2 −   +  1 ∆ ln 1 + 2 ∆ ln 2                   (A3.1)
                                ¡                            ¢
                   ∆1   '      1  +  1 1 + 1 2  + 1 1 ∆ ln 1 + 1 2 ∆ ln 2         (A3.2)
                                ¡                            ¢
                   ∆2   '      2  +  2 1 + 2 2  + 2 1 ∆ ln 1 + 2 2 ∆ ln 2         (A3.3)


where   are Frisch elasticities of consumption and hours with respect to price of consumption and wages

                                                         e and 
(see main text for details) and  and  are the logs of      e  , respectively.

   We now follow the approximation procedure detailed in Appendix 2 for the intertemporal budget con-

straint. The approximated LHS is given by

                   ¡                     ¢                                   ¡                          ¢
                     1 + 2 −   +  1 1 +  2 2 +   1 1 +  2 2          (A3.4)


and for the RHS by
                  ⎡                  ¡              ¢          ¡              ¢                      ⎤
                                       1 +  1 1 1 + 1 +  1 1  1 1
          (1 −   )  ⎣                                         ¡                              ¢ ⎦              (A3.5)
                          + 1 2 2 +  1 2  1 1 +  1  + 1 1 +  1 2 
                                 ⎡                                                                                ⎤
                                                                   2 1 1 + 2 1  2 1
          + (1 −   ) (1 −  ) ⎣ ¡                 ¢          ¡              ¢              ¡               ¢ ⎦
                                    + 1 + 2 2 2 + 1 + 2 2  2 2 +  2  +  2 1 + 2 2 

Assigning as before  =  1 =  2 = 0 and equating the two sides of the budget constraint (A3.4) and (22)

                                                            66
we can solve for 
                                                           ¡           ¢
                                                          + 1 − 1
                         = −                                                                  1   (A3.6)
                                       1    −  1 +  2 −  2 +   + 
                                                        ¡                 ¢
                                                      (1 −  ) +  2 −  2
                                  −                                                             2
                                       1    −  1 +  2 −  2 +   + 

where


                                          1     =  1 1 + (1 −  )  2 1

                                          2     =  1 2 + (1 −  )  2 2

                                                =  1  + (1 −  ) 2 


We can now plug  from equation (22) to the equations (22) - (22) to fully characterize the dynamics of

consumption and earnings of each earner as a function of the wage shocks, preference parameters,  and 

as in equation (15) in the main text:


                        ∆ ln        ' 1 ∆1 + 2 ∆2 + 1 1 + 2 2

                      ∆ ln 1       ' 1 1 ∆1 + 1 2 ∆2 + 1 1 1 + 1 2 2

                      ∆ ln 2       ' 2 1 ∆1 + 2 2 ∆2 + 2 1 1 + 2 2 2


where




                                                               67
             1     =  1

             2     =  2
                                                  ¡                      ¢£           ¡           ¢            ¤
                                                    1 +  2 −  (1 −   )  + 1 − 1
             1     =  1       −
                                        (1 −   ) 1 −  1 + (1 −   )  2 −  2 + (1 −   )   + 
                                             ¡                        ¢£           ¡                 ¢            ¤
                                              1 + 2 −   (1 −  ) (1 −  ) +  2 −  2
             2     =  2       −
                                        (1 −   ) 1 −  1 + (1 −   )  2 −  2 + (1 −   )   + 

           1 1     = 1 + 1 1

           1 2     =  1 2
                                                ¡                            ¢£         ¡           ¢           ¤
                                                  1  + 1 1 +  1 2 (1 −   )  + 1 − 1
           1 1     = 1 + 1 1 −
                                        (1 −   ) 1 −  1 + (1 −   ) 2 −  2 + (1 −   )   + 
                                       ¡                            ¢£          ¡                 ¢           ¤
                                         1  + 1 1 + 1 2 (1 −  ) (1 −  ) +  2 −  2
           1 2     =  1 2 −
                                    (1 −  ) 1 −  1 + (1 −   ) 2 −  2 + (1 −   )   + 

           2 1     =  2 1

           2 2     = 1 + 2 2
                                                    ¡                  ¢£          ¡           ¢           ¤
                                           2  + 2 1 +  2 2 (1 −   )  + 1 − 1
           2 1     =  2 1 −
                                    (1 −  ) 1 −  1 + (1 −   ) 2 −  2 + (1 −   )   + 
                                           ¡                            ¢£           ¡                  ¢          ¤
                                              2  + 2 1 + 2 2 (1 −  ) (1 −  ) +  2 −  2
           2 2     = 1 + 2 2 −
                                        (1 −   ) 1 −  1 + (1 −   ) 2 −  2 + (1 −   )   + 


Appendix 4: Identification

We show how the parameters of interest are identified in the case of no participation correction and no

measurement error. Identification when the participation correction is applied is available upon request from

the authors. Discussion of identification with measurement error is in the main text.

     Here we discuss the more general non-separable case. Identification in the separable case is a spe-

cial case of the one we discuss, and hence omitted. In the full model we estimate a total of 6 economi-

cally relevant wage parameters ( 21   22  21   22   1 2   1 2 ) and 12 preference and insurance parameters

(      1 1   2 2   1 2  2 1   1   2   1    2  ).

     Identification of the wage parameters is similar to Meghir and Pistaferri (2004). Consider unexplained


                                                                               68
wage growth of earner :



                                                 ∆ = ∆ + 


   It can be shown that the wage parameters are identified using:




                                   2   = − (∆ ∆+1 )

                                   2   =  (∆ (∆+1 + ∆ + ∆−1 ))

                                1 2   = − (∆1 ∆2+1 )

                                1 2   =  (∆1 (∆2+1 + ∆2 + ∆2−1 ))


   Identification of 2 rests on the idea that wage growth rates are autocorrelated due to mean reversion

caused by the transitory component (the permanent component is subject to i.i.d. shocks). Identification of

 21 2 is an extension of this idea - between-period and between-earner wage growth correlation reflects the

correlation of the mean-reverting components. Identification of 2 rests on the idea that the variance of wage

growth (E (∆ ∆ )), subtracted the contribution of the mean reverting component (E (∆ ∆−1 ) +

E (∆ ∆+1 )), identifies with the variance of innovations to the permanent component. Identification

of   − follows a similar logic.

   As we back out  and  from data (see section 4.1), we omit discussion of the identification of these

parameters.

   We start by discussing identification of hours elasticity parameters (own and cross-elasticities). Consider




                                                         69
the following moments:

                                                       ¡           ¢
                         1    =  [∆1 ∆1+1 ] = − 1 + 1 1  21 − 1 2  1 2
                                                       ¡           ¢
                         2    =  [∆2 ∆1+1 ] = − 1 + 1 1  1 2 −  1 2  22

                         3    =  [∆1 ∆1+1 ] = −21

                         4    =  [∆2 ∆2+1 ] = −22

                         5    =  [∆2 ∆1+1 ] = −1 2


   Combination of these moments gives

                                                          1 4 − 2 5
                                           1 1    =                 −1
                                                           3 4 − 25
                                                          2 3 − 1 5
                                          1 2     =
                                                           3 4 − 25

which shows identification of the parameters  1 1 and  1 2 . The identification of the parameters  2 2

and  2 1 is symmetric and hence omitted.

   The idea behind the identification of 1 and  2 is very similar. In particular, consider the following

two moments:


                              6    =  [∆1 ∆+1 ] = − 1  21 −  2  1 2

                              7    =  [∆2 ∆+1 ] = − 1  1 2 −  2 22


We can now show that:

                                                           6 4 − 7 5
                                              1   =
                                                            3 4 − 25
                                                           7 3 − 6 5
                                              2   =
                                                            3 4 − 25

Given that 1 and  2 are identified, the symmetry of the Frisch substitution matrix can be applied to

derive estimates for  1    2  (see section 4.2.2 in the main text).

   Note that we have not discussed identification of   and . This is quite involved, so we make it available

on request to those interested.

                                                           70
Appendix 5: Approximation with Taxes

We use the log linear approximation to the tax system, given in equation (19) in the main text. We estimate

the parameters  and  by regressing the log of total household after tax earnings on total household before

tax earnings, by year. While the latter is observed in the data, we calculate the former by using the tax

code by year, accounting for EITC (by number of kids), and assuming that all couples in our sample file

jointly, and only have income from earnings. The slope coeﬃcients from these regressions provide estimates

of (1 −  ) by year, and the constants provide estimates of log (1 −  ). The 2 from a regression of our

approximated tax rates on the actual tax rates (calculated using the tax code as explained above) is 0.77

for the entire sample and 0.95 if excluding EITC recipients, suggesting that our approximation captures

accurately the non-linearity of the tax code.

   The estimates for  and  can then be used in estimating the model parameters. To do that we need

to re-write the approximation for the first order conditions and for the budget constraint with taxes. The

approximation for the first order conditions, is given by the solution to equations (20) and (21) in the main

text for consumption and hours growth as a function of the growth in wages and in marginal utility of wealth

(+1 ). This step requires approximating the log change in total household earnings as the weighted sum of
                                                                                                              1
the two earners’ log change in earnings: ∆ ln (+1 ) '  ∆ ln 1+1 + (1 −  ) ∆ ln 2+1  where  =     .


   The inter-temporal budget constraint with the non-linear tax function is given by

                                    −                     −             1−
                                   X       +          X    (1 −  ) +
                                                   =  +                       
                                    =0
                                          (1 + )          =0
                                                                   (1 + )

   We apply the same type of approximation as the one described in Appendices 2 and 3 to this budget

constraint. This allows us to get the system of consumption and earnings equations as a function of the

wage shocks. The estimates for the transmission coeﬃcients from this procedure are given by:

                      ∆   ' − 015 ∆1         − 015 ∆2     + 038 1     + 019 2
                                    (0052)            (0136)          (0051)        (0042)

                      ∆1   '     154 ∆1       + 014 ∆2     + 099 1     − 021 2
                                   (0147)             (0055)          (0123)        (0045)

                      ∆2   '     023 ∆1       + 203 ∆2     − 079 1     + 137 2
                                   (0100)             (0260)          (0194)        (0078)



                                                          71
and as noted in the text, are very close to the estimates which are estimated without accounting for taxes

(see section 4.2.2. in the main text).


Appendix 6: Robustness to Results with Separable Utility

                                         (1)              (2)               (3)                  (4)
                                    Participation      Head Aged      Assets averaged          Optimal
                                     correction          30-55          by age and            weighting
                                                                         education             matrix
               E(π)                     0.176               0.142          0.239                0.181


               β                        0.729                0.658         0.721                 0.758
                                       (0.047)              (0.053)       (0.049)               (0.039)
               ηc,p                     0.231                0.286         0.199                 0.271
                                       (0.043)              (0.049)       (0.038)               (0.056)
               ηh1,w 1                  0.418                0.394         0.431                 0.386
                                       (0.042)              (0.039)       (0.042)               (0.043)
               ηh2,w 2                0.912            0.885         0.83             0.497
                                     (0.085)          (0.094)       (0.08)           (0.076)
               Observations           8,191            6,942        8,191             8,191
               Note: Standard errors are not bootstrapped (GMM standard errors reported).




Appendix 7: Quasi-Concavity of the Utility Function

In the main text, we have imposed symmetry of the Frisch substitution matrix (equation 18), reproduced

here:


                ⎛                                             ⎞       ⎛                                 ⎞−1
                                                                           2       2       2 
                      −      1 1       2 2                  2      1     2
                ⎜                                           ⎟     ⎜        2       2       2 
                                                                                                        ⎟
                ⎜ − 1                   1
                                 − 1 1               1 ⎟ =  ⎜
                                                − 1 2                                               ⎟
                ⎝    1                  1              2 ⎠     ⎝       1      12     1 2   ⎠
                                                                           2       2       2 
                  − 2  2             2
                                 − 2 1 1
                                                         2
                                                − 2 2 2               2     2 1    22

                                                               =  −1


   To show that our empirical estimates imply quasi-concavity of preferences, it suﬃces to show that the

Hessian of the utility function is negative semi-definite (n.s.d. henceforth). Since the inverse of an n.s.d.

                                                              72
matrix is n.s.d., it is suﬃcient to show that the  is n.s.d. ( ≥ 0 by definition, so it plays no role in this).

We perform this exercise by considering a value of  obtained using our estimates of the various elasticities,

and evaluating the consumption, hours, and wages terms at their sample medians (we normalize  = 1).

   We find that matrix A is estimated:

                                             ⎛                              ⎞
                                                 −1548 −0018 −0027
                                          ⎜                      ⎟
                                b = 104 × ⎜ −0018 −0004 −0002 ⎟
                                         ⎝                      ⎠
                                            −0027 −0002 −0009
                                 ³                         ´0
with eigenvalues given by: 104 × −15482 −00092 −00037 . It follows that concavity of the utility

function holds empirically. The signs on the Hessian are as expected (note that utility is written in terms of

leisure and not hours therefore the cross derivatives of consumption are positive):

                                        ⎛                                  ⎞
                                            −00001    00002     00002
                                       ⎜                                 ⎟
                                   b = ⎜ 00002
                                                     −00262    00037 ⎟
                                       ⎝                                 ⎠
                                         00002        00037    −00118
   A diﬀerent issue is the possibility that the selection of goods in the PSID makes a finding of Frisch

complementarity with leisure more likely. To check whether this is the case, we use CEX data and construct

two consumption aggregates 1 (where we attempt to replicate the composition of spending items available

in the PSID) and 2 (the residual of nondurable consumption). We then use household characteristics which

exist in both surveys along with data on 1 to impute 2 in the PSID. We then construct a measure of total

consumption which is the sum of 1 and the imputed 2 in the PSID, and use this measure in our estimation

of the structural parameters. The results when using the imputed measure remain very similar to the results

with the PSID consumption measure.




                                                       73
