NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DYNAMIC ASPECTS OF FAMILY TRANSFERS
Kathleen McGarry
Working Paper 18446
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18446
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012

The model in this paper is based on that in an earlier unpublished working paper “Testing Parental
Altruism: Implications of a Dynamic Model”, NBER working paper 7593. I am grateful to Steven
Haider and to many seminar participants for their helpful comments and to Michael Hurd and Janet
Currie for their help with the earlier version. Research support from the NIH is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Kathleen McGarry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Dynamic Aspects of Family Transfers
Kathleen McGarry
NBER Working Paper No. 18446
October 2012
JEL No. H0,H31,J0,J1,J14
ABSTRACT
Each year parents transfer a great deal of money to their adult children. While intuition might suggest
that these transfers are altruistic and made out of concern for the well-being of the children, empirical
tests of the model have consistently yielded negative results. However, an important limitation in these
sorts of studies and of our understanding of transfers in general has stemmed our inability to observe
transfers over time. Estimates of patterns in a single cross section necessarily miss important aspects
of behavior. In this paper I expand on the static altruistic model and posit a dynamic model in which
parents use current observations on the incomes of their children to update their expectations regarding
future incomes and desired future transfers. I then draw on data spanning a 17 year period to examine
the dynamic aspects of transfer behavior. I find substantial change across periods in recipiency, large
differences across children within the family, and a strong negative correlation between inter vivos
transfers and the transitory incomes of the recipients. This evidence suggests that dynamic models
can provide insights into transfer behavior that are impossible to obtain in a static context.
Kathleen McGarry
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
mcgarry@ucla.edu

1

Introduction

Intergenerational transfers between family members are an important economic phenomenon, particularly those transfers from parents to children. Gale and Scholz (1994) estimate yearly flows
between parents and their non-coresident children of $65 billion in 2010 dollars. Such transfers are
likely to have a substantial impact on the well-being of both donors and recipients and will have
consequences for the distribution of wealth. As large as these numbers are, they are only part of
the story as even the knowledge that funds could be available should the need arise, is likely to
alter behavior. Finally, familial transfers may interact with public transfers, and in doing so could
alter the effectiveness and eventual beneficiaries of government transfer programs.
The importance of the effects in any of these dimensions depends crucially on the motivation
behind the private transfers. The two most prominent models, altruism and exchange, make very
different predictions about the redistributional aspects of private transfers. Consider the case of
potential transfers from a parent to a child. The altruism model predicts a negative relationship
between the child’s income and both the probability and amount of a transfer; a result which means
that assistance from public programs can replace or crowd-out familial assistance and that transfers
can reduce income inequalities within families. In contrast, the exchange model is consistent with
either a positive or negative relationship between the child’s income and the magnitude of a transfer.
(See Cox 1987,for a clear description of the two models.) Unfortunately, despite the potential
importance of understanding familial behaviors, a consensus has not yet been reached on the most
appropriate model of behavior as none of the hypothesized models appears to be consistent with
observed patterns of giving. In fact, the empirical evidence has, at times, been inconsistent with
any of the standard models.
This difficulty likely stems, at least in part, from an inherent mismatch between our theory and
data. The models referred to above are written in a static context with the effects of interest being
changes in lifetime transfers in response to changes in permanent income. However, the data used to
test these models come from a dynamic world: Researchers observe current rather than permanent
income, and single period rather than lifetime transfers. As I illustrate in this paper, this difference
in measurement is likely to lead to incorrect conclusions in tests of the model’s validity.
Beyond attempts to discern the motivation for giving, the cross-sectional nature of the data

1

has also hampered our understanding of the empirical patterns of transfer behavior. Capturing
transfers at a single point in time makes it difficult to understand how parents respond to various
events in the child’s life or to understand the cumulative importance of transfers when aggregated
over an extended period of time. Even simple questions such as the year-to-year variation in receipt
have remained unanswered.
In this paper I address these issues by providing some of the first empirical evidence of transfers
over a prolonged time period and examining these transfers in light of a richer altruistic model. I first
consider a formal model which expands on the classic altruism model to incorporate dynamic aspects
of behavior. It hypothesizes that parental expectations regarding a child’s income evolve over time
and that transfers respond to these evolving expectations. This model serves as a straightforward
example of the importance of considering dynamic aspects of behavior.
In light of this illustration that dynamics matter on a theoretical level, I draw on data from
the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) covering the time period 1992-2008, to assess the time
varying nature of transfers and to compare aggregate patterns of giving with cross-sectional results.
Furthermore, by examining multiple observations within families and over time, I am able to control
for unobserved family and child effects, such as parental generosity and / or a child’s ability or
industriousness, to obtain unbiased measures of the relationships between income and transfer
receipt.
I find considerable variation in transfers over time. In each year approximately 14 percent of
children receive a transfer from their parents, yet only 6 percent of the sample receives a transfer in
any two consecutive survey years. Furthermore, while 46 percent of children in my sample receive a
transfer in at least one period, less than 1 percent receive a transfer in each of the nine waves, and
the period-to-period changes in receipt are strongly related to changes in a child’s income. These
dynamic aspects of behavior have frequently been ignored because of data limitations,1 yet from
the analyses presented here they appear to be an important part of the story. Analyses based on
a single year of data thus miss important aspects of behavior. Transfers made in conjunction with
specific events in the child’s life appear to be important and suggest that parents frequently respond
to negative shock to the childs income. Furthermore, differences in the amounts received by siblings
1
Dunn (1997), and Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1994) are exceptions. These papers both use multiple waves of
the NLS surveys. However, information is not available on all siblings of the (potential) recipients, so a complete
understanding of the allocation within families is not possible.

2

in any one year do not appear to “average out” over time. Finally, in examining transfer behavior
net of unobserved differences across children, I find that the effect of a child’s current income on
transfers is large and significantly different from zero, but is approximately one-third smaller than
its effect in specifications that do not control for unobservable differences. These results indicate a
strong negative correlation between transfers and the transitory income of potential recipients as
well as a negative relationship between transfers and unobserved characteristics of the child such
as ability or permanent income. This latter insight demonstrates the necessity of adequate controls
for permanent income and other fixed attributes our models.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In section 2 I briefly outline the standard
altruism model and discuss the tests used to distinguish this model from an exchange regime. I then
expand the static model to include two periods and note the conditions under which the predicted
results differ from the static case. Section 3 describes the data I use in the empirical work and
provides interesting annual and year-over-year patterns. Section 4 discusses the estimated effects
of current income on transfers in the context of regression models. A final section concludes and
summarizes the results.

2

Background and Theory

I divide the theoretical discussion into two subsections. The first presents the standard altruism
model and the second extends this model to two periods. Extensions beyond two periods are
straightforward. The discussion of the static model is kept brief as there are excellent expositions
elsewhere (e.g. Cox 1987).

2.1

The static altruism model

In the standard altruism model parents care about the well-being of their children; they receive
utility from their own consumption and from the utility of their children. Following the specification
used in Cox (1987), the utility function of a parent is written as Up = Up (cp , V (ck )) where cp and
ck are the consumption of the parent and child, respectively. The consumption of the child is
determined by his own income yk and transfers from the parent T . Thus, ck = yk + T. Because this
is a one-period model there is no saving.
The comparative statics of the altruism model yield two testable predictions. First, the change
3

∂T
in transfers for a change in a child’s income is negative ( ∂y
< 0); as the child’s income increases,
k

the marginal utility of an additional dollar of consumption decreases, and the parent transfers less.
This result implies that in families with more than one child, parents will make greater transfers to
lower income children, in effect compensating the lower income children for their lack of resources.
The second testable implication is that if transfers are positive, an increase of one dollar in the
child’s income along with a decrease of one dollar in the parent’s income, will result in a decrease of
one dollar in transfers to the child. That is,

∂T
∂yk

−

∂T
∂wp

= −1 where wp is the income of the parent.

Given these straightforward predictions, empirical tests of the model have centered on the
estimates of

∂T
∂yk

and

∂T
∂wp .

While early work found a positive relationship between a child’s income

and the amount of a transfer (Cox, 1987; Cox and Rank, 1992), a contradiction of the negative
relationship predicted by the altruism model, more recent efforts with higher quality data have found
a strong negative relationship (e.g. Cox and Jappelli 1990, Dunn 1997, McGarry and Schoeni, 1995,
1997), a result consistent with the altruism model, but also with alternative models.2 Although
the sign of
and

∂T
∂wp

∂T
∂yk

found by these studies is consistent with the altruism model, the magnitudes of

(where estimated) fail to satisfy the derivative restriction, with estimates of

∂T
∂yk

∂T
∂yk

∂T
that
− ∂w
p

are closer to 0 than to -1.

2.2

Static versus dynamic outcomes

The model outlined above is presented in a static framework. In the context of a single period model,
parents know the lifetime earnings of their children, and the lifetime consumption of children is
calculated directly as the sum of earnings and transfers. Parents make greater transfers to children
with lower lifetime incomes and the timing of earnings and transfers is not an issue. However,
in a more representative multiperiod framework, with an uncertain future, the timing of transfers
becomes an important matter.
As highlighted by Altonji, et al. (1997), absent additional constraints, if the child’s permanent
income is uncertain a parent will delay transfers in order to obtain additional information and
2
The most frequently cited alternative to the altruism model is an exchange model wherein observed transfers
represent payment for services provided by the child. In the exchange model parents care about their own utility
and the services (s) provided by the child. Formally, Up = U (cp, s). In contrast to the predictions of an altruism
model, in an exchange regime the sign of the relationship between a child’s income and the magnitude of a transfer
is indeterminate. As a child’s income increases, the price of his time increases and the quantity of time purchased
therefore decreases. However, the net amount spent by the parent to purchase services (price×quantity) can either
increase or decrease depending on the elasticities of supply and demand for services.

4

more efficiently allocate resources. Furthermore, parents who are uncertain of their own date of
death or of their future needs will be reluctant to part with resources they themselves might need
some day and prefer to postpone transfers (Davies, 1981). Acting against the desire to postpone
transfers is the possibility that children are unlikely to be able to borrow against future transfers
and therefore unable to smooth consumption optimally across time. Even children with high
lifetime incomes may be the recipients of inter vivos transfers if they are temporarily liquidity
constrained and unable to attain the level of consumption predicted by their permanent incomes
(Cox, 1990). Thus one would expect a negative relationship between transfers and current income
and a positive relationship between transfers and indicators of liquidity constraints. However,
whereas the derivative restriction holds with respect to changes in permanent income in a static
model, it is not clear that the same relationship must exist with respect to current income in this
dynamic context, even if children are liquidity constrained.
To illustrate the relationship formally consider a simplified version of the classic two period
model in Altonji et al. (1997).3 Parents receive utility from their own consumption in each period
cp1 and cp2 and from the utility of their children, V (ck1 ), and V (ck2 ) where ckt denotes the child’s
consumption level in period t. Ignoring interest rates and the time rate of discount, let the utility
function of the parent be
Up = U (cp1 ) + η V (ck1 ) + U (cp2 ) + η V (ck2 )
where U and V are concave functions and the child’s utility is weighted by η. Following the previous
literature, I assume that the parent has income wp in period 1 and no second period income. She
saves A1 in period 1 to finance period 2 consumption and transfers. The child has income ykt in
each period t, where t = 1, 2. Here I focus on the case in which children are liquidity constrained
in period 1 and cannot borrow across periods:4 their consumption in each period is therefore the
sum of their income, ykt and received transfers, Tt. The budget constraints are therefore written as
cp1 = wp − T1 − A1
ck1

= yk1 + T1

3

This discussion and the notation used here draws directly on their paper.
As demonstrated by Altonji et al. (1997) if a child is not liquidity constrained the parent has no incentive to
make transfers in the first period. The more interesting case is therefore the one in which the child does face these
liquidity constraints.
4

5

cp2 = A1 − T2
ck2

= yk2 + T2 .

In the first period the parent does not know her child’s period 2 income, but does know its distribution, conditional on information I available in period 1, f (yk2 |I). The parent will maximize her
utility using the expected value of second-period utility,
Up = U (cp1 ) + η V (ck1 ) +

Z

[ U (cp2 ) + η V (ck2 ) ] f (yk2 |I) dyk2 .

In the first period the parent observes yk1 and wp and chooses T1 and cp1 . In period 2 the parent
then observes yk2 and divides remaining resources A1 between T2 and cp2 .
The solution to this dynamic programming model can be obtained by first solving for the optimal
allocation in period 2 as a function of A1 and yk2 . That is, the parent maximizes the function
U2 (A1 − T2 ) + ηV2(yk2 + T2 )
with respect to T2 , yielding an optimal value for T2 (and thus cp2 ) as a function of A1 and yk2 ,
T2∗ = T2 (A1 , yk2 )
c∗p2 = A1 − T2 .
Using this result, the first period maximization problem is then to choose A1 and T1 to maximize
U (cp1 ) + η V (ck1 ) +

Z

yk2

[ U (A1 − T2 (A1 , yk2 )) + η V (yk2 + T2 (A1 , yk2 )) ] f (yk2 |I) dyk2

subject to
cp1 = wp − T1 − A1
ck1

= yk1 + T1 .

Note that in the above maximization problem the variables wp , yk1 , and T1 , apparently always
enter in pairs as either wp − T1 or yk1 + T1 . Using this relationship one can demonstrate that the
derivative restriction

∂T
∂yk1

∂T
− ∂w
= −1 continues to hold provided that I does not change.5 However,
p

5
To understand how this conclusion is reached, consider the first order conditions of the above utility maximization
problem. These equations will be functions of wp −T1 and yk1 +T1 . Writing one such equation as H(wp −T1 , yk1 +T1 ),
and differentiating first with respect to wp and then with respect to yk1 yields a system of two equations such that
∂T
∂T
∂T
∂T
H1 (1 − ∂w
) + H2 ∂w
= 0 and H1 (− ∂y
) + H2 (1 + ∂y
) = 0, where Hi is the derivative of the function H with
p
p
k
k
1

1

respect to the ith argument. These two equations can be combined and the terms rearranged to yield the result that
∂T
∂T
∂yk − ∂wp = −1.
1

6

in a plausible multiperiod framework one could expect f (yk2 |I) to be a function of yk1 (and not
yk1 + T1 ). If the distribution of second period income does depend on the childs first period income
then the derivative restriction is broken.
The intuition is as follows: When a parent observes her child’s income in period one she will
reassess the likelihood of potential outcomes in period two based on that information. Suppose the
child draws a low value in period one. If this realization causes the parent to revise downward her
belief about the distribution of draws in period two, then not only will the parent want to increase
transfers in period one in response to the low current income, but she will also expect to increase
transfers in period two. The change in first period transfers is therefore likely to be less than it
would be if she were responding to changes in first period income alone.
To understand this mechanism in the context of the above model, consider the specific case in
which yk1 and yk2 have a bivariate normal distribution with means µ1 and µ2 , variances σ12 and
σ22 , and a correlation coefficient ρ. The conditional distribution of yk2 given yk1 has an expected
value equal to µ2 + ρσ1

(yk1 −µ1 )
σ2

and variance (1 − ρ2 )σ22 . Thus, if ρ is positive, a low value of yk1 (

yk1 < µ1 ) will reduce the child’s period 1 consumption and increase the marginal utility of a transfer
T1 . At the same time, however, a low value of yk1 will shift the distribution of yk2 to the left. This
shift will decrease expected second period consumption of the child, increase the marginal utility
of a transfer in that period, and thus increase the marginal utility of A1 . To equalize marginal
utilities across arguments of the utility function, the parent will reduce cp1 and increase both T1
and A1 . Because of the change in A1 , the increase in T1 will be less than if the distribution of yk2
were unaffected.
The proof of this result for the general case is in the appendix. There I show that under
reasonable assumptions about the relationship between income in the two periods, the value of
∂T
∂yk1

−

∂T
∂wp

lies between zero and negative one, consistent with the results of previous empirical

studies. In the specific case of the bivariate normal distribution I show that the distance between
∂T
∂yk1

∂T
− ∂w
and -1 depends directly on the magnitude of the correlation coefficient. If ρ = 0, so that
p

period 1 income is uninformative about period 2 income, the derivative restriction holds.6
Given this result, the strict adding up of coefficients is unlikely to provide a definitive test of
6
Although derived here with information accruing through the observation on income, it could result from events
such as the unexpected loss of a job, changes in marital status, or the completion of additional schooling.

7

the altruism model. In what follows I explore directly the dynamic aspects of giving, focusing on
the responsiveness of transfers to changes in a child’s income as well as other dynamic elements in
the child’s life such as changes in their family situation and employment–events which may lead
the parent to update her expectations regarding the needs of the child. I also look for evidence of
parental updating behavior by examining the effect of lagged income on transfers, controlling for
current income and other attributes of the child. The results suggest that transfers are influenced
by a variety of factors and respond significantly to changes in the financial status and needs of the
child.

3

Data

The data used in this paper are from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). The HRS is a panel
survey of the older U.S. population that began in 1992 with a sample of individuals born between
the years 1931 and 1941 and their partners or spouses. When appropriately weighted the sample is
representative of the U.S. population of the target cohort. The initial wave of questioning included
12,652 respondents interviewed in 7,703 families. The second wave followed in 1994 with biennial
interviews conducted ever since.
The original HRS sample has been supplemented over time with additional cohorts including
both older and younger age groups, making it approximately representative of the population ages
50 and over. For the analysis in this paper, however, I limit my attention to the initial respondents
(and their children) in order to have a long panel with repeated observations on transfers from
parent to child. For a similar reason I also require that the household remain in the sample for the
entire nine waves.7 Finally, I also delete families in which the parents divorce and there is more than
one parent providing information on the child.8 This focus on intact families allows me to avoid
confounding the results of changes in observable factors with changes in behavior resulting from
unanticipated changes in the motivation of parents due to the separation. I do keep observations
7
While this requirement induces some selection bias I control for a large set of observable characteristics of the
parents in the regression analyses including income, wealth, and health, and use family fixed effects analysis to study
changes net of fixed differences across families. The analyses in this paper have also been repeated with observations
from all cohorts and for all children for whom there were at least two waves of data, as well as for some alternative
selection mechanisms including those observed from 1998 forward or for 6 or more waves. The results presented here
are for a data extract which I believe makes the most sense from both theoretical and intuitive perspectives but the
conclusions are no sensitive to the sample selection criteria.
8
In the case of divorce or separation, the HRS follows both respondents and asks the same questions about their
children.

8

if one spouse dies.
The HRS is uniquely suited to a study of transfer behavior for several reasons. First, individuals
in this age group are particular likely to be making inter vivos transfers (Schoeni, 1993). Second,
the HRS has specific questions about transfers to each child which likely result in more complete
reporting of such transfers than the more general questions about assistance to individuals outside the household that are used in many surveys (McGarry and Schoeni 1995). Finally, there is
relatively detailed information on each child in the family allowing for a complete within-family
analysis.
There are a total of 3,776 families in my sample with 12,835 children. I further restrict this
sample to children ages 18 or older in the first wave in order to avoid counting legally required
support payments to minor children as transfers, and to children who were not coresiding with
the parent at in the first interview because of the difficulty of imputing a value to shared food and
housing and differences in the early waves with respect to the measurement of income for coresident
children. With these selection criteria I have a sample of 3,383 families with 10,064 children and
90,576 person years of observations.9

Cross sectional patterns: The means and standard errors for several of the variables used in the
subsequent analyses are presented in table 1. The first pair of columns reports the values for 1992,
the first year of data, the second column gives the values for the same children in 2008, the last year,
and the final column corresponds to the stacked data for all 90,576 person years of observations.
As one can see from the list of variables included in the table, there is a good deal of information
available for the children of the HRS respondents. Respondents are asked to report the family
incomes for each of their children, as well as the child’s age, sex, whether they own a home, where
they live with respect to the parent, their marital status, number of own children, the highest grade
completed and whether they are currently enrolled in school. The majority of these variables are
measured in every wave of the survey although there are some differences in the set of questions
across the years.
Most pertinent to the analysis in this paper is the measurement of income. The family income
9
I also experimented with including coresident children and conversely, excluding those who lived with a parent
at any survey date. Alternative definitions of the sample lead to similar results.

9

of children is measured categorically in the HRS.10 The categories have evolved somewhat over
time, changing slightly to capture better the range in the underlying distribution. However, the
brackets have been constant since 1998 at income of less than $10,000, $10,000 - $35,000, $35,000
- $70,000 and greater than $70,000. I use these income categories to form two measures of income
each of which allows for comparisons across waves. First, for each child in each wave, I use a
single imputed value calculated as the median income within the given range for individuals in the
CPS data.11 This procedure provides me with a single number that makes examining changes over
time and interpreting regression coefficients more straightforward. As a second measure, I take the
various income categories and form four relatively consistent categories across waves. For example,
I treat $10,000 – $35,000 (used in most waves) and $10,000 – $25,000 (used in the first wave) as
being the same category. While I rely primarily on the first method for ease of presentation, all
analyses were done using both methods and with the sample limited to observations from the 1998
to 2008 surveys wherein the categories are identical across waves. The conclusions are unchanged.
As is apparent in table 1 when comparing the distribution of observations across income categories in 1992 and 2008, there was a significant increase in the incomes of adult children over time.
In 1992, 15 percent of children had incomes below $10,000 while just 3 percent had incomes in this
range in 2008. The second two categories differ somewhat between waves but the trend of rising
incomes is clear: 35 percent had income between $10,000 and $25,000 in 1992 and a substantially
smaller number, just 11 percent, had income in the $10,000 - $35,000 range in 2008 despite it being
much wider. Age obviously increased over time, but there were also large increases over time in
home ownership, from 50 percent to 69 percent, and a decline in the fraction of children living
within 10 miles of the parent, all consistent with the aging of the sample.
The HRS was particularly innovative in asking about familial transfers. It asked respondents
to report transfers of $500 or more made to any child since the last survey (or in the past year at
the first interview).12 Despite the maturing of the children, including rising incomes and increasing
home ownership, a substantial fraction continue to receive transfers from their parents: 14 percent
of children in 1992 and 11 percent in 2008 received a transfer from their parents–a surprisingly
10

An exception was made in the 1994 and 1996 waves which first asked for a continuous value and then provided the
respondent with categorical responses if the respondent could not give an exact value. Also, income for the children
in this original cohort was not obtained in 1998 or 2006.
11
These data were developed in concert with Steven Haider.
12
I adjusted the amounts in the first year of the survey to control for the difference in the relevant time spans.

10

large fraction given that these children are nearly 50 years old on average in this final year. The
mean amount (after adjusting for inflation) is much larger in 2008 consistent with increases in
the resources of parents, or with a worsening of parental health that provides opportunities for
exchange-based transfers or estate planning. Although there is a decline in transfer receipt from
1992 to 2008, it is not indicative a trend in the data; at any given interview, approximately 12-15
percent of children are reported to be receiving a transfer.

Transfers over time: Cross-sectional results such as these have provided important information on
the ties between families. Transfers are common and fairly large, and appear to be relatively stable
across time despite the aging of the sample. In work presented elsewhere (McGarry and Schoeni
1995, 1997; McGarry 1999) we have also seen a strong negative relationship between transfers
and the child’s income, and a positive relationship with parental resources. Missing from these
descriptions (and from most models) is an understanding of how transfers evolve over time; how
they change in response to changes in the situation of the parent or child, whether the same children
benefit year in and year out, or whether the 12-15 percent recipiency rates seen above include a
much larger fraction of children receiving a transfer in at least some years. In the remainder of the
paper I explore these issues paying particular attention to the importance of the child’s income as
it figures prominently in most behavioral models, including that outlined here.
Table 2 begins this analysis by showing that there exists considerable variation in the receipt
of transfers from wave to wave. Fifty-five percent of children who received a transfer in one twoyear period did not receive anything in the following wave (7.5/13.7), and 53 percent of those
who received a transfer in the second wave had not received one in the previous two-year period
(7.1/13.4). Just six percent of the children in the sample received a transfer in two consecutive
waves. For those who received a transfer in both waves the correlation between the two amounts
is 0.14 (not shown), significantly different from zero but perhaps lower than might be expected.
In examining the frequency of transfers across waves (not shown), 46 percent of children received
a transfer in at least one wave, 18 percent received a transfer in exactly one wave and only a tiny
fraction, less than one percent, received transfers in all waves. Conditional on receiving a positive
amount at some point, 62 percent of children received a transfer in more than one wave. This
irregularity of transfer receipt comes as a bit of a surprise give anecdotal stories of children who
11

repeatedly receive financial gifts from their parents.
How does this variability in transfers correspond to changes in the income of the child? Table
3 shows the number of children with decreased, constant, or increased income between waves
(defined categorically) along with the direction of change of the transfer amount.13 Those who
did not receive a transfer in either wave are excluded from the table. For children whose income
decreased between waves (and who had a non-zero transfer in at least one wave), the majority, 52
percent, had an increase in transfers (not adjusted for the CPI in this case) while 45 percent had
a decline in transfer amounts. The relationship is similar for those children with an increase in
income; 52 percent had a decrease in transfer amounts and 44 percent had an increase. Among
those children whose income remains in the same bracket, the percentages experiencing an increase
and a decrease in the transfer amount are nearly identical.
It is not just income that changes between waves. As these children age from an average age of
31 in 1992 to 49 in 2008 they experience various milestones in their lives—graduation from college
(defined as attaining 16 years of schooling from one wave to the next), marriage, the purchase of
a home, the birth of a child, and less happy outcomes, the end of a marriage, loss of a job, or loss
of a home. Many of these events will cause a parent to update or alter her expectations regarding
the child’s needs and his lifetime income. Table 4 examines the relationship between transfers and
these various events. The first two columns show the probability and amount of a transfer for those
making the transition and the second two columns for the portion of the sample that did not.
For those experiencing any of these life course events, both the probability and amount of the
transfer are greater than for those not. Taking the events in turn, college graduation appears to
be associated with the one of the highest probabilities of a transfer; 20 percent of children who
completed 16 years of schooling between waves of the survey received a transfer, a probability
that is 50 percent greater than the probability for those who did not attain 16 years of schooling.
Note that transfers to these children could include money given to finance an education as well as a
graduation gift or assistance with starting out on their own upon completion of schooling. However,
the average amount of the gift is only $500 greater than for the non-graduating children—consistent
13

I do not use the imputed income measure in this table but instead rely on the reported income categories.
changes between waves thus correspond to changes in a child’s income that are sufficient to move him from one
reported category to another and are thus larger than changes due to increases in the CPI.

12

with a relatively small but meaningful gift as one might expect at graduation time.14
The marriage of a child is associated with a large increase in the probability of a transfer,
approximately 30 percent greater than that to children who did not marry between waves, and a
$700 increase in the conditional amount. Perhaps surprisingly, the purchase of a home is associated
with only a modest increase in the probability of a transfer and in the amount.
The birth of a grandchild is associated with the largest conditional amount, $5,758 versus $4,236
for those who did not have a child between waves, although there is only a slight difference in the
likelihood of a transfer being made at this time, 14.5 percent versus 13.4. One might suspect that in
addition to larger financial transfers, transfers benefiting a grandchild are also often made in-kind,
and gifts of clothes, toys, or furniture will not be included in this total.15 However, looking at just
the birth of a first child, the amounts (and sample size) are much smaller-suggesting that financial
pressures on the child’s family associated with a growing family may be an important concern in
addition to the happy event itself.
While the birth of a child, the purchase of a home, and marriage, likely all result in significant
expenses incurred by the child, parents appear to respond not just to these happy (but expensive)
occasions, but to negative shocks as well. The loss of a job is associated with a greater probability of
a transfer than any of the previously listed events except for schooling and the amount is larger than
all events other than the birth of a child. Among those working in one wave and not in the next, the
probability of transfer receipt is 17.5 percent and the conditional amount averages $5,257. However,
the greatest probability of a transfer by far is associated with the end of a marriage. Among those
children who were reportedly married in one wave and not in the next, the probability of receiving
a cash transfer from a parent was 21 percent, 61 percent higher than for those who did not leave a
marriage.16 The amount too was larger than for most events, consistent with the negative financial
shock associated with a divorce. Although less obviously a negative shock, children who transition
from owning a home to not owning one are also more likely than average to receive a transfer and
14

The sample consists of only those children who did not live at home in the first wave. Children who were
temporarily away at school would be considered to be living at home. Therefore, the sample likely excludes most of
those who were full-time students at age 18, and thus much of the parental investment in college. See Haider and
McGarry (2012) for an examination of schooling transfers and their relationship to later financial transfers.
15
Hours spent on child care are also omitted from the tabulation although this information is available in another
part of the survey and has been studied elsewhere (Lei, 1996).
16
Because the children are relatively young, I refer to this event as a divorce although it could result from the death
of a spouse.

13

receive somewhat larger amounts.
Thus, it is not just the permanent income that matters as in the standard cross-sectional models,
children who experience any of the life course events associated with changes in their financial
circumstances are more likely to receive a transfer than those who do not. And these transfers are
not just congratulatory gifts for milestone events but appear to bolster a child’s financial resources.
Particularly noteworthy are the magnitudes associated with unexpected events such as divorce and
the loss of a job.
What do these patterns mean for differences within families? Previous work (McGarry and
Schoeni, 1995) has shown that parents rarely transfer equal amounts to their children in a given
wave. As demonstrated in that paper, even with only two children in the family, only 14 percent
of parents transferring a positive amount to at least one child, transferred an equal amount to
both children. For larger families the fraction giving equally approaches zero. Given the variability
exhibited from year to year in transfer receipt, and expected differences in the timing at which
children reach the various milestones noted in table 4, it is possible that cross-sectional patterns
obscure more equal transfers made over a lifetime. In table 5 I examine giving over a 17 year
period. The column headings denote the number of children in the family and the first row reports
the number of families of that size. Because I focus on equal giving among those who made at least
one transfer over the 17 year period, the second row reports the percent of this total that did so
for each family size. As one can see there is a slight decline in the likelihood of any transfer being
made as family size increases, consistent with differences in parental resources, but the trend is not
monotonic.
The first panel shows the results for transfers in a single survey period, with all nine biennial
reports stacked together. The results are similar to those in McGarry and Schoeni (1995) and show
that among two child families, just 16 percent of those making a transfer in a given year, transferred
the same amount to both children. This figure falls with family size although not monotonically so.
When a more generous definition of equality is used, treating as equal transfers within 10 percent
of the mean amount for the family, the percent making equal gifts is greater, but not by much, 17
percent of two child families and 6.0 percent of three child families make “equal” transfers. With a
definition of equal of 20 percent around the mean, the numbers rise further, to 20 and 6.2 percent
for two and three children families, but the majority are still treating children very differently.
14

In the second panel I examine the extent to which transfers tend to equalize across children
over a lifetime. Contrary to the assumption that transfers even out over a lifetiem, if anything,
the reverse appears to be true. While 16 percent of two child families, and 4.4 percent of three
child families who made a transfer, transferred the same amount to each child in a single period,
only 5 percent and 1.1 percent respectively made equal transfers over the entire HRS window of
observation. Again the percentages rise with a more relaxed definition of equality but equal giving
is far from being a norm, even over this extended period. In fact, the likelihood of equal giving is
far lower over an extended period than in any particular wave.
One difficulty with aggregating transfers over a long period of time is that parents typically
report giving round amounts such as $1,000. Using transfers measured in real dollars will treat as
unequal $1,000 gifts made to each child in different years. The third panel thus repeats this exercise
using nominal dollars. The percent making equal transfers is slightly higher that that in the second
panel, but the implication is the same—parents treat children very differently with respect to the
value of transfers.
The numbers presented in this section indicate a substantial amount of period to period variation
in recipiency and indicates that transitory shocks and / or temporary liquidity constraints likely
play important roles in explaining observed behavior. Furthermore, the evidence presented here on
aggregate giving is the first I know of demonstrating how parents divide transfers among siblings
over a lifetime. If children simply differed in the timing of transfer receipt, we would expect greater
equality when looking over a longer time horizon than in a single period, contrary to what is
observed.

4

Empirical Analysis of Income Effect

To examine more closely the relationship between a child’s income and the receipt of transfers, I
turn to a regression framework. Although the model presented earlier indicates that the magnitudes
of the income effects cannot be used to test the altruism motive, the effect of changes in income
on the probability and amount of transfers is important for understanding the potential degree of
crowding out of private assistance by public programs. The larger the change in familial transfers
for a change in the income of the potential recipient, the less effective will be government assistance
programs targeting these same individuals. In this regression context I can control for the observable
15

characteristics of the child and parent. However, also likely to be important are unobservable
characteristics such as permanent income, industriousness, or ability. To control for these important
features I estimate models with both family and child fixed effects and begin this section with a
discussion of how these effects might be modeled.

4.1

Specification of the empirical transfer equation

An important consideration in the empirical analysis of transfer behavior is thus the correct specification of the error process. One would expect there to be differences across families in affection,
dynastic wealth and other unobservables that would be correlated with transfer behavior. Even
within families it is likely to be the case that there are unobserved differences across children, perhaps in ability or in the effort they apply to their jobs, that will be correlated with the parent’s
decision to make a transfer. If these factors are ignored, estimates of the included effects will be
biased.
To illustrate the potential problem more formally, consider the following Stone-Geary specification of the utility function for the parent.17
Up = (1 − η)log(cp − β1 ) + η log(ck − β2 ).
In this specification β1 and β2 represent minimally acceptable consumption bundles for the parent
and child. They are assumed to be functions of the characteristics of the specific individual X1 and
X2 and to contain any unobserved heterogeneity, where the heterogeneity may be family-specific
(e1 ) or child-specific (e2 ). Assuming linearity, β1 and β2 can be written as
β1 = b1 X1 + e1
β2 = b2 X2 + e2 .
This specification of the utility function implies a transfer equation of the form
T = η wp − (1 − η)yk − ηb1 X1 + (1 − η)b2 X2 + ξ
where
ξ = −ηe1 + (1 − η)e2
17

For simplicity, in this example I temporarily ignore the dynamic aspect of transfer behavior.

16

and wp again is the income of the parent and yk is the income of the child. This expression is
linear in e1 and e2 —error components that may be correlated with the child’s income. For example,
on the family level, parents will differ in the level of consumption they desire for their children and
/ or their access to funds to pay for college, and will therefore have invested differentially in the
schooling of children. These differences in schooling will in turn lead to differences in the incomes
of the children. In this case the unobserved family specific component (e1 ) will be postively correlated with both current transfers and with the child’s income. On the child level, e2 may include
a measure of the child’s industriousness. If parents are satisfied with a lower level of consumption
for less industrious children (i.e. β2 is lower for these children) then ceteris paribus transfers and
industriousness will be positively correlated. We would also expect the child’s income to be positively correlated with his industriousness, leading again to biased effects of the derivative. Proper
estimation of the transfer equation thus needs to control for these sources of potential correlation.

4.2

Multivariate analyses

To estimate the correlates related to the probability a child receives a transfer and for the amount
of the transfer, I first estimate the pair of simple OLS equations.18 These specifications offer a
description of transfer behavior and provide a base against which to compare later models that
control for unobserved heterogeneity. I then control for the possibility that parental decisions on
transfers may differ across families in unobserved ways that are correlated with the regressors
by estimating a family fixed effects specification. Similar results have been reported elsewhere,
although with far less data (McGarry and Schoeni, 1995), so I do not discuss them in detail. Finally,
I take advantage of the multiple observations per child to control for unobserved differences across
children, such as permanent income or ability, that are potentially correlated with the explanatory
variables. Table 6 reports the results of the three specifications.19
In addition to income, the specifications control for the child’s age, sex, years of schooling,
whether he is currently enrolled in school, is married, the number of own children, and characteristics of the parent(s): age, race, Hispanic ethnicity, income, wealth, schooling, and health status.20
18

Observations for all waves are stacked and the standard errors corrected for multiple observations per child.
I report estimates from a linear probability model for the receipt of transfers for ease of interpretation, but logit
and fixed effect (conditional) logit specifications yield identical conclusions.
20
Here the child’s income is measured using the single CPS imputed amount but a similar negative effect relation19

17

4.2.1

OLS effects

In the first pair of columns in table 6 there is a strong negative relationship between the child’s
income and both the probability of receiving a transfer and the amount. Note, however, that the
effects are small. A $10,000 increase in income is associated with just a $61 decline in the amount of
the transfer. Married children are less likely to receive a transfer and receive less, perhaps attesting
to their greater maturity or financial stability, as well as the availability of a spouse to help smooth
negative shocks to income. Children who are enrolled in college are more likely to receive a transfer
and receive significantly more than those who are not. Sons are less likely to receive a transfer than
are daughters but there is no difference in the amounts. Children in non-white families also get
less, even controlling for parental resources.
I do not report the coefficient estimates for parental variables, but as expected, there is a strong
positive relationship between parental resources and transfers; the greater the parent’s income,
assets, and education level, the more likely the child is to receive a transfer and the greater the
amount. The more siblings a child has, the lower the transfer, as siblings can be thought of as
competition for parental resources. These effects are not identified in family or child fixed effect
models.
4.2.2

Family fixed effects

The second pair of columns reports the estimates for the family fixed effects specifications. The
unobserved family component captures differences in what families consider a minimum level of
consumption, differences in generosity, or perhaps dynastic wealth.
Perhaps surprisingly, most of the coefficients for the family fixed effects model for the probability
of a transfer are similar to the first set of estimates. The income effects are of similar magnitude
and the only notable change is with respect to years of schooling. In the OLS specification there is
a positive and significant relationship between years of completed schooling and the likelihood of
a transfer and a positive (although not significantly different from zero, p=0.14) relationship with
the amount of the transfer. However, in the family fixed effects estimation, the coefficient estimates
for both equations are negative and insignificant. Taken together the results indicate that children
ship between income and transfers is observed with the categorical measures. The effects of other coefficients are
unchanged.

18

with higher levels of schooling are more likely to live in families that made transfers, suggesting
perhaps that parents who give generously for schooling, allowing their children to complete more
years of education, continue to give once the children have completed school. When controlling for
this family fixed effect there is no difference in giving as a function of schooling.
4.2.3

Child-specific effects

An altruistic model predicts that parents will choose the amount to transfer over a lifetime with
regard to a child’s permanent income. However, if a child is unable to borrow freely across periods
parents may make transfers to alleviate liquidity constraints as well. Thus transfers will be made
with regard to both permanent and current incomes. The empirical specifications above do not
contain a measure of permanent income of the child beyond the inclusion of completed schooling.
To control for this and other permanent characteristics of the child, I estimate a child fixed-effects
model. Because I also control for schooling in the regression the individual–specific error might
best be thought of as permanent income less the effect of schooling (and other observables). If one
considers permanent income to be primarily a function of schooling and ability, this unobserved
error component can be termed a measure of ability.
The estimated coefficients from this specification are shown in the right-most pair of columns
in Table 6. When child specific effects are controlled for there continues to be a significant negative
relationship between a child’s income and both the probability of transfer receipt and the amount,
but the effect is dampened somewhat from the OLS version. The decline is approximately 30
percent for the probability and a similar 35 percent for the amount. If we consider the unobserved
child effect to be ability, then this result suggests that, all else constant, more able children receive
less generous transfers than less able. Or conversely, ceteris paribus, parents provide more support
to less able children, a result that accords with our intuition.

4.3

Updating

The updating model sketched out in section 2.2 implies that observations on a child’s income are
used by parents to update their expectations of the child’s future income and thus affect current
transfers. Using this updating framework, with past observations informing expectations, transfers
should be correlated with both current and lagged income measures. In table 7 I test this hypothesis.

19

Although not shown in the table, the regressions also include the complete set of child and parent
characteristics employed in the regressions in table 6.
The results shown here are consistent with an updating model. Lagged income is a significant
predictor of current transfers even when current income and other characteristics of the child
are controlled for. As one would expect, the effects are smaller than those of current income–
approximately half of the magnitude of current income. With controls for lagged income, the effect
of current income declines only slightly in absolute value and remains significant. Again as well,
there is little difference in the income effect between the OLS and family fixed effect regression with
a 30 percent or so dampening in the child fixed effect specification. The significance of lagged income
in the child fixed effects specification when permanent income and other fixed characteristics of the
child are controlled for, suggests that parents are indeed obtaining information from the realizations
on income.21

5

Discussion and Conclusions

This paper considers parental transfers in a new light by focusing on the dynamic aspects of giving to
children. The simple expansion of the classic altruism model incorporating the notion that parenta;
expectations regarding a child’s income are uncertain and are updated over time as information
about the child is revealed, highlights the difficulty of accepting or rejecting the altruism model
based on the standard tests and cross-sectional data.
In addition, the paper provides some of the first evidence of important time varying aspects
of transfer behavior. Using panel data I find that the amount of variation over time and within
families in both the probability of receiving a transfer and in the amount received, is large. This
result suggests that a substantial fraction of transfers are made in response to short-term income
fluctuations, consistent with the liquidity constraint argument of Cox (1990). I also directly examine
the coincidence of transfers and life course events. I find substantial giving particularly for what
are likely to be unexpected negative shocks to income such as a divorce or loss of a job, further
confirming the role of parents as helping to smooth consumption when times are difficult.
The degree of within family variation in the transfers children receive at any given time is not
21

An alternative explanation for the significance of lagged income is measurement error in the child’s income. It is
difficult to think of instrumental variables to identify separately the effects of current and lagged income.

20

surprising if gifts were targeted towards specific events. However,I find no evidence that inequality
within families is reduced when transfers are aggregated over an extended period of timein fact,
they aggregate transfers appear to be more unequal than total transfers. Thus, parents to not
appear to be endeavoring to make equal lifetime transfers.
The importance of a child’s need is further evidenced by the results of a regression analysis.
Using multiple observations per child I am able to control for fixed child-specific characteristics
such as ability or permanent income. I find that the estimated effect of the child’s current income
on transfers is biased upward when permanent differences are ignored. However, even when fixed
characteristics are completely controlled for, there continues to be a significant negative relationship
between current income and transfers as well as with lagged income. Taken together these results
indicate that parents appear to be taking all information regarding a child’s income into account
when determining whether and how much to give; information on both current and lagged income
as well as fixed difference across children in their permanent income / ability.

21

Appendix
The model in section 2.2 yields the first period maximization problem,
max U1 (cp1 ) + η V1 (ck1 ) +

Z

[ U2 (A1 − T2 (A1 , yk2 ) + η V2 (yk2 + T2 (A1 , yk2 )) ] f (yk2 |I) dyk2

with respect to cp1 and T1 subject to the following constraints
A1 = wp − cp1 − T1
ck1

= yk1 + T1 .

Differentiating with respect to cp1 and T1 results in the first order conditions for an interior solution:
U10 −
η V10

−

Z

Z

[U20 (1 − T20 ) + η V20 T20 ] f (yk2 |I) dyk2 = 0
[U20 (1 − T20 ) + η V20 T20 ] f (yk2 |I) dyk2 = 0

where primes denote derivatives and the arguments of the functions are omitted for clarity but are
uniquely determined by the subscripted functions. Let
g 0 = U20 (1 − T20 ) + η V20 T20
Then differentiating the first order conditions yields a system of equations
U100 dcp1

−

η V100 dyk1 + η V100 dT1 −

Z

Z

[g 00 (dwp − dcp1 − dT1 ) f (yk2 |I) − g 0 fyk1 (yk2 |I) dyk1 ] dyk2 = 0
[g 00 (dwp − dcp1 − dT1 ) f (yk2 |I) + g 0 fyk1 (yk2 |I) dyk1 ] dyk2 = 0

where fyk1 (yk2 |I) is the derivative of the probability density function of yk2 with respect to yk1 .
Let G1 =
and let G2 =

Z

g 00 f (yk2 |I)dyk2

Z

g 0 fyk1 (yk2 |I) dyk2 ,

then
"

U100 + G1 , G1
G1 ,
η V100 + G1

#"

dcp1
dT1

#

=

"

G1 dwp + G2 dyk1
G1 dwp + (G2 − η V100 )dyk1

This system can be solved for ∂T1 /∂yk1 and ∂T1/∂wp.
∂T1 /∂yk1

=

∂T1 /∂wp =

−U100 η V100 + U100 G2 − G1 η V100
4
00
G1 U1
4
22

#

where
4=

U100 + G1 , G1
G1 ,
η V100 + G1

and
∂T1
∂T1
U 00 G2
−
= −1 + 1
.
∂yk1
∂wp
4
U100 is negative, 4 is positive. Thus if G2 < 0 then (U100G2 )/4 > 0 and −1 <

∂T1
∂yk1

−

∂T1
∂wp

< 0. The

difference from -1 depends on the value of G2 .
What might one expect for G2 ? Note first that g 0 is a marginal utility and is therefore expected
to be monotonically decreasing in yk2 . It can then be shown that if the effect of an increase in the
child’s period 1 income is to shift the distribution of yk2 to the right (in other words, the random
variable yk2 becomes stochastically larger as yk1 increases)22 then G2 will negative.23
Consider a concrete example wherein yk1 and yk2 are jointly normal with means µ1 and µ2 ,
variances σ12 and σ22 and covariance ρ σ1 σ2 . In this case,
G2 =



ρ
E g0
σ1 (1 − ρ2 )








yk2 − µ2 +

σ2
ρ(yk1 − µ1
σ1



where E[·] denotes the expected value of [·]. The expectation term in the above expression is the
covariance of the marginal utility of period one savings and the child’s second period income which
is negative; an increase in the child’s second period income increases the family’s second period
resources and lowers the marginal utility of a dollar carried over to that period. Thus, if ρ is
positive, so that a greater value of yk1 implies a greater expected value of yk2 , then G2 is negative.
And the relationship
∂T1
∂T1
−
> −1.
∂yk1
∂wp
In the special case where ρ = 0 so that yk1 is uninformative about yk2 , the fraction
U100 G2
=0
4
and
∂T1
∂T1
−
= −1.
∂yk1
∂wp

22 ∗
yk2
23

is stochastically larger than yk2 if Fyk∗ (x) < Fyk1 (x) ∀ x (Bickel and Doksum, 1977).
2
The derivation also requires that yk2 be bounded to lie between 0 and some maximum income W.

23

References
[1] Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi and Laurence Kotlikoff (1992a), “Is the Extended Family Altruistically Linked? Direct Evidence Using Micro Data,” American Economic Review
82(5):1177-1198.
[2] Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi and Laurance Kotlikoff (1992b), “The Effects of Income
and Wealth on Time and Money Transfers Between Parents and Children,” mimeo, March.
[3] Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi and Laurence Kotlikoff (1997). “Parental Altruism and Inter
Vivos Transfers: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy 105(6): 1121-1166.
[4] Behrman, Jere, Robert Pollak and Paul Taubman (1982). “Parental Preferences and Provision
for Progeny.” Journal of Political Economy, 90(1): 52-73.
[5] Bickel, Peter and Kjell Doksum (1977). Mathematical Statistics: Basic Ideas and Selected
Topics, Oakland CA: Holden-Day, Inc.
[6] Cox, Donald (1990).“Intergenerational Transfers and Liquidity Constraints.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 105(1): 187-217.
[7] Cox, Donald (1987).“Motives for Private Income Transfers.” Journal of Political Economy,
95(3): 509-546.
[8] Cox, Donald and Tullio Jappelli (1990). “Credit Rationing and Private Transfers: Evidence
From Survey Data,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXII(3):445-454.
[9] Cox, Donald and Mark Rank (1992). “Inter-vivos Transfers and Intergenerational Exchange.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(2): 305-314.
[10] Davies, James (1981). “Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in Retirement,” Journal of Political Economy, 89(3): 561-577.
[11] Dunn, Thomas (1997). “The Distribution of Intergenerational Income Transfers Across and
Within Families.” mimeo, Syracuse University.

24

[12] Gale, William and John Karl Scholz (1994). “Intergenerational Transfers and the Accumulation
of Wealth.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(4): 145-160.
[13] Haider, Steven and Kathleen McGarry (2012). “Still Giving: Parental Investments in Education and Later Financial Transfers.” Mimeo, Michigan State University.
[14] Le, Xioyan, 2006. “Grandchild Care, Financial Transfers and Grandmas Labor Market Decisions,” unpublished mimeo, UCLA.
[15] McGarry, Kathleen (1999) “Inter vivos Transfers and Intended Bequests.” Journal of Public
Economics, 73 (3) : 321-351.
[16] McGarry, Kathleen (2000) “Testing Parental Altruism: Implications of a Dynamic Model.”
NBER working paper 7593.
[17] McGarry, Kathleen and Robert F. Schoeni (1995). “Transfer Behavior: Measurement, and the
Redistribution of Resources Within the Family.” Journal of Human Resources, 30: s184-s226.
[18] McGarry, Kathleen and Robert F. Schoeni (1997). “Transfer Behavior within the Family:
Results from the Asset and Health Dynamics Survey.” Journals of Gerontology, 52B: 82-92.
[19] Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Kenneth I. Wolpin (1994). “Parental and Public Transfers to Young
Women and Their Children,” American Economic Review, 84 (5): 1195-1212 .
[20] Schoeni, Robert (1993). “Private Interhousehold Transfers of Money and Time: New Empirical
Evidence,” RAND Labor and Population Program Working Paper, DRU-443-NICHD.

25

Table 1
Means of Selected Variables for Sample of Children
1992
(n=10,064)*
Mean
Std Err
Total Family Income of Child:
Less than $10,000
$10-$25/35,000
$25,000 or more
$35,000-$70,000
$70,000
Parent reported don’t know

2008
(n=10,064)*
Mean
Std Err

All
(90,576)*
Mean
Std Err

0.17
0.36
0.47
---

0.004
0.005
0.005
---

0.04
0.12
-0.23
0.24
0.37

0.002
0.003
-0.004
0.004
0.005

0.07
0.22

0.001
0.002

0.25
0.21
0.25

0.002
0.002
0.002

43,320

268.4

68,228

462

57,665

152

Demographic Variables for child:
Age
Male
Own home
Lives w/in10miles
Married
Number children
Schooling level
In school

30.9
0.503
0.47
0.40
0.64
1.36
13.08
0.08

0.054
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.013
0.022
0.003

46.9
0.50
0.67
0.29
0.72
2.13
13.37
0.03

0.054
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.004
0.015
0.023
0.002

38.9
0.50
0.59
0.33
0.69
1.79
13.29
0.04

0.025
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.005
0.007
0.001

Transfers:
Received a transfer
Amount
Amount > 0

0.15
1173
7977

0.004
55.3
324

0.12
82.8
4745

0.003
115.1
436

0.14
928.1
4524

0.001
19.9
92.3

Family Variables:
Income
Assets
Nonwhite
Education
Number children
Poor health
Married
Unmarried female

63,020
275,976
0.20
11.9
4.69
0.11
0.79
0.18

659
5621
0.004
0.031
0.024
0.003
0.004
0.004

49,293
425,145
0.20
11.9
4.68
0.15
0.58
0.35

704
9655
0.004
0.031
0.025
0.004
0.005
0.005

58,766
381,169
0.20
11.9
4.73
0.08
0.71
0.25

261
3,727
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.001

Continuous measure

* Number of observations differs for some variables due to missing values.
Sample is of children ages 18 years old or older in1992, who do not live with their parents in that year and
who are observed in all waves of the survey. Financial variables are reported in 2008 dollars.

Table 2
†

Year 1 Status

Number (and Percent) Receiving Transfers in Each Year Child Level
Year 2 Status
Received Transfer
No Transfer

Total

Transfer

4,950
(6.2)

5,968
(7.5)

10,918
(13.7)

No Transfer

5,667
(7.1)

62,950
(79.2)

68,617
(86.3)

Total

10,617
(13.4)

68,918
(86.7)

69,952
(100.0)

†

The sample size differs from table 1 due to missing observations on transfer receipt in one of the two
comparison waves and the lack of Year 2 measures for data from 2008.

Table 3
Relationship between Change in Income and Change in Transfers
Change in transfer amount
Change in Income
Decreased
number
percent
Same
number
percent
Increased
number
percent
†

Decreased

No Change

Increase

Total†

1657
45.2

110
3.0

2901
51.8

3668
100

1840
48.4

114
3.3

1872
48.3

4912
100

1179
52.4

63
3.2

992
44.3

3608
100

Rows may not sum to 100 due to rounding. The sample consists of children receiving a transfer in at least
one of the two waves. Income changes are changes in reported income category (see text) and dollar value of
transfers for this table only are in nominal terms—if real dollars are used there are only a couple of
observations in the middle column with exactly equal transfers in both periods.

Table 4
Relationship between Transfers and Life course Events
Experienced Event
Amount > 0

% received
transfer

Mean

Attained 16 yrs school (n=712)
Married (n=4,198)
Bought a home (n=5,202)
Had a child (n=19,369)
Had a first child (n=2,682)

20.2
16.8
16.5
14.5
14.4

Lost job (n=4,011)
Marriage ended (n=3,335)
Lost home (n=3,172)
Any event (n=32,299)

Event

Did not Experience Event
Amount > 0

(std err)

% received
transfer

Mean

(std err)

4,714
4,247
4,692
5,758
4,823

(665)
(271)
(313)
(211)
(518)

13.3
12.8
13.7
13.4
12.9

4,217
4,231
3,995
4,236
4,061

(97)
(101)
(101)
(103)
(114)

17.5
21.0
15.2

5,257
5,136
4,653

(425)
(408)
(463)

13.9
13.1
13.9

4,151
4,180
4,032

(102)
(99)
(99)

15.6

5,384

(150)

13.4

3,793

(121)

Variables are defined as changes in status between two surveys. Married means that the child was reported as
unmarried in one wave and married in the next. Marriage ended is the reverse; the child was married in one wave and
in the next. Bought / lost a home and lost job are measured similarly.

Table 5
Equality of transfers by the number of children (conditional on at least one transfer)
Number of Children in sample
Measure of parental transfer
Number of observations
Pct of families making a transfer at least once

2
1000
74.7

3
714
78.2

4
488
70.1

5+
254
65.1

Single year transfers (average of 9 reports)
Exactly equal
Within 10 percent of mean
Within 20 percent of mean

15.9
17.0
19.7

4.4
6.0
6.2

1.7
5.4
5.6

4.9
4.9
5.0

Aggregated 1992-2008 real dollars
Exactly equal
Within 10 percent of mean
Within 20 percent of mean

5.0
14.2
22.9

1.1
2.3
4.3

1.2
1.5
2.3

1.7
1.7
2.3

Aggregated 1992-2008 nominal dollars
Exactly equal
Within 10 percent of mean
Within 20 percent of mean

6.0
15.3
23.2

1.4
2.2
3.7

1.2
1.5
2.3

1.7
1.7
2.3

Notes: Families are grouped by the number of children in the sample, not necessarily the number in the family.
Children are missing from the sample if they were not at least 18 years old, living away from home in 1992
(excluding those temporarily away for school), and observed in all waves of the survey.

Table 6
Effects of Child's Characteristics on the Probability and Amount of a Transfer
(n=67,532)
(1)
Prob
Child Variables
Income ($10,000s)
Years of Schooling
Married
Own home
Currently in school
Number of children
Male
Nonwhite

OLS

-0.013***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.001)
-0.028***
(0.004)
-0.023***
(0.004)
0.079***
(0.009)
0.010***
(0.001)
-0.011***
(0.004)
-0.018***
(0.005)

(2)
Amount
-61.2***
(14.7)
26.7
(18.3)
-217***
(58.5)
-28.3
(54.7)
807***
(145)
27.7
(18.7)
-30.6
(59.0)
-143***
(45.5)

Family F.E.
(3)
(4)
Prob
Amount
-0.014***
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.028***
(0.003)
-0.018***
(0.003)
0.060***
(0.006)
0.010***
(0.001)
-0.017***
(0.003)

-64.0***
(10.1)
-25.8
(16.6)
-166.6***
(62.3)
-20.6
(60.7)
793***
(114)
50.5**
(20.0)
-85.5
(54.4)

Child F.E.
(5)
(6)
Prob
Amount
-0.009***
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.034***
(0.004)
-0.007*
(0.004)
0.060***
(0.007)
-0.001
(0.002)

-39.4***
(11.7)
-10.6
(35.1)
-189**
(79.8)
69.0
(74.5)
-751***
(129)
-28.1
(32.5)

Mean dependent variable
0.139
966
0.139
966
0.139
966
R2
0.089
0.046
0.30
0.20
0.39
0.27
Robust standard errors in parentheses. OLS regressions also include a dummy variable denoting that the parent could
not report the child’s income, dummy variables for each survey year, and the following characteristics of the parents:
head’s age, marital status, education, ethnicity, income, wealth, either parent in poor health, and number of children.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 7
OLS Estimates of the Probability and Amount of a Transfer
With lagged income (n=46,738)
OLS

Family Fixed Effect

Child Fixed Effect

Prob

Amount

Prob

Amount

Prob

Amount

-0.011***
(0.001)
-0.005***
(0.001)

-46.7***
(20.6)
-34.8**
(15.8)

-0.012***
(0.001)
-0.006***
(0.001)

-55.8***
(12.8)
-27.8**
(12.3)

-0.008***
(0.001)
-0.002***
(0.001)

-30.4**
(15.2)
-8.1
(14.9)

Income Measure
Midpoint
Lagged Income

Mean dependent variable
0.15
1043
0.15
1043
0.15
1043
R2
0.09
0.05
0.32
0.23
0.44
0.31
Robust standard errors in parentheses. The number of observations is reduced relative to table 6 because of
missing observations on lagged income. All regressions control for the complete set of child characteristics
contained in table 6 and where identified for the parental characteristics. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

