NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC PLANS AND SHORT-TERM EMPLOYEES
Alicia Munnell
Jean-Pierre Aubry
Joshua Hurwitz
Laura Quinby
Working Paper 18448
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18448

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Alicia Munnell, Jean-Pierre Aubry, Joshua Hurwitz, and Laura Quinby. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Public Plans and Short-Term Employees
Alicia Munnell, Jean-Pierre Aubry, Joshua Hurwitz, and Laura Quinby
NBER Working Paper No. 18448
October 2012
JEL No. H75
ABSTRACT
Public sector defined benefit pension plans are based on final earnings. As such, these plans are back-loaded;
those with long careers receive substantial benefits and those who leave early receive little. The analysis
consists of three parts. The first section discusses the design of state and local defined benefit plans,
documents the extent to which traditional public sector final earnings plans are back-loaded, and explores
the extent to which the incentives may reflect the preferences of employers. The second section shows
how participation in final earnings plans affects the lifetime resources of state and local workers of
various tenures compared to private sector workers. The third section presents plan-level data on the
flows of participants out of the plan by age and tenure and explores the extent to which plan design
– specifically, vesting periods, mandatory participation in a defined contribution plan, and Social Security
coverage – affects the probability of vesting and the probability of remaining to the earliest full retirement
age once vested. The findings suggest that complete reliance on delayed vesting and final earnings
plans results in minimal benefits for most short-service public employees. Hence, the recent trend
towards hybrid arrangements is a positive development not only for risk sharing between taxpayers
and participants but also for a more equitable distribution of benefits between short-term and career
employees.

Alicia Munnell
Center for Retirement Research
at Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
munnell@bc.edu

Joshua Hurwitz
Center for Retirement Research
at Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
hurwitzj@bc.edu

Jean-Pierre Aubry
Center for Retirement Research
at Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
aubryj@bc.edu

Laura Quinby
Center for Retirement Research
at Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
lquinby@fas.harvard.edu

Public sector defined benefit pension plans are based on final earnings. As such, these
plans are back-loaded; those with long careers receive substantial benefits and those who leave
early receive little. Additionally, employee vesting takes five or ten years. In most cases,
participants who leave before vesting receive their own contributions plus some low rate of
interest. Even once vested, benefits under the public final earnings plan are trivial for many
years. This arrangement raises a basic question of fairness, since it is not possible to identify
early leavers and compensate them with higher wages. Fairness is a particularly important issue
in states like California, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Illinois, Louisiana, and Ohio, where one or
both of the large retirement systems do not participate in Social Security. With no Social
Security and long vesting periods, many public sector workers end up with no accrued pension
benefits of any kind for their time spent in the public sector.
This pattern of back-loading could reflect an optimal design whereby plan sponsors want
to attract and retain workers who will stay with their employer for their entire career. But to the
extent that state and local governments benefit from a diverse workforce comprised of both short
and long-tenure workers, the current system may be poorly designed. A full career in the public
sector may be optimal for both the employer and the employee in some situations, but in other
instances shorter periods of employment may be more desirable from the perspective of both
parties. For example, social workers, who face burdensome caseloads and constant stress, are
often exhausted long before retirement age. These workers need to move to new jobs in either
the public or private sector. Therefore, a plan that disproportionately rewards long-service
workers probably does not provide the right incentives in all cases.
A major indication that a back-loaded final earnings plan may not represent an optimal
design is the fact that the overall structure of state-local retirement systems varies by whether
workers are also covered by Social Security. In those systems that participate, Social Security’s
more even accrual rate and portability offsets some of the back-loading of final earnings public
plans. Moreover, plans with Social Security coverage provide significantly larger retirement
benefits than those without, because the normal cost of the public plan is roughly equal under
both arrangements. It is unlikely that the desired workforce and Social Security coverage are
systematically related. It is more likely that the back-loading in pension accrual and lack of
portability across pension systems is an artifact of the past that continues to disadvantage young
and other short-term employees. At the least, given that the state and local sector offers two very
3

different compensation systems, seemingly based on happenstance, it is hard to say that both are
optimal.
This paper explores how public plans treat short-service employees and attempts to
measure how the design of the plan affects outcomes for public sector workers. The
analysis consists of three parts. The first section discusses the design of state and local
defined benefit plans, documents the extent to which traditional public sector final earnings
plans are back-loaded, and explores the extent to which the incentives may reflect the
preferences of employers. The second section shows how participation in final earnings
plans affects the lifetime resources of state and local participants of various tenures
compared to private sector workers. The third section presents plan-level data on the flows
of participants out of the plan by age and tenure and explores the extent to which plan
design – specifically, vesting periods, mandatory participation in a defined contribution
plan, and Social Security coverage – affects the probability of vesting and the probability of
remaining to the earliest full retirement age once vested.
The analysis yields several findings. First, both a stylized model and evidence from
the HRS suggest that back-loaded final earnings plans shortchange short-service
employees. Second, the variation in structure and level of total benefits between plans with
and without Social Security offers a unique opportunity for analyzing the impact of plan
design on participant behavior. The results show that both Social Security coverage and
participation in a mandatory hybrid reduce the likelihood of participants staying until the
earliest full retirement age. In other words, when workers have the option to leave backloaded plans, through retirement income from Social Security or a defined contribution
component in their public plan, they do. Long vesting periods also mean that many
workers leave public service with no accrued benefits. The main conclusion from these
findings is that the recent trend towards hybrid arrangements not only improves risk
sharing between taxpayers and participants but also provides for a more equitable
distribution of benefits between short-term and career employees.
The Design of Public Sector Defined Benefit Plans
State and local defined benefit plans vary enormously across states and between
states and localities, because these plans cover three different sets of workers – general
4

government employees, teachers, and public safety personnel – each of which have
different career paths (see Table 1). Nevertheless, the defined benefit plans share a basic
structure. In almost all cases, they calculate the initial benefit at the full retirement age as
the product of three elements: the plan’s benefit factor, the number of years of employee
service, and the employee’s average earnings.1 The calculation of average earnings is
generally based on the three to five years of highest earnings (see Figure 1).
Benefit factors for state and local plans are clustered between 1.5 percent and 2.4
percent, with a typical rate of about 2 percent (see Figure 2). Those plans where employees
are not covered by Social Security tend to be slightly on the higher side, those with
coverage slightly on the lower side. While most states use a single benefit factor, some
states increase the benefit factor modestly with tenure. Some plans impose a cap on the
replacement rate (benefits relative to pre-retirement earnings), but 60 percent do not.
The age at which participants can claim full benefits generally varies with length of
service. For example, age 65 with 5 years, age 60 with 10 to 20 years, and any age with 30
years of service. Most plans allow early retirement with a reduced benefit. Plans generally
do not provide an enhanced benefit for work beyond the normal retirement age.
After the benefit is in payment status, retirees in nearly all plans receive some type
of annual cost-of-living adjustment (COLA). The COLA varies substantially across plans
in both the form and generosity (see Figure 3).2 In the wake of the financial crisis, a
number of states have reduced or suspended their COLAs, but this discussion is based on
2009 data.
Updating earlier work with Peter Diamond and Gregory Leiserson (2010), a simple
model based on typical public plan characteristics can illustrate the effects of final pay
provisions. This exercise uses a plan with a constant 2-percent benefit factor, a three-year

1

Nebraska is an exception to this generalization since it has a cash balance plan for general state employees.
Nebraska still provides a traditional pension benefit for its public school teachers and state police. The Texas
Municipal Retirement System, Texas County and District Retirement System, and California State Teachers’
Retirement System (for part time employees of community colleges) also provide a cash balance plan.
2
The COLA is an annual post-retirement increase in the pension benefit designed to help retain purchasing
power over time. There are four main types of COLAs: 1) automatic – the increase is a constant percentage
or dollar amount that is not tied to the Consumer Price Index (CPI); 2) CPI-linked – the increase is tied to the
CPI; 3) Ad-hoc – the increase is set by the legislature and revised on an ad-hoc basis; and 4) Investmentbased – the increase is tied to some financial metric, generally the overall plan funded level or the level of
assets in a special COLA fund.

5

averaging period, a full retirement age of 65, actuarially fair adjustments for early
retirement, and a COLA that compensates for 1.5 percent inflation after the start of
benefits, the average COLA in the Public Plans Database (PPD). The calculation also
assumes 4.5 percent nominal earnings growth (faster at young ages and then slowing) and 3
percent inflation.3 Employees may claim a pension as early as 55, provided they have
accumulated at least 10 years of service. Those who leave prior to age 55 and have
accumulated at least 10 years of service are assumed to claim a pension at the full
retirement age. No cap is imposed on the replacement rate. Employee pension
contributions are 5.5 percent of salary, the most typical rate found among our PPD sample
of plans (see Figure 4).
One measure of the incentive to keep working an additional year, along with
earnings, is the change (relative to the gross salary) in the present value of the promised
pension benefit less the pension contribution.4 As shown in Figure 5, this measure
increases markedly throughout a worker’s career and particularly at older ages.5 At age 35,
a worker who began working for the government at age 25 for a salary of $30,000 earns a
gross salary of $51,784.6 The value of the employee’s future pension benefits increases by
$3,136 from working to age 36, but contributions of $2,848 are deducted from his
paycheck. Thus, on net, the pension system increases total compensation above quoted
salary by $288, or 0.6 percent. In contrast, at age 55 his salary is $124,522, and the value

3

Salary increases average 4.5 percent over the course of the worker’s career, declining from 6 percent at age
25 to 3 percent at age 65. This pattern is consistent with the graded salary scales provided in most actuarial
valuations.
4
This analysis focuses on the problems of the average earnings formula at the core of the final pay pension.
For an analysis that illustrates other erratic patterns of benefit accrual associated with common features of
teacher retirement systems, see Costrell and Podgursky (2009). For an analysis that focuses on one state in
detail, see the Technical Appendix to the Final Report of the Special Commission to Study the Massachusetts
Contributory Retirement Systems (2009). An alternative method for estimating the pension incentive to
postpone retirement is to calculate the difference between current pension wealth and pension wealth at the
age at which that wealth is maximized (Coile and Gruber, 2000a, 2000b; Friedberg and Webb, 2005).
5
Present values are computed using a real interest rate of 3 percent, similar to the 2.9 percent rate used in the
2012 Social Security Trustees Report. Mortality rates are formed as a 50-50 gender mix of the RP-2000
combined healthy tables, projected to 2012 using Scale AA. The calculation is pre-tax; it ignores the role of
both income and payroll taxes, as well as promised Social Security benefits, in determining the level of
compensation.
6
Calculations use an earnings history with a salary of $30,000 at age 25, 3 percent annual inflation, and 4.5
percent annual earnings growth; however the incentive and distribution measures computed are independent
of the absolute salary level.

6

of the pension accrual is $36,232. Contributions are only $6,489, so the pension system
increases compensation by $29,383, or 23.6 percent of wages.
Moreover, employees who have equal tenure are affected differently by the pension
system based on their age. Workers who have the same experience receive larger
compensation additions at older ages. For example, the worker described above who has
10 years of experience at age 35 receives 0.6 percent of gross salary. If the worker has 10
years of experience at age 45, the pension system adds 5.0 percent. At 55, the pension
system adds 13.0 percent to the salary.
Figure 6 shows the extent to which the typical final earnings plan is back-loaded.
An employee starting at 35 with a 30-year career will earn more than 30 percent of lifetime
pension benefits in the last five years of employment; those leaving with 10 years of
service receive about 14 percent of the possible lifetime benefits.7 Thus, participants face a
very strong incentive to keep working until full benefits are available.8
The question is whether the design of state-local defined benefit plans is consistent
with the human resource goals of state and local governments. According to the theory,
defined benefit pensions make workers more productive, producing surpluses that can
benefit both the employer and the employee (Lazear 1986). Pensions, particularly those
based on final earnings, improve productivity by altering the incentives for long-term
employment. Employers value long-term employment because it reduces hiring costs and
allows them to invest in the human capital of their workers. More human capital
investment increases productivity and raises profits. Offering a pension at the end of the
career also encourages workers to devote more energy to their job, since shirking could
lead to being fired and losing the pension. If the incentive for long-term employment were
paid in the form of rising wages, it might encourage workers to stay on the job too long or
tempt employers to fire workers as soon as their productivity gains dropped below their
wage gains. In contrast, a defined benefit pension encourages the worker to retire when the

7

Back-loading also rewards those with rapidly rising earnings, who tend to be the higher paid, makes the
comparison of compensation across workers with different salaries opaque, and makes the cost of employing
a worker today depend on past employment. The system also creates a large incentive for employees who left
public service at a young age to return to covered public employment for a short period immediately before
retirement. See Diamond et al. (2010).
8
If the plan caps the replacement rate, the strong incentive to continue working stops when the cap is
reached.

7

real value of pension accruals turns negative, even if wages continue to rise, and reduces
the incentive to fire older workers, which makes the implicit contract credible.9
It is hard to believe that the current design of pensions in the public sector reflects
the existing needs of public employers. The most compelling argument that the design
cannot be deliberate is that some state-local employees are covered by Social Security and
some are not. When Congress enacted the Social Security Act in 1935, it excluded state
and local workers from mandatory coverage due to constitutional concerns about whether
the federal government could impose taxes on state governments. As Congress expanded
coverage to include virtually all private sector workers, it also passed legislation in the
1950s that allowed states to elect voluntary coverage for their employees.10 Nothing in the
history suggests that the decision to join or not to join the Social Security program was
based on benefit design considerations. Yet, joining Social Security substantially increased
total benefits received by the participant and altered the pattern of benefit accrual. As
shown in Figure 7, the normal cost of covered plans is only slightly lower than that for noncovered plans in the case of teachers and general employees (albeit a significant difference
exists for the small sample of police and fire plans in the PPD).11 Moreover, the pattern of
benefit accrual of the combined Social Security/defined benefit structure is significantly
less back-loaded than the defined benefit pension alone, because the combination of the
two plans changes the ratio of total accruals in later years relative to those earned in earlier
years.
The current situation seems perfectly summarized in a footnote to a recent paper
(Costrell and Podgursky (2009)) that quotes a 1995 report from the National Education
9

In the Lazear model, defined benefit plans enhance the productivity of otherwise equal employees. An
alternate framework proposed by Ippolito (1997) presents pensions as a mechanism for attracting and
retaining high-quality employees. Under this framework, productivity is higher in workers with a low
discount rate and a propensity to save because savers are more conscientious of the long-term ramifications of
present-day actions. Savers value the delayed gratification of a retirement plan. Interestingly, though, the
plan can be either defined benefit or defined contribution. For this reason, the Ippolito framework is less
relevant for the current discussion.
10
Specifically, Amendments to the Social Security Act in 1950, 1954, and 1956 allowed states, with the
consent of employees in the pension plan, to elect Social Security coverage through agreements with the
Social Security Administration (making their taxation voluntary). The amendments also allowed states to
withdraw from the program after meeting certain conditions, although this option was eliminated in 1983.
11
This pattern is confirmed in a regression reported in Appendix Table A1 with summary statistics in Table
A2. Interestingly, the ratio of the plan’s average wage to the state’s average private sector wage is positively
related to both Social Security coverage and the plan’s normal cost, as shown in Table A3 with summary
statistics in Table A4.

8

Association on a survey regarding the purpose of the current design of teacher plans.
Respondents say that the purpose of the design has “been lost in the mist of time” and
“many pension administrators would be hard-pressed to give an account of why their
systems are structured as is except to say ‘The legislature did it’ or ‘It is a result of
bargaining’.” In short, the original purpose of the back-loaded nature of public plans
appears to have been lost and what remains is a system that contains haphazard incentives
and produces minimal benefits for short-service employees.

Impact on Public Sector Employees
The previous section demonstrates that short-service employees accrue little under
state-local defined benefit plans and, in systems without Social Security, can end up with
no retirement credits at all after several years of work. It could be, however, that once
these short-service employees leave public service they more than compensate for failing to
accrue retirement protection in their state or local job. To see how public employees with
different tenure patterns fare over a lifetime, the following analysis explores whether at the
end of the day state-local employees end up with more or less wealth at retirement than
their private sector counterparts and the extent to which the outcome depends on tenure in
the public sector. That is, the analysis looks at the wealth of couples where the head is age
65 and tests, controlling for many other factors that could affect the outcome, whether
state-local employment has a positive or negative effect on wealth and how that effect is
related to tenure in the state-local sector.
The analysis uses data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a nationally
representative panel of older American households.12 This study began in 1992 by
interviewing about 12,650 individuals from about 7,600 households ages 51-61 and their
spouses (regardless of age), and the survey has been re-administered every two years since
1992. Over time, other cohorts have been added to the survey, substantially increasing the
sample size. The strategy here is to focus on the original 1992 cohort (born between 1931
and 1941) and limit the analysis to retired married couples. Given the age range of the
original sample, the first group reaches 65 in 1996 and the last group in 2006. The
12

The HRS is conducted by the Institute for Social Research (ISR) at the University of Michigan and is made
possible by funding from the National Institute on Aging. More information is available at the ISR website:
http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/.

9

classification of the couple as retired is based on a RAND labor force classification
variable, and the respondent must claim to be completely retired. Spouses must claim to be
either partly or fully retired, according to a RAND self-reported retirement variable, and
not working full time as reported in the labor force classification variable. The final
sample includes 1,476 households, roughly 20 percent of which had spent some time in the
state-local sector (see Appendix Figure B1 for the derivation of the sample).
The estimated equation relates total household wealth when the respondent is 65 to
the percent of the respondent’s and the spouse’s career spent as a state-local worker.13 The
calculation of the total wealth variable begins with RAND total household assets, which
include financial and business assets, property and transportation assets, and IRA holdings
and nets out total debt. RAND does not include 401(k) assets in the wealth measure, since
the HRS asks questions about these plans only when respondents change jobs or retire.
However, a recent study found that 80 percent of 401(k) assets are rolled over into IRA
accounts within five years of the employee leaving work, so the assumption is that the IRA
variable captures the majority of 401(k) assets.14
The next step in the wealth calculation is to add defined benefit pension wealth,
Social Security wealth, and retiree health insurance. For pension wealth, as all the
members of the sample are retired, it is possible to observe their annual income from
defined benefit pensions. Pension amounts are often not reported until a full wave after the
respondent claims to have retired, so this value is taken as the base for the wealth
calculation. The basic formula for calculating the expected present value of pension wealth
is:

∗ 1

∗

∗ 1

Where at is the recipient’s current age, a represents the pension recipient’s age over time,
is the probability of living from age at to age a, based on Social Security life tables, and
r is the discount rate – equal to 3-percent inflation plus a 3-percent real return on assets.
Pat is the annual pension awarded the recipient at age at, augmented by c, the cost-of-living
13
14

The sample is constructed so that all the respondents are men and all the spouses are women.
Utkus and Young (2010).

10

adjustment.15 The presence of a COLA is determined by the HRS question whether
pensions at the current job receive a COLA and, for those with a COLA, the assumed
adjustment is 1.5 percent per year.16 If the variable is missing, the assumption is that state
and local workers receive a COLA, and that private sector workers do not.17
The calculation of Social Security wealth is similar to that for pensions. For about
75 percent of the sample, Social Security earnings are taken from the restricted data set of
the HRS Covered Earnings Records for the years 1951-2007. The earnings history is then
used to construct the Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME). The Primary Insurance
Amount (PIA) and Social Security benefit – either worker or spousal – are calculated using
the Social Security benefit formula.18 For the remaining 25 percent, the RAND variable for
Social Security retirement benefits is used as the base of the calculation, and again the
amount is taken one wave after the husband has turned 65. RAND imputations are
replaced with the first reported value, adjusted for COLAs awarded since age 65. Those
who claim to receive Social Security but without any reported values are given the RAND
imputations. The COLA is equal to 3 percent, and the real discount rate is equal to 3
percent. Survivor benefits are calculated from the Social Security formula, based on the
full retirement age, the actual claiming age, a reduction multiplier, and the spouse’s benefit.
The final component of wealth is retiree health insurance. The RAND data contain
a measure of whether the household head and spouse are covered by retiree health
insurance.19 The individual wave data also indicate whether the employer covers all, part,
or none of the premiums. Partial coverage is coded at 50 percent of the total premium.
Thus, households where the employer covers the entire premium are awarded the full
expected present value of the lifetime stream of premiums, while households where the
15

The basic equation is complicated by the fact that some pensions are straight life annuity whereas
others are joint survivor. In the case of joint survivor, the expected pension benefit in a given year is
the average of the benefit received if the worker is alive, and that received if the worker is deceased
and the spouse is alive, weighted by the respective survival probabilities. If the joint-survivor
pension is reduced upon the worker’s death, the surviving spouse’s benefit is assumed to be 50
percent of the worker’s.
16
Public Plans Database (2009).
17
The resulting pension wealth values are consistent with those reported in Gustman, Steinmeier, and
Tabatabai (2010).
18
State and local workers with fewer than 30 years of substantial earnings receive reductions due to the
Windfall Elimination Provision. Additionally, spousal benefits are reduced by the Government Pension
Offset when the beneficiary is also receiving a state-local pension.
19
Coverage patterns calculated from the RAND data are consistent with those reported in Monk and Munnell
(2009).

11

employer only covers half are awarded half that amount. The premium itself comes from a
2006 Kaiser/Hewitt survey of retiree health benefits.20 According to the study, the annual
average retiree-only premium for new retirees age 65 or older was $3,240 in 2006.21 The
individual premium is doubled for those households where both the husband and wife are
covered. Premium wealth equals:

∗ 1

∗

∗ 1

Where at is the recipient’s current age, a represents the pension recipient’s age over time,
is the probability of living from age at to age a, and r is the discount rate – equal to 3percent inflation plus a 3-percent real return on assets. Pat is the retiree health insurance
premium awarded the recipient at age at, augmented by MCI, historical and projected
nominal medical cost inflation at time t corresponding to age a.22
The next step is to define tenure periods for public sector workers. Because of
delayed vesting, increasing benefit factors, and benefits based on final earnings, the
relationship between state-local tenure and wealth would not be expected to be linear.
Thus, tenure is broken into three periods: one percent to 15 percent of career spent as a
state-local employee; 15 percent to 50 percent; and over 50 percent. Figure 8 shows that
roughly equal numbers of state-local workers fall in each of these categories.23 Figure 9
compares the wealth of households with a state-local worker to that of households with a
history of private sector employment.24 The relationship clearly varies with how long the
individual worked in state and local employment. Couples with a long-tenured state-local
worker have 21 percent more wealth, while those with a short-tenured worker have 14
percent less. The question is how much of these differences can be explained by the nature
of the individuals and the nature of the jobs.
20

McArdle et al. (2006).
A survey of limited data in the PPD showed that the average retiree-only individual premium was $300 to
$400 per month, $3,600 to $4,800 per year, for three plans that reported between 2006 and 2010. Meanwhile,
the private sector premium was $270 per month, $3,240 per year, according to McArdle et al. (2006).
22
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2012) and U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2011). Future
medical cost inflation estimates do not account for potential cost reductions from the Affordable Care Act.
23
As one would expect, those with less tenure tend to have left state-local employment early in their careers
while those with longer tenure left at older ages. The average age of departure for short-tenured workers was
about 36; the average age of departure for long-tenured workers was 54.
24
Federal workers are included in the private sector group, but account for only 2.5 percent of the total.
21

12

The Analysis
The empirical model takes the form:
ln

Where the log of household wealth, Wh , is linearly related to the respondent’s time spent in
the state or local sectors. Sr represents a dummy variable taking the value one if the
respondent spent one to 15 percent of his career in the state-local sector, and zero
otherwise. Mr is equal to one if tenure equals 15 to 50 percent, and zero otherwise. Lr is
equal to one if tenure equals 50 percent or more, and zero otherwise. The corresponding
spousal variables are Ss, Ms, and Ls. Additionally,

is a vector of control variables of

length 48 that captures demographics, personality factors, other sources of wealth, and job
characteristics that could affect wealth accumulation. The focus is on married couples at
65, so no controls are required for marital status or age of the respondent. (The summary
statistics are presented in Table 2.)
Demographic variables include:


Education. This variable measures years of education and comes from RAND.
More years of schooling for either the husband or wife should be associated
with more wealth.



Black. A dummy variable from the 2008 tracker file equal to one if the
respondent is black and zero otherwise.



Hispanic. A dummy variable from the 2008 tracker file equal to one if the
respondent is Hispanic and zero otherwise.



Age of spouse. Although the respondent is 65, the spouse can be any age.25 The
hypothesis is the older the spouse, the shorter the expected life of the couple and
therefore the less need for wealth.



Life expectancy. This variable is the self-reported probability of living to age 75
as reported in the RAND data. Due to the high correlation between the

25

The spouse’s age when the respondent is 65 is calculated by subtracting the spouse’s birth year, observed in
the RAND data, from the year the respondent turns 65.

13

responses for respondents and spouses, the variable equals the maximum
reported value for a household. A higher probability of living to age 75 would
be expected to result in more household wealth.
The nature of the individuals could also have an impact on wealth accumulation.


Stocks %. The RAND data provide information on both total financial assets
and equity holdings. Households with a greater taste for high-risk/high-return
investments would be expected to have more wealth.



Risk aversion. The HRS asks participants to choose between pairs of jobs where
the pay is more or less risky and, based on the responses, assigns levels of risk
aversion ranging from one (lowest) to six (highest). High risk aversion is
defined as being in level five or six. Being risk averse and wealth would be
expected to be positively related.



Long horizon. A dummy variable from the RAND data is equal to one if the
individual’s planning horizon is greater than five years and zero otherwise.
Households with a longer financial planning horizon are more likely to save and
end up with more wealth.

Other factors that could affect wealth accumulation include the career length of
both the husband and spouse, and whether the household has received, or expects to
receive, an inheritance.


Years worked. This variable represents the total number of years worked by the
husband and spouse and is expected to be positively correlated with wealth at
age 65.



Expect inheritance: The HRS asks households the probability of either the
respondent or spouse receiving an inheritance and the expected amount; the
expected amount is multiplied by the probability of receipt. The final variable
equals the natural log of the probability-weighted expected inheritance.26 All
else equal, households expecting to receive an inheritance would have less
wealth.



Received inheritance: The HRS provides information on up to three past
inheritances, including the year in which each inheritance was received. The

26

For people not expecting an inheritance, the value is set equal to zero.

14

inheritances are increased by a 6-percent nominal rate from the years they were
received until the respondent turns 65. The variable is the natural log of the
total amount received. Households having already received an inheritance
would have higher wealth.27
Job characteristics include occupation, firm size, and region.


Occupation. The ten job categories include: management, professional, service,
sales, administrative support, agriculture and forestry, construction and
extraction, maintenance and repair, production, and transportation
occupations.28



Firm size. Firm size consists of five groups: 24 employees or less; 25 to 99; 100
to 499; 500 to 999; and 1000 or greater.29



Census region. The nation is divided into five regions: Northeast, Midwest,
South, West, and Other.

Note that the list of control variables does not contain any measure of lifetime
earnings. The reason is that we are not asking: “For a given level of earnings, what is the
impact on wealth of tenure as a state-local worker?” It is generally acknowledged that
equivalent individuals have different lifetime earnings depending on whether they worked
in the public or private sector.30 The question of interest here is “Given personal
characteristics, occupation, enterprise size, and region of the country, does household
wealth at 65 depend on the extent to which each spouse works in the public sector?” This
broader question does not require controlling for earnings.31
In the regression equation, the coefficients of almost all the control variables come
in with the expected signs and most are statistically significant (see Table 3). (The
exception is the age of the spouse, which has an unexpected statistically significant positive
coefficient.) The impact of state-local employment is presented in Figure 10. The results
27

Past and future inheritances are consistent with those reported in Coe and Webb (2009).
Members of the armed forces are excluded.
29
This variable is the number of employees at the respondent’s location from the individual wave data.
However, a large number of missing values requires an imputation based on occupational averages from the
Current Population Survey for the public and private sector workers separately.
30
See Munnell et al. (2011) and citations therein.
31
Including the earnings variable has no impact on the results. A separate equation was estimated for a
subsample of households with Covered Earnings Records; the coefficients of the state-local tenure variables
showed the same pattern as that reported below and the control variables had consistent signs, magnitudes,
and significance as in the reported equation.
28

15

show that spending more than 50 percent of one’s career as a state-local worker is
associated with 20 percent (spouse) to 21 percent (respondent) more household wealth at
age 65 than one’s private-sector counterparts, and the coefficients are statistically
significant. As noted earlier, about one-third of those with some state-local employment
fall into this category.
The relationships between shorter periods of state-local tenure and wealth are
consistent with expectations. Those who spend only a brief time in state-local employment
appear to end up with less wealth than those who never work as a public employee.32
Although the coefficients are not quite statistically significant for the respondent group in
the reported specification, they tend to fluctuate between significance and insignificance
depending on the definition of the control variables and sample size. As noted earlier,
about a third of those with public sector employment fall into this group. This finding is
not surprising, given that many leave without vesting in the pension and receive only a
refund of their contributions and some small interest payment. And those who work for
employers without Social Security leave with much less than they would have accrued in
the private sector. Those who spend an intermediate portion of their career (15 percent to
50 percent) in state-local employment look similar to private sector employees in terms of
wealth at 65. The coefficients for this group are never statistically significantly different
from zero.

Further Questions
The analysis presented above implicitly assumes that state-local and private sector
workers retire at the same time. But what if state and local workers had been retired for a
significant period of time before they were observed at age 65? To take an extreme
example, suppose they had retired from a state-local job and had received a pension and
retiree health insurance for 15 years from 50 to 65. Such a pattern requires addressing two
issues: 1) the value of pensions and retiree health insurance received during that period;
and 2) the value of the leisure enjoyed. The financial aspect of such a situation is captured
32

These patterns persist, but with varying differentials, using alternative discount rates. The coefficients for
short-tenure, intermediate, and long-tenure state-local worker (respondent), using a 3 percent nominal
discount rate, are -0.09, -0.09, and 0.24, respectively. Again, the long-tenure state-local variable is significant
at the 5 percent level, the short-tenure state-local variable fluctuates in and out of significance based on the
specification, and the intermediate state-local tenure variable is never statistically different from zero.

16

in the analysis. The pension can be viewed as equivalent to a wage, and to the extent that it
is saved or avoids the drawdown of accumulated assets, it will be reflected in the final
wealth figure. Similarly, savings from not having to purchase retiree health insurance will
show up in wealth at 65. The really troublesome issue would be the fact that someone had
15 years of leisure. Valuing such leisure would be important in any final assessment of
well-being at 65.
As it turned out, the leisure issue was not a major problem. Most of the respondents
who had spent time in the state-local sector ended up retiring from a private sector job (see
Figure 11). In terms of retirement age, those public sector employees who moved to the
private sector actually retired later than workers who had spent their entire career in the
private sector. Those who retired directly from their state-local job did retire early, but
they accounted for only a small fraction of those with state and local employment (see
Figure 12). In short, an issue that could have complicated the analysis turned out to not be
that important.
A related issue is the treatment of the income received by state-local employees
who leave their public sector job and move to the private sector. These individuals would
be earning wages from their private employer and (if eligible) could be simultaneously
receiving a pension from their former state-local employer. Again, to the extent that any of
this income is saved, it will be reflected in the final wealth figure.
A second issue is whether short tenure in a state-local job and not just periods of
short tenure alone have a negative impact on wealth in retirement. For example, it could be
that workers who spend only 1 to 15 percent of their careers in a state-local job are “job
hoppers,” who are generally less qualified, underperform, and/or have a myopic approach
towards saving. A comparison of the characteristics of short-tenure state-local workers to
workers with any state-local tenure and career private sector workers reveals no significant
differences between the short-tenure state-local workers and the other two groups (Table
4). Relative to all state-local workers, short-tenure state-local workers have very similar
education, estimated life expectancy, aversion to risk, and likelihood of being planners.
Relative to private sector workers, the short-tenure state-local workers have more years of
schooling and also exhibit similar attitudes toward longevity, risk, and planning.
Interestingly, those with short-tenure in a state-local job work more total years (40.4) than
17

both workers with any state-local tenure (40.0) and career private sector workers (39.6).
They also spend more than 50 percent of their career at their longest held job, indicating
that chronic job hopping is not an explanation for having less wealth at retirement.
The bottom line from the preceding analysis is that households in which one or both
of the individuals hold a state-local job for a short period of time end up with less wealth at
retirement than private sector workers.
Impact on the Public Sector Workforce: Insights from the Administrative Data
The first section discussed the delayed vesting and back-loading in public sector
plans and its potential for harming short-service workers. The second section suggested,
using data from the HRS, that indeed those couples with short-service state and local
workers end up with less wealth at age 65. The goal of this section is to provide some
insights on how the structure of public sector pensions affects the careers of state-local
workers, exploiting the difference in vesting periods, Social Security coverage, and the
introduction of hybrid defined benefit/defined contribution plans. The section reports on
two exercises. The first uses data from actuarial valuations to confirm that the pattern of
tenure reported in the HRS comports with that experienced by the plans themselves. The
second explores the extent to which the probability of becoming vested and, once vested,
staying until the earliest age for full benefits is related to vesting periods, Social Security
coverage, and mandatory participation in a defined contribution plan.

Tenure Patterns from Actuarial Reports
Using each system’s actuarial valuation, it is possible to generate the population of
those who quit public employment before vesting, quit with deferred benefits, or retire in a
given year. Detailed data on participant flows, which come from the plans’ most recent
(2009-2012) actuarial valuation report, were collected for 113 of the 126 plans in the
PPD.33 These plans provide demographic data on plan membership by age and years of
service, accompanied by similar decrement tables stating the rate at which plan members of
a given age and tenure are expected to terminate (leave service before retirement) or retire
33

Three of the 13 plans—Washington LEOFF Plan 1, Washington PERS Plan 1, and Washington Teachers
Plan 1— were omitted because they have long been closed to new entrants. The remaining 10 did not provide
the required data.

18

within the next year.34 Within a given plan, benefit generosity and plan design often vary
by occupation and over time, creating “tiers.” Whenever possible, demographic tables
were collected by plan tier and gender, and the relevant decrement rates applied to each
group. When detailed demographic information was not available, the rates of the largest
demographic subgroup were applied to the whole population; for example, female rates
were often applied to the entire membership of teachers’ plans. Appendix Table C1 lists
the tiers used and the rates applied to those tiers for the sample plans.
The format of the demographic and decrement tables varies by plan. While the
demographic tables are frequently presented by five-year age and tenure brackets (e.g. age
20-25 with 0-4 years of service), many plans provide certain age-by-tenure brackets at oneyear intervals (e.g. age 20 with one year of service). In order to take advantage of this
detailed information, all of the tables were transformed to one-year intervals. For
demographic tables, members within a five-year bracket were divided evenly among the
one-year brackets. For decrement tables, the rates within a five-year bracket were assumed
to apply to all the members.35
The rates were then further transformed to be mutually exclusive according to tierspecific plan design. The retirement and separation rates presented in actuarial valuations
do not always reflect plan design. Often, the rates are presented as a vector by either
service or age only, not a combination of the two. Taken at face value, rates presented in
this manner produce misleading results – for example, that all members with five years of
service face a constant probability of retiring, whereas plan design limits retirement
eligibility to members over age 65 with five years of service. For this reason, the
retirement and separation rates were transformed to be mutually exclusive. All separation
rates were set to zero once the members became eligible for retirement; similarly, all
retirement rates were set to zero for periods occurring before the members were eligible for
retirement. Early retirement rates were applied once members become eligible for reduced
benefits, and were replaced by normal retirement rates once members were eligible for
unreduced benefits. Retirement eligibility was gathered on a plan and tier-specific basis
34

The rates presented in the decrement tables are based on the plan’s actual experience over some length of
time, and are typically updated by the plan’s actuaries every five years, when the plan performs an experience
study.
35
For example, a 0.2 termination rate for ages 20-24 became 0.2 at age 20, 0.2 at age 21, 0.2 at age 22, etc.

19

from the most recent actuarial valuation. Finally, if plans do not have a service
requirement for retirement eligibility, the service requirement was set equal to the vesting
period.
With these data in hand, the annual flow of separators eligible for deferred vested
benefits is equal to,

, ,

∗

, ,

∗

, ,

∗

, ,

Where Di is the total number of members in plan i terminating employment with deferred
vested benefits. Mi,a,t is the total number of plan members of age a and accrued tenure t.
, ,

is the probability of an individual age a and accrued tenure t terminating before

retirement eligibility, and vi,a,t is an indicator function which equals one if t meets the plan’s
vesting requirements, and zero otherwise. Finally, ei,a,t is an indicator function that takes
the value zero if the member is eligible for retirement. The result is summed across tenure,
with a minimum of zero years and a maximum of 80 years, and age, with a minimum of 20
and a maximum of 100. Similarly, the flow of separators ineligible for any benefits is
equal to,

, ,

∗

, ,

∗

, ,

∗

, ,

Where Ni is the total number of members in plan i terminating employment without
deferred vested benefits and vi,a,t is an indicator function which equals one if t does not
meet the plan’s vesting requirements, and zero otherwise. The other variables are as
defined above.
The flow of retirees out of the plan equals,

, ,

∗

, ,

∗

, ,

∗

, ,

Where Ri is the total number of members retiring in plan i. Mi,a,t is the total number of plan
members of age a and accrued tenure t.

, ,

is the retirement probability of an individual

20

age a and accrued tenure t, and vi,a,t is an indicator function which equals one if t meets the
plan’s vesting requirements, and zero otherwise. ei,a,t is an indicator function that equals
one if the member is eligible for either early or normal retirement according to plan design.
The result is summed across tenure, with a minimum of zero years and a maximum of 80
years, and age, with a minimum of 20 and a maximum of 100.
Figure 13 presents the projected distribution by tenure and benefit status of
participants in the 113 plans. Of those who leave, only 35 percent claim retirement benefits
immediately, 19 percent will receive a deferred benefit based on their earnings at
termination, and 47 percent leave without any promise of future benefits (see Figure 14).36
Thus, the administrative data confirm the pattern in the HRS showing that only a third of
all workers who enter public service receive an immediate pension when they leave public
employment.
Table 5 shows the age and tenure of leavers by benefit status. For the non-vested,
the average age is 38 with two years of service; for those with deferred benefits the average
age is 44 with nine years of service; for retirees, the average age is 61 with 16 years of
service.
The Relationship between Tenure Patterns and Plan Design
The next step is to use the tenure data to determine 1) the probability of a
participant in a plan staying until vested and 2) the probability of a vested participant
staying until the earliest eligibility for full retirement benefits. The design parameters of
interest are the plan’s vesting period, whether or not participants are covered by Social
Security, and the presence of a mandatory defined contribution plan.37

36

This pattern is similar to that found by the State of Maine Unified Retirement Plan Task Force (2010).
The plans considered to have a defined contribution component were mandatory hybrid plans: Georgia
ERS, Indiana PERF, Indiana Teachers, Michigan Public Schools, Ohio Teachers, and Oregon PERS.
Washington PERS 2/3, Washington School Employees’ Plan 2/3, and Washington Teachers 2/3 each have a
hybrid tier and a defined contribution tier. Alaska PERS and Alaska Teachers defined benefit plans were
considered hybrids because both these plans have a mandatory supplemental defined contribution component.
Florida RS was considered a hybrid because defined benefit members are permitted to switch to the optional
defined contribution system at any point in their career. Finally, South Dakota PERS was also categorized as
a hybrid because terminating members are returned not only their own contributions, but 85 percent of
employer contributions on their behalf. This feature makes South Dakota PERS more portable than
traditional defined benefit plans.
37

21

The expected coefficients in the case of the vesting period are fairly
straightforward. The longer the vesting period, the less likely the participant is to vest, and
once vested, the more likely to stay until eligible for full retirement benefits. The positive
impact simply represents the fact that with longer vesting the participant is older, and older
people are more likely to stay until earliest eligibility.
Social Security coverage represents a much more complicated kettle of fish. On the
one hand, coverage means that the combined Social Security/public plan benefit structure is
less back-loaded than the public plan alone, because Social Security benefits accrue at a
more even pace over the employee’s work life. Thus, Social Security coverage would be
expected to be associated with less vesting and less staying until earliest eligibility for full
benefits. On the other hand, Social Security coverage means that the accruing retirement
income is much more substantial than under a public plan alone. More substantial accruals
create both an income and substitution effect. The income effect means the participant has
more purchasing power and therefore the ability to buy leisure at older ages and to be more
mobile at younger ages. That is, the variable would be expected to have a negative
coefficient. However, the large accruals also raise the price of leisure and, perhaps,
moving jobs, thereby coverage might encourage staying until eligibility and have a positive
coefficient.
Several states have introduced mandatory hybrid plans that require participants to
participate in both a defined benefit and defined contribution component. Participation in
such a plan would be expected to reduce the probability of remaining until vested and of
remaining until eligible for full benefits because the defined contribution component
reduces the degree of back-loading of benefits.
The two dependent variables – probability of vesting and probability of staying to
the earliest age for full benefits – are calculated from the decrement tables in the actuarial
valuations. Calculating the cumulative probability of remaining with the plan through the
vesting period requires multiplying a diagonal vector of marginal rates:
|
|

1

, ,

∗ 1

,

,

∗ …∗ 1

,

,

is the member’s probability of remaining in plan i long enough to vest, conditional

on the age at hire.

, ,

is the marginal probability of terminating from the plan at hiring
22

|

age a and accrued tenure at hire t (by definition, t is equal to zero).

is cumulative

from a and t through a+n and t+n, where n is the number of years in the plan’s vesting
period.
Likewise for calculating the probability of remaining in the plan until the earliest
age for full benefits once vested, given the hiring age:
|
|

1

,

,

∗ 1

,

,

∗ …∗ 1

,

,

is the member’s probability of remaining in plan i long enough to retire,

conditional on having already vested.

,

,

is the marginal probability of terminating

from the plan at vesting age av and accrued tenure at vesting tv.

|

is cumulative

from av and tv through av +n and tv +n, where n is the number of years remaining from av
and tv until the plan’s earliest normal retirement eligibility (for those instances where the
plan permits normal retirement at different combinations of age and tenure).
The analysis on probability of vesting takes the form:
|

Where the member’s probability of vesting is linearly related to SSi, the plan’s Social
Security coverage, the vesting period Vi , and participation in a defined contribution plan,
DCi. Social Security coverage is a dichotomous variable equal to one if a majority of plan
members are covered by Social Security, and zero otherwise. 38 Additional variables
include the ratio of average annual salaries in the plan divided by the average annual
private-sector salary in the state, Wi; and whether the plan only covers teachers and school
38

The coverage data come from the Public Plans Database, but were initially compiled by the National
Association of State Retirement Administrators’ Public Fund Survey. The coverage classification was
subsequently checked against a U.S. Government Accountability Office (2010) report that lists the percent of
earnings in each state covered by Social Security. If all the PPD plans within a state were classified as having
Social Security, the GAO report was expected to show at least 80 percent of earnings covered by Social
Security. Similarly, if all the PPD plans within a state were classified as not having Social Security, the GAO
report should have shown at least 80 percent of earnings not covered. For states where some plans are
classified by the PPD as having Social Security and others are not, an average of the Social Security variable,
weighted by payroll, should have resulted in a percentage of covered payroll similar to that in the GAO study.
In the rare instance of any discrepancies, contact with plan administrators provided helpful guidance. The
only remaining question was how to classify plans with significant numbers of both covered and uncovered
workers. In these instances, the PFS/PPD classifications were retained.

23

employees (including universities), Ti..39 Finally, a vector of eight dichotomous variables,
, captures the member’s age at hire. The ages are broken into five-year brackets, from 20
to 54.
A similar regression is estimated for the probability, once vested, of remaining until
the earliest age for full benefits:
|

The equations are estimated using ordinary least squares, because the dependent
variables do not take on a value of zero or one, but rather equal a specific probability
associated with each individual achieving each of the two hurdles. Because police and fire
personnel have such unique career paths, vesting provisions, and retirement options, the
equation is limited to general employees and teachers.
The results for the vesting equation are shown in Figure 15. (Full regressions and
summary statistics are shown in Appendix Tables C2 and C3.) The probability of vesting
is related to the public/private wage ratio and the vesting period, both of which have
statistically significant coefficients. The higher the average wage in the plan relative to
wages in the private sector, the more likely the participant is to stay until vested; the longer
the vesting period, the less likely. In addition, generally the later the age at which people
are hired, the more likely they are to remain until vesting. Neither Social Security nor
participation in a defined contribution plan have a statistically significant effect. Thus, the
main message from the vesting equation is that long vesting periods are likely to lead to
participants leaving with no accrued benefits.
The results for the probability of remaining in the plan, once vested, until the
earliest age for full benefits are presented in Figure 16. (Full regressions and summary
statistics are shown in Appendix Tables C4 and C5.) Again, the ratio of public to private
wages is related positively to remaining on the job. And again the vesting period has a
statistically significant coefficient, although it is positive as opposed to negative in the
39

The average plan wage was obtained by dividing total payroll in the PPD by active members in the PPD.
The average private sector wage was produced by the March Supplement of the Current Population Survey
(2011). The private sample was limited to non-military workers between the ages of 16 and 75, earning more
than $9,000 per year.

24

vesting equation. As noted, the most straightforward interpretation is that the longer the
vesting period, the older the vested participant and the more likely to remain. And again
the probability of remaining rises with the age of hire. In the retirement equation, as
opposed to the vesting equation, both Social Security coverage and mandatory participation
in a defined contribution plan have statistically significant coefficients. In both cases, the
coefficients have a negative sign. One way to interpret this result is that these alternative
sources of retirement income moderate the back-loading of the plan and reduce the
likelihood that people will remain. That is, despite the fact that plans with Social Security
are significantly more generous, when participants have the ability to leave they take it.

Conclusion
This paper has used a variety of approaches to explore the impact of final earnings
defined benefit plans on the well-being of employees. Both a stylized model and evidence
from the HRS show that final earnings plans are back-loaded and short change shortservice employees. It is very difficult to argue that this outcome is the result of an optimal
design to attract and retain workers who will stay with their employers for their entire
careers. The design varies dramatically with the presence or absence of Social Security
coverage, and it is unlikely that Social Security coverage is systematically related to the
desired workforce profile.
Thus, continued reliance solely on final earnings defined benefit plans raises human
resource and equity issues as well as financial concerns. On the financial side, the risk is
that benefits are not funded on a timely basis, shifting costs to future taxpayers. The
financial crisis has also demonstrated that fluctuations in financial markets put benefits at
risk for not only current workers but also retirees. On the human resource side, final
earnings plans produce strongly back-loaded benefits. These incentives may be desirable
for some types of employees, but it is unlikely that they are appropriate for all. More
importantly, for the topic of this paper, they deprive short-term employees of retirement
protection, especially for those systems that do not participate in Social Security.

25

References
Allen, Steven, Robert Clark, and Ann McDermed. 1993. “Pensions, Bonding, and Lifetime
Jobs.” Journal of Human Resources 28(3): 463-81.
Coe, Norma B., and Anthony Webb. 2009. “Actual and Anticipated Inheritance Receipts.”
CRR WP 2009-32. Chestnut Hill, MA: Center for Retirement Research at Boston
College.
Coile, Courtney, and Jonathan Gruber. 2000a. “Social Security Incentives for
Retirement.” In Themes in the Economics of Aging, edited by David Wise. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
______. 2000b. “Social Security and Retirement.” Working Paper 7830. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Costrell, Robert M. and Michael Podgursky. 2009. “Peaks, Cliffs, and Valleys: The
Peculiar Incentives in Teacher Retirement Systems and their Consequences for
School Staffing.” Education Finance and Policy 4(2): 175-211.
Diamond, Peter A., Alicia H. Munnell, Gregory Leiserson, and Jean-Pierre Aubry. 2010.
“The Problem with State-Local Final Pay Plans and Options for Reform.” State and
Local Issue in Brief 12. Chestnut Hill, MA: Center for Retirement Research at
Boston College.
Friedberg, Leora, and Anthony Webb. 2005. “Retirement and the Evolution of Pension
Structure.” The Journal of Human Resources 40(2): 281-308.
Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier, and Nahid Tabatabai. 2010. Pensions in the
Health and Retirement Study. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hirsch, Barry T. and David A. Macpherson. 2010. Union Membership and Coverage
Database. Available at: http://www.unionstats.com.
Ippolito, Richard A. 1997. Pension Plans and Employee Performance. University of
Chicago Press.
Lazear, Edward P. 1986. “Retirement from the Labor Force.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 1, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard. New York:
Elsevier Science Publishers.
McArdle, Frank, Amy Atchison, Dale Yamamoto, Michelle Kitchman Strollo, and Tricia
Neuman. 2006. “Retiree Health Benefits Examined: Findings from the
Kaiser/Hewitt 2006 Survey on Retiree Health Benefits.” The Henry J. Kaiser
Family Foundation.

26

Monk, Courtney, and Alicia H. Munnell. 2009. “The Implications of Declining Retiree
Health Insurance.” CRR WP 2009-15. Chestnut Hill, MA: Center for Retirement
Research at Boston College.
Munnell, Alicia H., Jean-Pierre Aubry, Joshua Hurwitz, and Laura Quinby. 2011. “Are
State-local Workers Overpaid?” State and Local Issue in Brief 20. Chestnut Hill,
MA: Center for Retirement Research at Boston College.
National Association of State Retirement Administrators. 2010. Public Fund Survey,
FY2010 (PFS). Washington, DC.
Public Plans Database (PPD), 2009-2012. Center for Retirement Research at Boston
College and Center for State and Local Government Excellence.
Salop, Joanne, and Steven Salop. 1976. “Self-Selection and Turnover in the Labor Market.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 90(4): 620-27.
Special Commission to Study the Massachusetts Contributory Retirement System. 2009.
“Final Report of the Special Commission to Study the Massachusetts Contributory
Retirement System.” Boston, Mass.
State of Maine Unified Retirement Plan Task Force. 2010. Task Force Study and Report:
Maine State Employee and Teacher Unified Retirement Plan. Augusta, ME.
University of Michigan. Health and Retirement Study (HRS), 1992-2008. Ann Arbor, MI.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Consumer Price Index (CPI), 2012. Washington, DC.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2010. Annual Public Employment Survey. Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Labor. Current Population Survey (CPS), 1990-2011. Washington,
DC.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2010. Social Security Administration:
Management Oversight Needed to Ensure Accurate Treatment of State and Local
Government Employees. GAO-10-938. Washington: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2012. The Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of
the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance
Trust Funds. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 2011. The Annual Report of the Boards
of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical
Insurance Trust Funds. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

27

Utkus, Stephen P., and Jean A. Young. 2010. “Distribution decisions among retirement-age
defined contribution plan participants.” Vanguard Research. Valley Forge, PA: The
Vanguard Group, Inc.

28

Table 1. State and Local Full-time Equivalent Employees by Function, 2010, in Millions
Activity
Education
Elementary and Secondary
Higher Education
Protective Services
Health
Community Development*
Transportation
Financial and Other Administration
Public Welfare
Public Utilities and Waste Management
Total

State
1.8
0.1
1.7
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.0

Local
7.1
6.8
0.3
1.7
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.5
0.3
0.5

Total
8.9
6.9
2.0
2.4
1.4
1.4
0.8
0.7
0.5
0.5

4.4

12.2

16.6

*Includes Libraries, Housing, Community Development, Environment, Recreation, and All Other.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Annual Public Employment Survey (2011).

29

Table 2. Summary Statistics for Regression on Total Household Wealth, 1996-2006

Variable
Total wealth
S/L 1 to 15 [R]
S/L 15 to 50 [R]
S/L over 50 [R]
S/L 1 to 15 [S]
S/L 15 to 50 [S]
S/L over 50 [S]
Education [R]
Education [S]
Black
Hispanic
Age [S]
Probability of Living to 75 [H]
Stocks %
Risk aversion [R]
Risk aversion [S]
Long horizon [R]
Long horizon [S]
Years worked [R]
Years worked [S]
Expect inheritance [H]
Received inheritance [H]

Standard
Deviation Minimum
1472821
535
0.255
0
0.243
0
0.292
0
0.245
0
0.279
0
0.273
0
3.04
0
2.54
0
0.254
0
0.238
0
5.328
35
18.07
10
32.77
0
0.410
0
0.479
0
0.500
0
0.499
0
7.83
5
13.76
0
234374
0
202141
0

Mean
981737
0.070
0.063
0.094
0.064
0.085
0.081
12.54
12.42
0.069
0.060
61.51
78.70
22.33
0.213
0.355
0.498
0.461
40.45
24.19
63365
52876

Source: Authors’ calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2006).

30

Maximum
3.76E+07
1
1
1
1
1
1
17
17
1
1
85
100
100
1
1
1
1
52
55
5929255
4733007

Table 3. Regression Results on the Log of Total Household Wealth, 1996-2006
Variable
S/L 1 to 15 [R]
S/L 15 to 50 [R]
S/L over 50 [R]
S/L 1 to 15 [S]
S/L 15 to 50 [S]
S/L over 50 [S]
Education [R]
Education [S]
Black [R]
Hispanic [R]
Age [S]
Probability of living to 75 [H]
Stocks %
Risk aversion [R]
Risk aversion [S]
Long horizon [R]
Long horizon [S]
Years worked [R]
Years worked [S]

Coefficient
-0.1057
(0.0768)
-0.1265
(0.0869)
0.1879
(0.0733)
-0.1338
(0.0804)
-0.0668
(0.0893)
0.1801
(0.0796)
0.0459
(0.0103)
0.0278
(0.0125)
-0.4142
(0.0773)
-0.2784
(0.1184)
0.0201
(0.0040)
0.0036
(0.0012)
0.0045
(0.0007)
-0.0324
(0.0483)
0.3069
(0.0468)
0.1774
(0.0470)
0.1205
(0.0451)
0.0146
(0.0032)
0.0068
(0.0021)
31

**

*

**
***
**
***
**
***
***
***

***
***
***
***
***

Received inheritance [H]
Expect inheritance [H]
Constant
R-squared
Number of Observations

0.0258 ***
(0.0043)
-0.0155 ***
(0.0052)
9.9066 ***
(0.3830)
0.3917
1468

Note: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Additional controls not depicted include vectors of
occupation, firm size, and regional dummy variables. [R] denotes the respondent, [S] denotes the
spouse, and [H] denotes the household. Coefficients are significant at the 10-percent level (*), the 5percent level (**), or the 1-percent level (***).
Source: Authors’ calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2006).

32

Table 4. Characteristics of Short-Tenure State-Local Workers, Workers with Any StateLocal Tenure, and Career Private Sector Workers, 1996-2006
School
Years
[R] [S]
State-Local, 1-15% 13.1 12.7
Any State-Local
13.6 13.0
Career Private
12.2 12.2

Years
Worked
[R] [S]
40.4 24.9
40.0 25.8
39.6 22.4

Longest Probability Planning Risk
Job % alive at 75 Horizon Aversion Stock %
[R] [S]
[H]
[R] [S] [R] [S]
[H]
54.1 44.4
78.7
0.4 0.4 0.2 0.3 23.8
59.9 48.3
79.3
0.5 0.5 0.2 0.3 21.2
60.8 45.7
78.7
0.5 0.5 0.2 0.3 21.8

Note: [R] denotes the respondent, [S] denotes the spouse, and [H] denotes the household.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2006).

33

Table 5. Age and Tenure of Leavers by Benefits Status, 2011
Characteristics
Average age
Average tenure

Non-Vested
Deferred Benefit
Retired
37.9
41.8
1.5
9.1

Source: Authors’ estimates from various actuarial reports.

34

60.6
16.1

Figure 1. Distribution of State and Local Plans, by Years in Averaging Period, 2009
80%
65.9%
60%

40%

19.8%

20%
7.9%

6.3%
0%
1-2

3

4

Source: Public Plans Database (2009).

35

5

Figure 2. Distribution of State and Local Plans, by Benefit Factor, 2009
50%

46%

40%

30%

26%

20%
14%
10%

9%
6%

0%
0-1.4

1.5-1.9

2-2.4

2.4-2.9

Source: Public Plans Database (2009).

36

3+

Figure 3. Distribution of State and Local Plans, by COLA Type, 2009
50%
41%
40%

35%

30%
20%
13%
10%

7%
4%

0%
None

Automatic CPI-Linked Ad-Hoc

Source: Public Plans Database (2009).

37

Investment
based

Figure 4. Distribution of State and Local Plans by Employee Contribution Rate, 2010
40%
33.3%
30%

27.8%

20%
13.5%
9.5%

10%

8.7%
4.8%

2.4%
0%
None

0-1.9

2-3.9

4-5.9

6-7.9

Source: Public Plans Database (2010).

38

8-9.9

10+

Figure 5. Increase in Lifetime Pension Benefit as a Percentage of Annual Earnings
60
Start at 25
50

Start at 35
Start at 45

40
30
20
10
0
35

40

45

50

55

Source: Authors’ calculations.

39

60

65

Figure 6. Percent of Lifetime Pension Benefits Earned over an Employee's 30-year Career,
Starting at Age 35
100%

100%

75%

68%

50%

44%
27%

25%
14%
6%
0%
40

45

50

55

60

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Public Plans Database (2010).

40

65

Figure 7. Total Normal Cost as a Percentage of Payroll, by Plan Type and Social Security
Coverage, 2010
30%
SS

26.8%

No SS

25%
20%
15%

13.2%

14.6%

14.5%
12.9%

14.3%
13.7%

General
Employees

Teachers

16.3%

10%
5%
0%
All Employees

Police/Fire

Sources: Public Plans Database (2010) and Government Accountability Office (2010).

41

Figure 8. Distribution of HRS State-Local Workers by Percent of Career Spent in
the State-Local Sector, 1996-2006
50%
Respondent
40%

Spouse

39.0%

32.6%
30%

29.6%

39.9%
31.4%

27.6%

20%

10%

0%
S-L 1% to 15%

S-L 15% to 50%

S-L 50% to 100%

Source: Authors' calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2006).

42

Figure 9. Ratio of Age-65 Wealth for HRS Households with State-Local
Employment versus HRS Households with Private Sector Employment, by StateLocal Tenure 1996-2006

S-L 50% to 100%

21.4%

S-L 15% to 50%

5.0%

S-L 1% to 15% -13.6%

-20%

-10%

0%

10%

20%

Source: Authors' calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2006).

43

30%

Figure 10. Impact of Percent of Career as a State-Local Worker on Relative Wealth
of Public Sector versus Private Sector Households at Age 65, 1996 -2006

Note: Solid bars indicate the coefficient is statistically significant at least at the 5-percent level. The
bars represent the relationship (percent) between the characteristic and total wealth.
Source: Authors’ calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2006).

44

Figure 11. Distribution of HRS Workers by Job at Retirement, 1996-2006
100%
78.7%

80%
60%
40%
16.4%

20%
4.9%
0%
Retired from S-L
job

S-L retired from
private job

Private worker

Source: Authors’ calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2006).

45

Figure 12. Average Retirement Age of HRS Men Who Have Retired by Age 65, by
Sector
62
61.1

60.8

61
60

59.2

59
58
57
56
55
Retired from S-L
job

S-L retired from
private job

Private worker

Source: Authors’ calculations from Health and Retirement Study (1992-2006).

46

Figure 13. Distribution of Leavers in Public Plans Database by Tenure and Benefit Status,
2011
50%
Retirees
Deferred Vested
Non-vested

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
0-5

5-10 10-15 15-20 20-25 25-30 30-35 35-40 40+
Years of Service

Source: Authors’ estimates from various actuarial reports.

47

Figure 14. Percent of Leavers by Benefit Status in Public Plans Database

Retirees,
34.8%
Non-vested,
46.7%

Deferred
vested,
18.6%
Source: Authors’ calculations from various actuarial reports.

48

Figure 15. Coefficients for Regression on Probability of Vesting, Excluding Police and Fire
Plans, 2010
Social Security coverage
Public to private wage ratio
Vesting period -7.3
Has DC plan -3.2
Teachers' plan
Hiring age 25-29
Hiring age 30-34
Hiring age 35-39
Hiring age 40-44
Hiring age 45-49
Hiring age 50-55
Constant
-10

2.3
3.6

3.1
2.5
5.1
7.9
10.1
11.1
10.1
40.8
0

10

20

30

40

50

Notes: Solid bars indicate significance at the 10 percent level or better. The association is for a change from
zero to one for dichotomous variables, and a one-standard deviation change for continuous variables.
Sources: Authors’ estimates from the Current Population Survey (2011) and the Public Plans Database
(2010).

49

Figure 16. Coefficients for Regression on Probability of Remaining in Plan until Earliest
Normal Retirement Eligibility Once Vested, Excluding Police and Fire Plans, 2010
Social Security coverage

-7.6

Public to private wage ratio

5.8

Vesting period

8.1

Has DC plan

-11.2

Teachers' plan

0.3

Hiring age 25-29

2.2

Hiring age 30-34

5.1

Hiring age 35-39

9.6

Hiring age 40-44
Constant

16.4
-19.0
-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

Notes: Solid bars indicate significance at the 10 percent level or better. The association is for a change from
zero to one for dichotomous variables, and a one-standard deviation change for continuous variables.
Sources: Authors’ estimates from the Current Population Survey (2011) and the Public Plans Database
(2010).

50

Appendices

51

Table A1. Regression Results on Ratio of Average Plan Wage to Average State Private
Sector Wage, Excluding Police and Fire Plans, 2010
Variable
Coefficient
Social Security coverage
0.0988 **
(0.045)
Total normal cost
0.0174 ***
(0.004)
Closed plan
0.2927 ***
(0.090)
Teachers' plan
0.0825 **
(0.038)
Union membership
0.0027 ***
(0.001)
Constant
0.5776 ***
(0.075)
R-Squared
0.3265
Number of observations
113
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Coefficients are significant at the 10-percent (*), 5-percent
(**), or 1-percent (***) levels.
Sources: Authors’ estimates from the Current Population Survey (2011), Hirsch and Macpherson (2010), and
the Public Plans Database (2010).

52

Table A2. Summary Statistics for the Regression on Ratio of Average Plan Wage to
Average State Private Sector Wage, Excluding Police and Fire Plans, 2010
Variable
Public to private wage ratio
Social Security coverage
Total normal cost
Closed plan
Teachers' plan
Union membership

Mean
1.015
0.761
12.44
0.053
0.345
36.89

Standard
deviation
0.221
0.428
4.404
0.225
0.478
19.44

Minimum
0.508
0
5.850
0
0
6.2

Maximum
1.706
1
32.84
1
1
72.4

Sources: Authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey (2011), Hirsch and Macpherson (2010),
and the Public Plans Database (2010).

53

Table A3. Regression Results on Total Normal Cost as a Percent of Payroll, Excluding
Police and Fire Plans, 2010
Variable
Coefficient
Social Security coverage
-2.9566 ***
(0.835)
Public to private wage ratio
7.5315 ***
(2.172)
Closed plan
-5.8957 ***
(1.665)
Teachers' plan
-0.9086
(0.856)
Union membership
0.0317
(0.023)
Constant
6.5105 ***
(2.335)
R-Squared
0.2654
Number of observations
113
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Coefficients are significant at the 10-percent (*), 5-percent
(**), or 1-percent (***) levels.
Sources: Authors’ estimates from the Current Population Survey (2011), Hirsch and Macpherson (2010), and
the Public Plans Database (2010).

54

Table A4. Summary Statistics for Regression on Total Normal Cost as a Percent of
Payroll, Excluding Police and Fire Plans, 2010
Variable
Total normal cost
Social Security coverage
Public to private wage ratio
Closed plan
Teachers' plan
Union membership

Mean
12.44
0.761
1.015
0.053
0.345
36.89

Standard
deviation
4.404
0.428
0.221
0.225
0.478
19.44

Minimum
5.850
0
0.508
0
0
6.2

Maximum
32.84
1
1.706
1
1
72.4

Sources: Authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey (2011), Hirsch and Macpherson (2010),
and the Public Plans Database (2010).

55

Figure B1. Derivation of HRS Sample
Households within the HRS cohort (2008 Tracker File)
7,817

Observe at least one household member coupled at age 65 (RAND)
4,371

Age-65 household member is male (RAND)
3,462

Male is alive at age 65 (RAND)
3,313

Male is retired at age 65 (RAND)
2,377

Male’s spouse is female (RAND)
2,366

Male’s spouse is retired when respondent is 65 (RAND)
1,943

Male and spouse have valid responses for all components of wealth and explanatory variables
1,476

56

Table C1. Information Used for Construction of Plan Administrative Data

Plan Name
Alabama ERS
Alabama Teachers
Alaska PERS
Alaska Teachers
Arizona Public Safety
Personnel
Arizona SRS
Phoenix ERS

Valuation
Year
2011
2010
2010
2010

Tiers Used
State, Local
All members
Others
All members

2011 All members
2011 State, County, Other Education
2011 All members

Arkansas Teachers

State and Local (Excluding
2011 General Assembly)
All members (Education rates
2011 used)

California PERF
California Teachers

State Misc. Tier 1, Schools, State
2010 Police Officer
2010 Male, Female

Contra Costa County
LA County ERS
San Diego County

General Tier 3 Enhanced, Safety
2010 Tier A Enhanced
2011 General
2011 General Tier A, Safety Tier A

San Francisco City &
County
University of California
Colorado Municipal
Colorado School
Colorado State
Denver Employees
Denver Schools
Connecticut SERS
Connecticut Teachers
DC Police & Fire
DC Teachers
Delaware State Employees
Florida RS
Georgia ERS
Georgia Teachers

2011
2011
2010
2010
2010
2011
2009
2010
2010
2011
2011
2011
2011
2010
2010

Arkansas PERS

All members (Miscellaneous rates
used)
All members
Local
School
State
All members
Male, Female
Tier II- Others, Tier IIA - Others
All members
Police, Fire
Teachers
All members
Regular (Male, Female)
All members
All members

57

Percent of
Plan
Members
Male

Male or
Female
Rates Used
Male
Female
26.5%
Male
Female
82.7% Male
32.6% Female
Female
Female
21.7% Female
Both
Both
Male
37.2% Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Both
Female
Female
Male
Female
Female
Both
Female
Female

Hawaii ERS
Chicago Teachers
Illinois Municipal

Hybrid plan (General Employees,
2011 Teachers)
2010 All members
2010 Regular

Illinois SERS
Illinois Teachers
Illinois Universities
Indiana PERF

2011
2011
2011
2011

Indiana Teachers
Iowa PERS

2011
2011

Pre-2011 (Regular SS covered,
Regular Non-SS covered,
Alternative SS-covered,
Alternative non-SS covered)
Pre-2005 (Full-time teachers)
Pre-2011 (General)
All members
Pre-1996 Account, Post-1996
Account
Regular membership

Louisiana SERS
Louisiana Teachers
Maine Local
Maine State and Teacher
Maryland PERS
Maryland Teachers
Massachusetts SERS
Massachusetts Teachers
Michigan Municipal
Michigan Public Schools
Michigan SERS
Duluth Teachers
Minnesota PERF
Minnesota State Employees
Minnesota Teachers
St. Paul Teachers
Mississippi PERS

State (Tier 1), School (Tier 1),
2010 Local (Tier 1)
2011 Non-hazardous
2011 All members
Regular before 7/06, Regular after
2011 7/06
2011 All members
2011 Regular, Special
2011 State, Teachers
2011 Employees
2011 Teachers
2011 Group 1
2011 All members
2010 All members
2010 Teachers
2010 All members
2011 All members
2011 All members
2011 All members
2011 All members
2011 All members
2011 All members

Missouri DOT and Highway
Patrol
Missouri Local
Missouri PEERS
Missouri State Employees

2011
2010
2011
2011

Kansas PERS
Kentucky ERS
Kentucky Teachers

MoDot Closed, MoDot 2000,
MoDot 2011
General Members (Male, Female)
All members
All members

58

37.9% Female
Female
37.1% Female

Both
Both
Both
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Unisex
17.4% Female
Unisex
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Unisex
Female
Female
Unisex
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Male
54.7% Male
25.6% Female
39.5% Female

Missouri Teachers
St. Louis School Employees
Montana PERS
Montana Teachers
Nebraska Schools
Nevada Police Officer and
Firefighter
Nevada Regular Employees
New Hampshire Retirement
System
New Jersey PERS
New Jersey Police & Fire
New Jersey Teachers
New Mexico PERF
New Mexico Teachers

2011
2011
2011
2011
2011

All members
All members
All members
All members
All members

22.6% Female
Female

2011 All members
2011 All members

Male
Female

Employees, Teachers
State, Local
All members
All members
State General, Municipal General
All members

31.7% Female
Unisex
Unisex
Both
Female
Female

New York City ERS
New York State Teachers

Tier 4 Basic 62/5 plan (Male,
2011 Female; General employee rates)
2011 Tier IV (Male, Female)

Unisex
Both

NY State & Local ERS

NY ERS Tier 3,4 Coordinated
2011 Plan (Male, Female)

Unisex

NY PFRS Tier 2 Special 20yr
2011 (add'l 60ths) (Male, Female)

Unisex

NY State & Local Police &
Fire
North Carolina Local
Government
North Carolina Teachers
and State Employees
Ohio PERS
Ohio Police & Fire
Ohio School Employees
Ohio Teachers
North Dakota PERS
North Dakota Teachers
Oklahoma PERS
Oklahoma Teachers
Oregon PERS
Pennsylvania School
Employees
Pennsylvania State ERS
Rhode Island ERS
Rhode Island Municipal
South Carolina Police

2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011

Female
Female
Female

2010 General Employees

54.6% Male

2010
2010
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2010

All members
State, Local (Male, Female)
Police, Fire
All members
All members
All members
All members
Regular membership
All members
Tier 1, Tier 2, (General Service)

31.1%
47.0%
98.1%
25.9%
28.2%
39.4%
25.9%
42.2%

2011
2010
2010
2010
2010

All members
All members (Male, female)
State, Teachers
General, Police and Fire
All members

27.3% Female
Both

59

Female
Female
Male
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female

Female
Female
Male

South Carolina RS
South Dakota PERS
City of Austin ERS
Houston Firefighters
Texas ERS
Texas LECOS
Texas Teachers
Vermont State Employees
Vermont Teachers
Fairfax County Schools
Virginia Retirement System
Washington LEOFF Plan 2
Washington PERS 2/3
Washington School
Employees Plan 2/3
Washington Teachers Plan
2/3
West Virginia PERS
West Virginia Teachers
Wisconsin Retirement
System
Wyoming Public Employees

2010
2011
2010
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2011
2010
2011
2010
2010

Employees, Teachers (Employee
rates used)
All members
All members
All members
All members
All members
All members
All members
All members
All members (Male, Female)
State, Teachers
All members
Plan 2, Plan 3

Female
Unisex
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Unisex
Female
Both
Female
92.0% Male
47.7% Female

2010 Plan 2, Plan 3

21.9%

2010 Plan 2, Plan 3
2011 State, Non-State
2011 Teachers, Non-teachers

28.4%

2010 General
2012 All members

Source: Various actuarial reports.

60

Female
Female
Female
Female

Female
37.7%
35.9% Female

Table C2. Regression Results on Probability of Vesting, Excluding Police and Fire Plans,
2010
Variable
Social Security coverage
Public to private wage ratio
Vesting period
Has DC plan
Teachers' plan
Hiring age 25-29
Hiring age 30-34
Hiring age 35-39
Hiring age 40-44
Hiring age 45-49
Hiring age 50-55
Constant
R-Squared
Number of observations

Coefficient
2.2971
(3.417)
16.5380
(6.676)
-3.2045
(0.633)
-3.2339
(3.238)
3.1349
(3.225)
2.4542
(0.438)
5.0787
(0.693)
7.8640
(0.966)
10.1072
(1.213)
11.1162
(1.374)
10.0817
(1.444)
40.7831
(8.633)
0.2813
3570

**
***

***
***
***
***
***
***
***

Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Coefficients are significant at the 10-percent (*), 5-percent
(**), or 1-percent (***) levels.
Sources: Authors’ estimates from the Current Population Survey (2011) and the Public Plans Database
(2010).

61

Table C3. Summary Statistics for Regression on Probability of Vesting, Excluding Police
and Fire Plans, 2010

Variable
Probability of vesting
Social Security coverage
Public to private wage ratio
Vesting period
Has DC plan
Teachers' plan
Hiring age 25-29
Hiring age 30-34
Hiring age 35-39
Hiring age 40-44
Hiring age 45-49
Hiring age 50-55

Standard
deviation
17.94
0.446
0.216
2.283
0.344
0.484
0.350
0.350
0.350
0.350
0.350
0.350

Mean
47.19
0.725
1.012
6.054
0.137
0.373
0.143
0.143
0.143
0.143
0.143
0.143

Minimum
3.629
0
0.508
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Maximum
96.04
1
1.706
10
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Sources: Authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey (2011) and the Public Plans Database
(2010).

62

Table C4. Regression Results on Probability of Remaining in Plan until Earliest Normal
Retirement Eligibility Once Vested, Excluding Police and Fire Plans, 2010
Variable
Coefficient
Social Security coverage
-7.6109 *
(4.224)
Public to private wage ratio
26.8500 ***
(9.440)
Vesting period
3.5407 ***
(0.714)
Has DC plan
-11.1892 **
(4.437)
Teachers' plan
0.3446
(3.764)
Hiring age 25-29
2.1849 ***
(0.705)
Hiring age 30-34
5.0819 ***
(1.374)
Hiring age 35-39
9.6116 ***
(1.698)
Hiring age 40-44
16.4492 ***
(1.983)
Constant
-18.9512 **
(8.846)
R-Squared
0.2926
Number of observations
2550
Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Coefficients are significant at the 10-percent (*), 5-percent
(**), or 1-percent (***) levels.
Sources: Authors’ estimates from the Current Population Survey (2011) and the Public Plans Database
(2010).

63

Table C5. Summary Statistics for the Regression on Probability of Remaining in Plan until
Earliest Normal Retirement Eligibility Once Vested, Excluding Police and Fire Plans, 2010
Standard
Variable
Mean
deviation Minimum Maximum
Probability of retire, if vested
29.40
21.82
0
95.30
Social Security coverage
0.725
0.446
0
1
Public to private wage ratio
1.012
0.216
0.508
1.706
Vesting period
6.054
2.283
0
10
Has DC plan
0.137
0.344
0
1
Teachers' plan
0.373
0.484
0
1
Hiring age 25-29
0.200
0.400
0
1
Hiring age 30-34
0.200
0.400
0
1
Hiring age 35-39
0.200
0.400
0
1
Hiring age 40-44
0.200
0.400
0
1
Sources: Authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey (2011) and the Public Plans Database
(2010).

64

