                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE EFFECT OF TAX RATES AND TAX BASES ON CORPORATE TAX REVENUES:
       ESTIMATES WITH NEW MEASURES OF THE CORPORATE TAX BASE

                                              Laura Kawano
                                               Joel Slemrod

                                          Working Paper 18440
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18440


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2012




We are grateful for comments from Kimberly Clausing, Michael Devereux, Martin Feldstein, James
Hines Jr., and participants at the NBER 2012 Trans-Atlantic Public Economics Seminar (TAPES)
Conference and the 2012 Michigan Tax Invitational Conference. We thank Allison Paciorka, Jacqueline
Schwartz and Jonathan Slemrod for their able research assistance and Richard Resen for providing
us the 2004 International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation Annual Reports publication. Slemrod acknowledges
having had a consulting contract with the International Monetary Fund related to the taxation of multinational
corporations over the course of doing the research for this paper. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research
and the U.S. Department of Treasury.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Laura Kawano and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Effect of Tax Rates and Tax Bases on Corporate Tax Revenues: Estimates with New
Measures of the Corporate Tax Base
Laura Kawano and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 18440
October 2012
JEL No. H25

                                            ABSTRACT

Several recent analyses have suggested that the revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate resides in the
low-30's. We challenge this result by re-examining this relationship using a new compilation of changes
in corporate tax base definitions for OECD countries between 1980 and 2004. By considering tax base
changes in addition to tax rate changes, we can address the estimation bias that applies to tax rates
absent their consideration. We find that the relationship between corporate tax rates and corporate
tax revenues is tenuous. The large behavioral response to corporate tax rates implied in the literature
does not obtain when accounting for persistent differences in tax policy and business environments
across countries.


Laura Kawano
Department of the Treasury
Laura.Kawano@treasury.gov

Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
Room R5396
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu
  The Effect of Tax Rates and Tax Bases on Corporate
  Tax Revenues: Estimates with New Measures of the
                  Corporate Tax Base
                               Laura Kawano and Joel Slemrod∗
                                        September 28, 2012


                                                Abstract
             Several recent analyses have suggested that the revenue-maximizing corporate tax
         rate resides in the low-30’s. We challenge this result by re-examining this relation-
         ship using a new compilation of changes in corporate tax base definitions for OECD
         countries between 1980 and 2004. By considering tax base changes in addition to tax
         rate changes, we can address the estimation bias that applies to tax rates absent their
         consideration. We find that the relationship between corporate tax rates and corporate
         tax revenues is tenuous. The large behavioral response to corporate tax rates implied
         in the literature does not obtain when accounting for persistent differences in tax policy
         and business environments across countries.


       How responsive a tax base is to the rate of tax applied is a central question in tax analysis.
In the past decade, the elasticity of taxable income (ETI) with respect to the marginal tax
rate has come to occupy a central role in the normative evaluation of income tax systems.1
Under certain conditions, the ETI summarizes the marginal efficiency cost of raising funds,
which in turn plays a central role in the optimal progressivity of the tax system and arguably
   ∗
     Kawano: U.S. Department of Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis, Laura.Kawano@treasury.gov. Slemrod:
University of Michigan, Department of Economics, jslemrod@umich.edu. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the policy of the U.S. Department of Treasury. We
are grateful for comments from Kimberly Clausing, Michael Devereux, Martin Feldstein, James Hines Jr.,
and participants at the NBER 2012 Trans-Atlantic Public Economics Seminar (TAPES) Conference and the
2012 Michigan Tax Invitational Conference. We thank Allison Paciorka, Jacqueline Schwartz and Jonathan
Slemrod for their able research assistance and Richard Resen for providing us the 2004 International Bureau
of Fiscal Documentation Annual Reports publication.
   1
     See Feldstein (1995) and Saez (2003) for concise statements of this proposition.



                                                     1
optimal public good provision.2 Although much recent empirical public finance research has
focused on quantifying the elasticity of an income tax base to the marginal tax rate applied,3
with a few exceptions most of it is has addressed the responsiveness of the personal tax base
rather than the corporate tax base.
       The elasticity of the corporate tax base is of interest to revenue forecasters, but to
economists it is largely of interest because of its normative implications, particularly with
regard to the appropriate rate of corporate income tax. The basic intuition is that the larger
the elasticity, the greater is the efficiency cost per dollar raised of further increases, and the
lower is the optimal tax rate. Extending that logic suggests that the rate that maximizes
revenue must be higher than the optimal rate, because at that rate a further increase causes
distortion but raises no additional revenue.
       Some recent papers have estimated the relationship between corporate tax rates and
corporate tax revenues, and then used those estimates to calculate an implied revenue-
maximizing corporate tax rate in the low-30’s. If true, the current U.S. statutory corporate
tax rate as of 2012, 35% plus any state rates, is greater than the revenue-maximizing rate.
       This paper challenges the empirical methodology that underlies these results as well as
the results themselves by analyzing data for the OECD countries between 1980 and 2004 that
includes a new compilation of changes in corporate tax base definitions and enforcement over
this period. We first characterize the systematic relationship between statutory rate changes
and several categories of base and enforcement (henceforth referred to as base changes)
changes. This is relevant for the interpretation of empirical studies on the consequences
of rate changes, which generally omit measures of the tax base. Because of this omission,
the correlation between rate changes and base changes (together with hypotheses about the
independent effect of base changes) is informative about the direction of bias in estimates
   2
     Slemrod (1998) discusses the conditions under which it is a sufficient statistic for marginal efficiency
cost, and Chetty (2009) clarifies those conditions formally.
   3
     This literature is critically reviewed in Saez, Slemrod and Giertz (2012).



                                                     2
that are obtained when econometric models exclude such variables. As far as we know,
this issue has not heretofore been addressed systematically. But it is well-known that base
changes have been prominent in recent tax reforms, at least since the landmark U.S. Tax
Reform Act of 1986, which dramatically lowered corporate tax rates but was expected to raise
more revenue due to the elimination of the investment tax credit, scaling back of accelerated
depreciation allowances, and other base broadeners.
   With these data we then estimate the responsiveness of corporate tax revenues with
respect to the statutory corporate tax rate and with respect to aspects of the tax base and
system of corporate taxation, as well as the interaction between the corporate tax rate and
corporate tax base. Because in most cases corporate tax rate schedules are essentially flat
rather than graduated, there is a simple relationship between the elasticity of revenues with
respect to the tax rate (εRt ) and the elasticity of the base with respect to the tax rate (εBt ),
εBt = εRt − 1. We allow the tax base elasticity to vary systematically as a function of
non-rate aspects of the tax system. Some of these factors would be expected to affect the
breadth of the tax base definition, and so would affect the tax base for any given tax base
elasticity. But, as Slemrod and Kopczuk (2002) have suggested and Kopczuk (2005) has
demonstrated for the personal tax base, they would also in general affect how responsive are
corporate decisions to the statutory tax rate, and thus affect the tax base responsiveness.
   We document that corporate tax base changes are more likely to occur in years when there
is a change to the corporate tax rate, raising a red flag about the appropriateness of ignoring
base changes in a study of the consequences of rate changes. In 51% of country-years with
corporate tax rate changes, there is also a change to the corporate tax base. However, in only
36% of the country-years where the corporate tax rate is unchanged is there a change to the
corporate tax base. We also find limited evidence for a tendency towards tax policies that
simultaneously lower the corporate tax rate and broaden the corporate tax base across OECD
countries over the period that we consider. When the corporate tax rate decreases, they are


                                                3
accompanied by measures that broaden the tax base 39% of the time, and accompanied by
measures that narrow the tax base only 32% of the time.
    In our empirical analysis we find that, using an appropriate econometric specification,
the causal relationship between corporate tax rates and corporate tax bases is tenuous. We
find that it is important to control for unobserved heterogeneity when estimating the corpo-
rate tax base elasticity using cross-country panel data. As initially shown by Gravelle and
Hungerford (2007), including country-specific fixed effects in the basic regression framework,
which eliminates spurious correlation due to unobserved country-specific variables that affect
both tax rates and tax revenues, also eliminates the statistical significance of the relation-
ship between corporate tax rates and corporate tax revenues. When we incorporate our new
data on corporate tax base changes, the relationship between the corporate tax rate and
corporate tax base remains statistically insignificant. We do find some evidence that the
corporate tax appears to play an important role as a backstop for the personal tax base and
that corporations shift profits across countries’ corporate tax bases.
    The effects of some particular aspects of the corporate tax system are notable, and in
some cases surprising. As an example of the latter, when there are enhancements to thin
capitalization rules, i.e., rules that limit a company’s ratio of debt to equity typically meant to
regulate the amount of interest that can be claimed as a deduction, corporate tax revenues
tend to decrease. Unsurprisingly, there is a positive relationship between increasing the
taxation of foreign companies and corporate tax revenues, and between reductions to R&D
credits and corporate tax revenues.



1     Framework

Consider a single-period, closed-economy model where the corporate tax schedule has a single
rate (t), so that tax revenue (R) is simply proportional to taxable income (Y ). Taxable



                                                4
income depends in two ways on the non-rate aspects of the tax system (the vector N ) that
define the tax base. The first is a mechanical relationship - revenues change when the base
changes absent any behavioral response. Second, corporate decisions (the vector D) may
be affected by the non-rate aspects of the tax system via incentive effects; the decisions
themselves are generally a function of both t and N . As elaborated below, these decisions
include real ones such as investment, but also income shifting, avoidance and evasion. Thus
we can write:
                                    R = tY (N, D(t, N )).                                  (1)

The value of N may also affect dD/dt, and therefore dY /dt, and in turn, the elasticity of
taxable income, which is usually defined as [dY /d(1 − t)][(1 − t)/y].
   A country’s statutory rate could affect several categories of decisions, and thereby affect
taxable income and revenues. One obvious candidate is taxable income shifting. This shifting
could be from high tax-rate countries to low tax-rate countries, reducing tax revenues in the
former, but increasing it in the latter. A low rate of corporate tax relative to personal
income tax may also encourage businesses to take incorporated form, making them liable
to corporate taxes in addition to personal income taxes, and otherwise shift taxable income
into the corporate tax base, as examined by Gordon and Slemrod (2002).
   A distinct but related avenue of influence that the corporate tax rate has is through
its effect on investment. It has been understood at least since Hall and Jorgenson (1967)
that the tax disincentive to invest, often referred to as the marginal effective tax rate on
investment, depends on not only the statutory rate but on a host of other factors including the
schedule of tax depreciation (interacted with inflation), the system of inventory allowances
(also interacted with inflation), and the rate of investment tax credit. We denote the marginal
effective tax rate on investment as τ , and note that it depends on t, some non-rate aspects
of the tax system (Nτ ), and some aspects (denoted with a τ subscript) of the economic
environment such as the rate of inflation (Z), so that τ = τ (t, Nτ , Zτ ). Thus (1) can be


                                              5
rewritten as R = tY (N, Nτ , D(t, τ (t, Nτ , Zτ )).
   Note that the link between the effect of the tax rate on investment and its effect on
revenue is not straightforward. For example, if lower tax rates reduce the effective tax rate
on new investment, this may stimulate investment. But, in the short run an increase in
investment may reduce, rather than increase, taxable income because at first (accelerated)
tax depreciation allowances often exceed any increased profits due to the capital investment
and because increased profits may not arise for several years. This is important in part
because it suggests that the response lag to tax system changes will vary depending on
the kind of behavioral response. For example, the change in taxable income due to income
shifting is likely to be relatively fast, but the change in taxable income due to a response
in real investment is likely to be slower, and in the short run may be perverse (i.e., more
investment may reduce taxable income).
   The vectors of the non-rate aspects of the tax system, N and (Nτ ), include elements that
are usually characterized as affecting the tax base. One might distinguish two types of base-
related tax system aspects: those that provide behavioral response opportunities, and those
that do not. An example of the former is the “domestic production deduction,” which allows
for a reduction in net income for certain domestic business activities and thus provides an
incentive to expand lower-taxed domestic activity at the expense of other activities. Another
example is accelerated depreciation. Because depreciation for tax purposes does not equal
economic depreciation, the effective tax rate on new investment varies across capital assets
and a change in the statutory tax rate will affect the effective tax rate differentially. In
contrast, eliminating the deduction for state and local income taxes, while broadening the
base, is unlikely to materially affect behavioral response opportunities. Only the former
category would be expected to affect the elasticity of response with respect to the statutory
rate, by broadening the range of ways in which the tax base could be reduced in response to
a higher statutory rate.


                                                  6
2         Data

We focus on the experiences of developed countries over time using data on 29 OECD
countries.4 For data items aside from our new tax base measures, which we describe shortly,
we collect data from 1980 to 2008. We use several sources to compile information on corporate
tax systems, corporate tax revenues and other factors that may affect the responsiveness of
corporate tax revenues to corporate taxes. Table 1 provides summary statistics for all of
these variables, except for the tax base measures.
        Data on statutory corporate tax rates is obtained from the University of Michigan World
Tax Database for years 1980-2002, supplemented with the OECD Tax Database for years
2003-2008. These data refer to the top marginal income tax rates on domestic corporations
at the central government level. Where a surtax applies, we use the statutory corporate rate
exclusive of a surtax. Corporate income tax revenues as a fraction of GDP are collected
from the OECD Revenue Statistics database. The revenues data refer to central government
collections only.
        We collect information on several other aspects of taxation systems. Top personal income
tax rates at the federal level are collected from the OECD Tax Database for years 1981-2008.
We supplement these with personal tax rate data from the World Tax Database for 1980.
These are the highest statutory marginal tax rates and, as with corporate tax rates, refer
to central government taxes only. The system of dividend taxation and dividend tax rates
are obtained from the OECD Tax Database and are available from 1981-2008. To control
for the incentive to shift corporate income across countries, for each country in each year we
compute the GDP-weighted average of corporate tax rates in the other countries that are
    4
    The countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom
and the United States. Corporate tax revenue data are not available for Mexico, so Mexico is excluded from
our analysis.




                                                    7
included in this study.5
       For comparison with previous work, we investigate proxies for the corporate tax base that
have been used in previous research. Devereux (2006) uses the present discounted value of
depreciation allowances for an investment in plant and machinery; these data are available
from the Institute for Fiscal Studies and cover a panel of 16 countries beginning in 1979, all
of which are included in this study, and have been updated through 2005.6 Alternatively,
Clausing (2007) examines measures of the corporate profit rate and the corporate share of
GDP; we construct these measures following her methods using data on corporate value
added and operating surplus from the OECD National Accounts Database.
       Foreign direct investment data are obtained from the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development Statistics Database, UNCTADstat. The database contains data on
inward and outward foreign direct investment stocks and flows.7 We obtain information on
GDP, GDP per capita, GDP growth rates, population growth rates, the proportion of the
population residing in urban areas, and unemployment rates from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators Database. GDP is reported in current U.S. dollars.8 To account
for differences in corporate tax revenue collections due to the size of the financial industry,
we use the ratio of central banking assets to GDP from the World Bank database, A New
Database on Financial Development and Structure. The methodology for constructing these
data are described in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2000).
       An important contribution of this paper is the systematic documentation of changes in the
breadth and nature of countries’ corporate income tax bases. We hand-collect these data from
the International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation’s (IBFD) Annual Report publications,
which provide concise summaries of important tax policy changes in several countries. These
   5
     The contemporaneous GDP is used for these calculations.
   6
     Updated versions of the data used in Devereux and Griffith (2003) are available at
http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/3210.
   7
     These data are available at http://unctadstat.unctad.org.
   8
     These data are available at http://data.worldbank.org/indicators. We also collect GDP in local currency
to compute the corporate profit rate and the corporate share.


                                                     8
publications were produced annually from 1965 through 2002 and then in 2004. For this
study, we use publications from 1980 through 2004, so we study 725 potential country-year
combinations when corporate tax base measures are included in the analysis.9
      From the descriptions of tax policy changes, we code changes to several aspects of the
corporate tax base. We assign noted changes in the tax base into one of the following twelve
categories:

  1. the research and development tax credit

  2. credits for foreign taxes paid

  3. the tax treatment of foreign companies, such as credits or other incentives to attract
     foreign investment

  4. policies that target evasion or avoidance by companies

  5. investments credits or other tax incentives to promote investment

  6. accelerated depreciation or other depreciation allowances

  7. other tax rates that may affect the corporate tax base, e.g., net worth tax on corpora-
     tions or extraordinary profits tax

  8. loss carry-forward rules

  9. loss carry-back rules

 10. thin capitalization rules

 11. controlled foreign company (CFC) legislation

 12. other changes to the corporate tax base

A detailed explanation of the ways that we have translated the IBFD descriptions of tax
policy changes into our twelve indicator variables is provided in the Data Appendix.
      For all of our tax base measures, we code a change that broadens the tax base system
(defined as increasing tax revenue for a given tax rate, other tax base aspects, and behavior)
  9
      The 2004 publication also contains information on tax policy changes that were enacted in 2003.




                                                      9
as +1 and we denote a change that shrinks the tax base as -1.10 For the tax credits,
depreciation allowances, loss carry back and loss carry forwards, a coding of -1 is equivalent
to the provision becoming more generous to the taxpayer, whereas +1 refers to the provision
becoming less generous. Foreign companies taxed equals +1 when taxes on foreign firms
became more extensive. Changes in thin capitalization rules are coded to be equals +1 when
thin capitalization legislation was introduced or strengthened. CFC legislation equals +1
when such legislation was introduced. Evasion equals +1 whenever there was mention of
initiatives to addresses tax evasion or avoidance, except when it was indicated that these
measures were directed solely to the non-corporate sector. Increases in a non-corporate tax
rate are recorded as +1, while decreases are recorded as -1.11
       Counts for these measures of tax base changes are provided in Table 2. Overall, we
observe that changes to the corporate tax base noted in the IBFD’s Annual Reports are a
fairly frequent phenomenon. There are 433 changes to the corporate tax base. The majority
of these changes broadened the tax base, but there are substantial occurrences of narrowing
the base. We label 248 of the tax base changes as making the base broader, and 185 as making
the base less broad. Because there may be more than one base change for a given country
in a given year, there was at least one base change in just 289 (out of 725) country-years.
Thus, in 41% of country-years, there was at least one base change.
       Tabulations of country-years for which we observe multiple changes to the corporate
tax base by base-broadening and base-narrowing measures are provided in Table 4.12 The
majority of tax policy changes that we document contain only tax base broadening or tax
  10
     There are a few cases where there are several changes to the same tax base measure. For example, there
may two policies that are aimed at reducing tax avoidance behaviors in the same year. In these instances,
we do not adjust our measurements beyond the +1 and -1 schematic.
  11
     Taxes that are included in the other-rate-change category are: (exceptional, extraordinary, excess) profits
or income taxes, movable capital taxes, business capital or immovable property taxes, property transfer
taxes, special corporation taxes, industry-specific taxes (manufacturing, petroleum, shipping, oil companies,
banking, financial institutions, life insurance companies), taxes on large corporations only, and the corporate
AMT.
  12
     Note that the maximum number of base-broadening or base-narrowing measures that we observe occurs
within a country in a single year is 4.


                                                      10
base narrowing measures (84%, i.e., of the 289 country-years where there was any tax base
change, 243 contained only tax base changes in one direction). In these cases, there is an
unambiguous change in the breadth of the tax base. However, there are some instances
where polices have adjusted the definition or enforcement of the corporate tax base, and we
are unable to determine the net impact of these policies to the corporate tax base with our
binary measures alone.
      Table 5 provides tabulations of tax rate changes and tax base changes by country. We
observe that all countries in our sample have changed their top statutory corporate tax
rate in our sample period. Moreover, with the exceptions of Iceland and Switzerland, we
document some change to the corporate tax base for all countries in our sample. Thus, we
see variation in both corporate tax rates and tax bases across most countries, rather than
these changes being concentrated in only a few countries. We return to discuss in detail the
pattern of base changes and their relationship to rate changes in Section IV.



3       Corporate Tax Rates and Revenue

3.1       Aggregate Time Series

Some simple correlations suggest that the elasticity of the corporate tax base with respect
to the statutory rate may be substantial. First, consider the aggregate time trend. On
average, statutory corporate tax rates in OECD countries have fallen significantly since the
early 1980s, while over the same period until 2008 revenues from corporate taxes have been
buoyant. Figure 1 shows that, after holding constant during the early 1980s, the average
statutory corporate tax rate began to fall noticeably.13 The left panel of Figure 1 depicts
the unweighted average top statutory corporate tax rate over time, while the right panel
 13
      These rates refer to federal or central government tax rates only.




                                                       11
depicts this average weighted by GDP.14 The dashed lines indicate a one standard-deviation
interval around the average rates. Weighting the statutory tax rates does not qualitatively
affect these patterns.




                    Figure 1: Average OECD corporate tax rates, 1980-2008


       To demonstrate that this dramatic change in the average corporate tax rate is not due
solely to very large drops in just a few countries, but reflects a decline in most of the
countries, Figure 2 shows changes in corporate tax rate for 30 OECD countries. Changes
in rates between 1980 and 1994, chosen because it is halfway between 1980 and 2008, are
shown in black, while changes between 1994 and 2008 are shown in gray. The change from
the beginning to the end of our sample can be obtained by adding the bars together. The
figure shows that most countries decreased their corporate tax rates over the sample, as most
of the bars fall below zero. In addition, the tax rate increases that exist are much smaller
in magnitude than the tax rate decreases. Comparing tax rates in 1980 and in 2008, 21 out
of the 24 countries with available data reduced their tax rate and only three increased it.
In many cases, the fall has been substantial. In 1980, 14 of the 24 countries had statutory
  14
    GDP corresponds to the same year as the corporate tax rate, reported in 2010 U.S. dollars. These data
are from the World Bank’s Web Database, as described in Section 2.

                                                   12
corporate tax rates of 40% or more; by 2002 and through 2008, there were none.




         Figure 2: Changes in corporate tax rates by country: 1980-1994 and 1994-2008


       The time-series of corporate tax revenues looks quite different, and in particular exhibits
no secular decline. Due to differences in country size, we scale tax revenues in each country
by GDP to compare total corporate income tax revenues across countries.15 The right panel
of Figure 3 presents the GDP-weighted average value of the ratio of corporate tax revenues
to GDP across the same group of countries and the same time period, along with its one-
standard deviation interval.16 This average varies over the economic cycle, but does not
appear to follow any long-term trend. In all years it is within the interval from 2.4% to 3.6%
of GDP, beginning in 1980 at 2.9% and ending in 2008 at 3.0%. In contrast, the left panel
of Figure 3 presents the unweighted average value of the ratio of corporate tax revenues to
GDP. In 1980 this stood at 2.3% - that is, on average, corporate tax revenues amounted
to 2.3% of GDP. This average rose slightly in the first half of the 1980s to reach 2.6% by
  15
     Two standard ways of comparing corporate tax revenues across countries are to scale tax revenues in
each country by GDP - as done in Figure 3 - or by total tax revenues. These measures will vary for reasons
other than the corporate tax system. For example, both depend on the size of the corporate sector (e.g., the
degree to which business is incorporated) and on the relative size of corporate income in GDP, which varies
considerably over the economic cycle.
  16
     Contemporaneous-GDP-weighted averages are equivalent to aggregate tax revenues.

                                                    13
1985, where it remained fairly constant until the 1990s. After that, however, it has rapidly
increased. It peaked at 3.6% in 2000, and then again at 3.9% in 2007.17




                 Figure 3: Corporate tax revenues divided by GDP, 1980-2008


       The comparison between the weighted and unweighted averages clearly indicates that,
relatively speaking, small countries have been increasingly reliant on corporate tax revenues.
Figure 4 shows changes in corporate income tax revenue as a proportion of GDP from 1980
to 1994 and from 1994 to 2008. The variation across countries is considerable: some of
the smaller countries raised less than 2% of GDP from corporate income taxes in 1980;
by contrast, Luxembourg raised over 6% in 1994. Between 1980 and 2008 most countries
experienced an increase in tax revenues as a proportion of GDP. There are five exceptions,18
but only Japan experienced a drop in excess of 1 percentage point. Between 1994 and 2008,
in six countries the ratio declined, in none of them by more than 1 percentage point. Norway
is an outlier in this series, with a large increase in corporate tax revenues driven largely by
  17
     The 2008 corporate tax revenue-to-GDP data were not available for five countries: Australia, Greece,
Mexico, the Netherlands, and Poland. In previous years, these countries had a higher average revenue-to-
GDP ratio than those with data available for 2008. These missing data points may account for the dip in
the revenue-to-GDP series in 2008.
  18
     These are Canada, Germany, Japan, Luxembourg, and the United States.



                                                   14
the oil and gas industry.




              Figure 4: Corporate tax revenues to GDP: 1980, 1994, and 2008


   In summary, corporate tax rates have fallen substantially across OECD countries over
the past four decades. This decrease is observed in nearly all OECD countries and is not
driven by very large decreases by a small number of countries. At the same time, the overall
ratio of corporate tax revenues to GDP has remained relatively stable and may have slightly
increased, and some countries have substantially increased their reliance on corporate taxes
for revenue. This is consistent with a substantial negative correlation between the tax base
and the tax rate, whether due to behavioral responses or concurrent statutory base changes.


3.2    Cross-country

Looking across countries at a point in time reveals little sign of a strong positive relationship
between the statutory corporate tax rate and corporate tax revenues. Figure 5 plots these
two variables against each other for 1980 and 2008. As we saw previously, Norway is an
outlier with very high tax revenue and a moderate tax rate, reflecting that its corporate tax
base and revenues tend to be high because of North Sea oil and gas.

                                               15
                 Figure 5: Corporate tax rates and revenues, 1980 and 2008

   To depict the relationship between changes in corporate tax rates and changes in corpo-
rate tax revenues, Figure 6 plots these patterns. For each country, we compute the change
in corporate tax rates and the change in the corporate tax revenue to GDP ratio between
the last year in which both variables are available and the first year in which both variables
are available. In the figure, a positive relationship is observed.
   Complementary evidence on the relationship between changes in the breadth of the cor-
porate tax base and changes in corporate tax revenues is presented in Figure 7. To summarize
the change in a country’s corporate tax base over time, we sum over the tax base indicators
within a country over all years that they are in the sample. In this way, a measure that
shrinks the corporate tax base, which we code as -1, will negate the impact of a measure that
broadens the corporate tax base, coded as +1. Overall, the more positive this measure is,
the more frequent were changes to broaden the corporate tax base. A negative value of this
measure indicates that there were more measures that shrank the corporate tax base than
measures that broadened it. The change in corporate tax revenues is as defined above, except
we restrict observations on corporate tax revenues to between 1980 and 2004 because those


                                               16
Figure 6: Change in corporate tax rates and change in corporate tax revenues/GDP, 1980-
2008

are the years for which we have data on corporate tax bases. As with corporate tax rates,
we observe a (weak) positive relationship between a broadening of the corporate tax base
and corporate tax revenues. As mentioned in Section III, we observe that base-broadening
measures have more numerous than base-narrowing measures over this period.
   Aside from corporate income tax rate schedule non-linearities, which are relatively unim-
portant, revenue is the product of taxable profit and the tax rate. As we have already
investigated the recent changes in the tax rate, it is also useful to consider the development
of taxable profit, which we approximate by dividing revenue by the tax rate. Figure 8 shows
the average of this taxable profit estimate as a fraction of GDP for each country presented
over the period 1980-1990 and 1991-2008. In many countries, there have been substantial
changes in the size of taxable profit over these two periods. The most remarkable change
has been in Ireland. In the first two decades, Ireland’s taxable profit was 2.8% of GDP;
in the second period it was 16.2%. This is consistent with the very low tax rate on profits
from manufacturing activity in Ireland, enacted in the early 1980s, which created a powerful
incentive for moving real activity and especially taxable profits to Ireland. But many other

                                             17
Figure 7: Change in corporate tax bases and change in corporate tax revenues/GDP, 1980-
2004

countries also saw a substantial rise in their taxable profit between the two periods. Taxable
profit as a fraction of GDP more than doubled in 15 of the 30 countries examined, and it
increased by more than 50% in seven more.19
      It is interesting to note the experience in the United States, which saw an increase in
the ratio of taxable profit to GDP of 41.2% between the two periods. Commentators in
the U.S.20 have noted that corporate tax revenues have been relatively constant since 1980,
albeit moving strongly with the economic cycle.21 While this is largely true, this masks the
comparison with other OECD countries, as shown in Figure 9. The two series were roughly
at the same level in 1980, and although apart for some years in the 1980s when the U.S.
taxable profit was lower, they were still at a comparable level until 1995. Since then, however,
estimated taxable profits as a fraction of GDP in the rest of the OECD have soared; the
GDP-weighted average of the taxable profit to GDP ratio rose from 8.3% in 1995 to 13.9%
in 2007, before falling back slightly.
 19
    For Italy and Japan, however, the corporate profit to GDP ratio decreased between the two periods.
 20
    See, for example, Auerbach (2006).
 21
    Auerbach and Poterba (1987) investigated the development of U.S. corporate tax revenues up to 1980.


                                                 18
          Figure 8: Estimated taxable corporate profits to GDP, by country




Figure 9: Estimated taxable corporate profits to GDP, U.S. and other OECD countries




                                        19
4     The Correlation Between Tax Base Changes and Tax

      Rate Changes

In the previous section, we examined non-parametrically the empirical correlation between
the corporate tax rate and corporate tax revenues. Omitted from the discussion thus far are
changes to both the definition and the enforcement of the corporate tax base, which may have
an important influence on corporate tax revenues for a given tax rate. Of particular interest
for identifying the effect of corporate tax rates on corporate tax revenues is the relationship
between the timing of corporate tax rate changes and corporate tax base changes. Over
the period considered, most OECD countries have enacted tax policies that have altered
the breadth of the corporate tax base. Such policies may be used to encourage business
activities, such as increasing certain business tax credits, or to curb tax avoidance behavior
by corporations, such as imposing thin capitalization rules. Unfortunately, comprehensive
measures of the corporate tax base have not been available, and researchers have had to rely
on highly imperfect proxies for the corporate tax base if they address this issue at all.
    To overcome this limitation, we utilize our new measures of corporate tax base changes.
With our new corporate tax base measures, available from 1980 to 2004, we can examine this
relationship in greater detail than has been previously possible. Table 3 provides a cross-
tabulation of corporate tax base changes by the direction of corporate tax rate changes.
We restrict attention to years through 2004 because that is the last date for our tax base
measures. For the 29 countries that we examine, there were 167 rate changes (25% of the
662 country-years for which we have two consecutive years of corporate tax rate data) in
either direction. Of these 167, 128 were tax rate decreases and 39 were tax rate increases;
the predominance of rate cuts (77%) is consistent with the already-discussed trend toward
declining corporate statutory rates over this period. Of the 96 country-years when both the
tax rate and base changed, the most prevalent combiantion was lower-the-rate, broaden-


                                              20
the-base (37 country-years), followed by lower-the-rate, narrow-the-base (31), raise-the-rate,
broaden-the-base (17), and lastly raise-the-rate, narrow-the-base (9).
       Most tax policy changes that occurred over this period consisted of either changes to the
corporate tax rate or the corporate tax base, but not both. This finding is consistent with
Becker and Fuest (2011), where the present discounted value of depreciation allowances is
the only measure of the tax base considered. We learn that base changes are more likely
to occur when there are rate changes compared to when there are no rate changes. About
47% (60 out of 128) of the corporate tax rate decreases were accompanied by some change
to the corporate tax base, while 59% (23 of 39) of the corporate tax rate increases were
accompanied by some change to the corporate tax base. In contrast, some kind of base
change occurred in only 40% (197 out of 495) of the country-years when there was no rate
change. A linear probability model that regresses an indicator variable for there being any
change to the corporate tax base on an indicator variable for there being any change to the
corporate tax rate indicates that this relationship is statistically significant. The probability
of any base change increases by nearly 18 percent when there is any change to the corporate
tax rate, and this is statistically significant at the 1% level.22
       The nature of the base changes varies depending on whether the tax rate changed, and
also whether it was an increase or decrease. Tax rate decreases were slightly more likely to
be accompanied by base broadening than base shrinking measures: when there was a tax
rate decrease, base broadening measures occurred 29% (37 out of 128) of the time, while base
narrowing measures occurred 26% (33 out of 128) of the time. Of the 280 instances where
there was any change to the corporate tax base, 21% were accompanied by tax rate decreases
(60 of 280), while 8% were accompanied by tax rate increases (23 of 280) and 70% (197 of
280) were for no tax rate change country-years. A t-test on the equality of means reveals that,
  22
    The estimated coefficient on the indicator for there being any change in the corporate tax rate is 0.177
with a standard error of 0.060. There are 662 observations in this regression and standard errors are clustered
at the country level.



                                                      21
conditional on there being an increase in the corporate tax rate, base-broadening measures
are more likely than base-reducing measures at the 5% level. Conditional on there being
a reduction in the corporate tax rate, base-broadening measures are more likely than base-
reducing measures, but this difference is not statistically significant. Thus, there is no strong
tendency on average for base changes to offset, rather than reinforce, the revenue effects of
tax rate changes at least within the same year. This result stands in strong contrast to
the conventional wisdom that broaden-the-base, lower-the-rate reforms have predominated
in recent decades.
   For certain base changes some interesting patterns emerge. For example, a crackdown
on evasion is much less likely to happen when the rate falls (11%, or in 14 of the 129
years where there is a tax rate decrease) than when the rate increases (24%, or 9 or the 38
years where there is a tax rate increase), but least of all when the rate is unchanged (8%).
The most common tax base changes that accompany tax rate decreases are the limitation
of loss carry-forward allowances and the strengthening of thin capitalization rules. Tax
rate decreases are never associated with extensions to the generosity of the R&D credit,
accelerated depreciation allowances or loss carry back allowances, each of which would be
associated with a narrowing of the corporate tax base.
   Figure 10 depicts the relationship between changes in the corporate tax rate and the
breadth of the corporate tax base. The change in corporate tax rates and base is computed
as the change between the last year and the first year in which data are available, as in
Figure 6. The majority of the countries in our sample are above the zero horizontal line and
to the left of the zero vertical line. This pattern indicates that most countries both lowered
their corporate tax rates and engaged in tax policy measures that broadened the corporate
tax base more than measures that shrunk the corporate tax base. There is, however, no
clear correlation between these two measures.
   Figure 11 depicts the relationship between the change in the corporate tax rate and the


                                               22
   Figure 10: Change in corporate tax rates and change in imputed corporate tax bases

change in the present discounted value of depreciation allowances (PVDA) between the last
year and the first year in which the data are available. The PVDA data are from Devereux,
Griffith and Klemm (2002), and the change to depreciation allowances corresponds to one of
our tax base indicator variables, changes to tax depreciation allowances. This figure provides
complementary evidence to Figure 1 in Becker and Fuest (2011), which plots year-to-year
changes in corporate tax rates and the PVDA for 19 OECD countries between 1982 and
2003 using the same source data. Becker and Fuest (2011) show that the majority of tax
reforms in these country-years resulted in a decrease in the corporate tax rate, a decrease in
depreciation allowances (i.e., a broadening of the corporate tax base), or both. In our figure,
a similar pattern emerges where the majority of countries have experienced decreases in the
corporate tax rate along with a broadening of the corporate tax base (in this case, through
a decrease in the PVDA).




                                              23
Figure 11: Change in corporate tax rates and change in depreciation allowances, according
to Becker and Fuest 2011

5        Regression Analysis of the Determinanats of Corpo-

         rate Tax Revenues: Related Research

Now we turn to a regression-based analysis of the relationship among the corporate tax rate,
tax base and tax revenues. We begin by reviewing three previous studies that use country-
level panel data to estimate the elasticity of corporate tax revenues - and by implication the
tax rate elasticity of the corporate tax base - with respect to the statutory corporate tax
rate. Devereux (2006) uses data for 20 OECD countries from 1986 to 2004, Clausing (2007)
uses data on 29 OECD countries from 1979 to 2002, and Brill and Hassett (2007) use data
on 29 OECD countries between 1980 and 2005.
       These studies begin with a regression of corporate tax revenues23 as a fraction of GDP24
  23
     An alternative is to investigate the determinants of the tax base, rather than tax revenue, as shown
non-parametrically in Figure 10. The decisive problem with this approach is that the base is not known and
can be approximated as R/t, which imparts potentially serious ”division bias” to the extent of measurement
error in t.
  24
     These analyses, as ours that follows, ignore the possibility that tax rate and tax base changes may affect
GDP (indeed that is often their motivation), so that the estimated effects may not reflect solely the impact
of the explanatory variables on tax revenues. Nor does this methodology allow us to parse out the effects


                                                      24
on the corporate tax rate, the corporate tax rate squared, and year fixed effects to allow for
worldwide macroeconomic conditions to affect all countries’ corporate tax system outcomes.25
All three studies find a substantial negative response of the tax base to rate changes in
their baseline model, implying a revenue-maximizing tax rate ranging from the mid-20s to
mid-30s.26, . However, these estimates are quite sensitive to the set of included controls.
For example, Clausing’s (2007) estimates imply a revenue-maximizing tax rate of 57% for
relatively large, closed countries, such as the U.S. Moreover, in Devereux (2006), the tax
rate variables are generally not statistically significant when a larger set of controls is used.
    Each of these studies attempts to account for various aspects of the behavioral response
to changes in corporate tax rates. Clausing (2007) finds a significantly negative relationship
between the top statutory personal tax rate and corporate tax revenues, which is interpreted
as evidence of income shifting between the personal and corporate tax bases. In addition,
the revenue-maximizing rate is lower for countries that are more integrated in the global
economy, measured by having a foreign direct investment-to-GDP ratio that is higher than
the median value across OECD countries, presumably because of shifting of corporate income
across countries. Devereux (2006) controls for income shifting between the personal and
corporate tax bases within a country using the difference between the top personal tax rate
and the top corporate tax rate and for income shifting to relatively lower corporate income
tax rate countries by including the weighted average of corporate tax rates in the other
countries included in his study. However, he does not find strong statistical support for
either type of income shifting. Devereux (2006) finds that the average of corporate tax rates
in other countries is a statistically significant determinant of corporate tax revenues. This
finding suggests that there is income shifting across countries. Brill and Hassett (2007) focus
that operate via the incidence of the tax changes, e.g. that corporate taxes may reduce wage income if they
reduce the domestic capital stock.
  25
     Despite modeling their analysis on Clausing’s (2007) study, Brill and Hassett (2007) appear to not
include year fixed effects in their regressions.
  26
     Note, however, that in his preferred specification, Devereux’s (2006) estimate of the tax rate effect is no
longer statistically significant.


                                                      25
on the evolution of tax responsiveness, and find that the implied revenue-maximizing tax
rate has been declining over time.
       Critically, all three studies omit country-specific fixed effects, despite using data with
a panel structure. If there is unobserved heterogeneity across countries that is related to
both the dependent variable, conditional on the observed explanatory variables, and the ex-
planatory variables themselves, the estimates from these studies suffer from omitted-variable
bias. Indeed, Gravelle and Hungerford (2007) show that, when country-specific fixed effects
are added to this type of specification, corporate tax rates are no longer statistically sig-
nificant predictors of corporate tax revenues, suggesting two conclusions. First, unobserved
heterogeneity indeed imparts bias to the previous analyses based on panel data. Including
country-specific fixed effects will, in particular, control for time-invariant aspects of the non-
rate aspects of the corporate tax system that may importantly differ across countries. For
example, a reduction in the corporate tax rate may induce a larger behavioral response by
corporations in a country where the detection of tax avoidance is relatively sophisticated than
a similar reduction in a country where firms are able to employ tax avoidance schemes with
relative ease. Second, and strikingly, the data do not allow us to reject the null hypothesis
that within-country changes in corporate tax rates are not associated with within-country
changes in corporate tax revenues.
       Even after including country-specific fixed effects, omitted-variable bias will remain if
revenue-relevant aspects of the corporate tax system that are not included as explanatory
variables vary over time.27 As previously mentioned, changes to the corporate tax rate
often are accompanied by changes to the corporate tax base, and both of these changes
affect corporate tax revenues.28 Without accounting for tax base changes, the joint effect
of changing rates and bases is attributed to tax rates alone, which in general will lead to
  27
     Brill and Hassett’s (2007) result are more difficult to interpret because no other control variables are
included in their regressions.
  28
     Robinson and Slemrod (2012) investigate this issue in the context of individual income taxation.



                                                     26
biased estimates of the effect of corporate tax rates on corporate tax revenues. Moreover,
the implied revenue-maximizing tax rate from these analyses would be biased toward zero.29
The analysis of Clausing (2007) and Devereux (2006) include some proxies for the tax base,
although we would argue that these measures are not sufficient. Clausing (2007) proxies
for the size of corporate profits with the GDP growth rate and the unemployment rate,
and proxies for the share of the corporate sector with GDP per-capita.30 Devereux (2006)
uses a more direct measure of the corporate tax base–the present discounted value of tax
depreciable allowances per dollar of investment in plant and machinery. In contrast to these
studies, we construct several variables based on descriptions of tax policy changes to account
for changes to the corporate tax base.



6      Empirical Model and Results

6.1     Replications of Previous Studies

To provide a comparable baseline for our analysis, we begin by estimating using our data
the most basic empirical model featured in previous studies:


                                  Rit = β0 + β1 τit + β2 τit2 + µt + εit                                 (2)
  29
     Formally, consider that the true model is: R = β0 + β1 τ + β2 τ 2 + β3 N + X 0 γ + u. If we estimate
the simplest regression model found in earlier studies, we have: R = β0 + β1 τ + β2 τ 2 + X 0 γ + u where
u = β3 N + ν. The bias of the estimated coefficients is a function of the covariance between the included
variables and the tax base, and β3 . A broader tax base will tend to increase corporate tax revenues, ceteris
paribus, so β3 > 0. The simultaneity of corporate tax rate decreases and base broadening measures implies
that the corporate tax rate and tax base are negatively related. Thus, the estimated tax coefficients are
negatively biased. The literature goes one step further to use these biased estimates to compute an implied
revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate, computed as τ ∗ = −β̂1 /2β̂2 . The numerator is biased towards zero
because β1 > 0 and β̂1 is negatively biased, whereas the denominator is biased away from zero because
β2 < 0 and β̂2 is negatively biased. Thus, the implied revenue-maximizing rates obtained in these studies
are biased towards zero.
  30
     In another specification, Clausing (2007) includes corporate share of GDP, corporate profitability, and
the system for taxing worldwide income (i.e., under a territorial system, a credit system, or a mixture) to
account for the tax base.




                                                     27
where Rit is the ratio of corporate tax revenues to GDP, τit is the top statutory corporate tax
rate, i denotes country and t denotes year.31 Year fixed effects, µt , are included to account
for changes in world economic conditions across years.32 We include several control variables
that are meant to provide a comparison to the key results of Clausing (2007) and Devereux
(2006) using the models that include the most generous number of controls. Results from
these regressions are shown in Table 6.33 Column (1) corresponds to column (4) in Table 4
of Clausing (2007).34 Columns (2) and (3) correspond to columns (8) and (9) in Table 1 of
Devereux (2006). Both studies include models with interaction terms but omit the level of
the non-tax variable, complicating interpretation. In columns (4)-(6), we replicate columns
(1)-(3) but also include the level of the relevant non-tax variable. Each specification includes
year fixed effects. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered at the country
level to allow for arbitrary within-country serial correlation.35
       In addition to corporate tax rates and proxies for the corporate tax base that were
described in Section III, there are several other controls included in these studies. Measures
to control for incentives to shift corporate profits are included. For example, both studies
include some function of the top personal tax rate to account for potential incentives to shift
income between corporate and personal tax bases. Devereux (2006) controls for incentives
to shift income across corporate tax bases in different countries with the GDP-weighted
  31
     Following the previous literature, we do not pursue the potential endogeneity of tax policy, nor attempt
to distinguish business-cycle-exogenous policy changes, as in Romer and Romer (2012), for example.
  32
     Note that Brill and Hassett (2007) do not include year dummies in their analysis.
  33
     In the baseline model that includes no other controls, we estimate that β̂1 = 0.19 (se = 0.06) and β̂2 =
−0.30 (se= 0.11), which gives an implied revenue maximizing rate of 31.8%. There are 756 observations and
standard errors are clustered at the country level. This regression corresponds to the most basic regression
that is common to Clausing (2007), Devereux (2006), and Brill and Hassett (2007), and the results we find
are broadly similar to these.
  34
     We also replicate column (3) of Clausing’s (2007) Table 3, which uses the corporate profit rate and
corporate share to proxy for the breadth of the corporate tax base. The sample size becomes smaller due to
data availability, but the results are fairly stable. The estimated coefficients on the tax variables are both
statistically significant and the implied revenue maximizing rate from this regression is 38.2.
  35
     Clausing (2007) and Devereux (2006) compute standard errors that are robust only to heteroskedasticity.
Corporate tax revenues are likely serially correlated within a country due to trends in economic growth and
the corporate tax climate, among other reasons. Failing to appropriately account for this serial correlation
will typically lead to invalid (usually underestimated) standard errors of the parameter estimates.


                                                     28
average of other countries’ corporate tax rates. Clausing (2007) instead uses the size and
openness of the country.36 An indicator for whether the country uses a worldwide system in
2004 controls for the system of taxing corporations, either through a tax credit or exemption
system.37
       Table 6 also provides the implied revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate from these re-
gressions.38 For regressions that include the interaction of the present value of depreciation
allowances and the corporate tax rate, we evaluate this revenue maximizing rate at the aver-
age value of the present value of depreciation allowances for the estimation sample (0.773).39
       The results in columns (1)-(4) are qualitatively consistent with the previous studies,
although the point estimates differ somewhat due to differences in sample size, years con-
sidered, and (possibly) data sources. The relationship between corporate tax revenues and
corporate tax rates appears concave and the implied revenue-maximizing corporate tax rate
from these regressions falls between 27 and 30 percent, compared to the 33 to 42 percent
range in Clausing (2007) and the 16 to 37 percent range found in Devereux (2006). The
modified Clausing-style regressions yield results that are fairly consistent with those that do
not include the indicators for a country being large or a country being international. In the
modified Devereux-style regressions, the results change substantially and the effect of cor-
porate tax rates is no longer statistically significant. The implied revenue maximizing rate
is lower, 23 and 15 percent, but should not be weighed heavily because of the imprecision of
  36
      Two dummy variables are separately interacted with the corporate tax rate and corporate tax rate
squared. The first is an indicator for whether the country has an above average population. The second is
an indicator for whether the country has an above average foreign direct investment stock to GDP ratio. We
construct this measure on a year-by-year basis so it varies within country over time.
   37
      We determine the type of system that is in place using PricewaterhouseCoopers’ Corporate Taxes: A
Worldwide Summary 2004 publication.
   38
      This rate is computed by solving the first-order condition of the corporate tax revenue regression equation
with respect to the corporate tax rate. For ease of reading, the corporate tax rate squared is divided by 100 in
the regressions. Thus, for example, the implied revenue-maximizing rate is computed as −1∗ β̂τ /(2∗ β̂τ 2 /100)
in the baseline model.
   39
      Note that in Clausing (2007) and Devereux (2006), the revenue-maximizing tax rate is computed ignoring
that some of the control variables are a function of the corporate tax rate. The rate is computed as though
it came from the baseline model.



                                                       29
these estimates.
       These regression results do not uncover any evidence of income shifting, either between
the corporate and personal income tax base within a country or between corporate tax
bases across countries. We should note that our ability to identify income shifting across
countries is limited because we include only the tax rates for the other countries included
in this study, as is done in the previous literature. Thus, this measure does not separately
measure incentives to shift to tax havens.40 The only factors that appear to consistently
have a statistically significant effect on corporate tax revenues are the type of tax system (a
worldwide system reduces revenues), the unemployment rate (reduces revenue), and the size
of the country as proxied by population.41
       Having verified that we derive similar conclusions as these previous studies using their
methodology, we turn now to address several problematic econometric issues.


6.2       Country-specific fixed effects

As already noted, excluding country-specific fixed effects generates biased estimates in the
presence of unobserved heterogeneity across countries that is correlated with corporate tax
rates and affect corporate tax revenues.42 A potential source of such heterogeneity are dif-
ferences in corporate tax environments, such as in the willingness to rely on corporations
for tax revenues or in the effectiveness of tax collection agencies. Another source of hetero-
geneity is in the data collection systems. Some of these omitted variables likely affect both
  40
      Desai, Foley and Hines (2003) provide evidence on the behavioral responses of U.S. firms’ foreign direct
investment to international tax rates and Altshuler and Grubert (2004) provide evidence on responses in
a larger set of countries. Both report a large tax elasticity of foreign investment. Desai, Foley and Hines
(2006b) develop a model where tax havens may increase business activity in non-haven countries, with
empirical support in Desai, Foley and Hines (2006a).
   41
      Note that the GDP growth rate, GDP per capita, and international variables appear to be statistically
significant if standard errors are not clustered. This would more closely mimic the results shown in Clausing
(2007).
   42
      We do not believe there is no insight at all to be gained from cross-country comparisons. There is
no doubt, for example, that Ireland’s relatively low corporate tax rates are partly responsible for its large
corporate tax revenues relative to its GDP. We leave for future research the appropriate way to learn from
this with minimal bias in estimated causal relationships.


                                                     30
corporate tax revenues and corporate tax rates, rendering the previous estimates biased and
inconsistent.
   Gravelle and Hungerford (2007) show that the significance of the estimated tax effects in
these models may be quite sensitive to the inclusion of country fixed effects. To investigate
this issue further, we refine the estimates from Section 6.1 by adding country-specific fixed
effects to the estimating equations. Because the indicator for corporations being taxed
on worldwide income is time-invariant in our data, this variable is now excluded. We also
include additional controls for several other factors that may importantly affect corporate tax
revenues. For one, the extent of integration between the corporate and personal income tax
systems may influence the responsiveness of corporate tax revenues. To account for this, we
include indicator variables for the type of dividend tax system in place in a country, whether
classical method or imputation method. Systems that combine aspects of the classical and
imputation methods are the excluded category. Second, the size of the financial sector may
influence corporate tax receipts as financial sector profits may be more easily manipulated
due to corporate activity being intangible-intensive. We proxy for the size of the financial
sector with the ratio of central banking assets to GDP. These additional variables are included
in the remainder of our analysis.
   Table 7 shows that, when country-specific fixed effects are added to the model, in only
two specifications do corporate tax rates appear as even marginally significant determinants
of corporate tax revenues. Thus, unobserved cross-country factors appear to be important
determinants of the estimated effect of corporate tax rates on corporate tax revenues using
cross-country data. Within countries, however, no clear relationship appears. Although
the estimated tax effects are generally not statistically significant, Table 7 also includes the
implied revenue-maximizing tax rate from these regressions. Again, for specifications that
include the present value of depreciation allowances, we evaluate these rates at the mean
of this variable. For those regressions that control for the personal income tax system, the


                                              31
implied revenue-maximizing rate falls between 28 and 37 percent, somewhat higher than that
when country-specific fixed effects are excluded. When we do not control for the top personal
income tax rate, the implied revenue maximizing rate is much higher, likely implausibly high.
       Interestingly, in the fixed-effects specification there is now evidence of some income shift-
ing.43 Increases in the top personal tax rate are significantly related to an increase in
corporate tax revenues, perhaps indicating that income is shifted from corporations to indi-
viduals when the corporate tax rate increases. This finding is consistent with the corporate
tax acting as a backstop to the personal income tax. However, the effect of an increase in
the corporate tax rate in other countries has the “wrong” sign if these increases would lead
to corporate income being sheltered in the home country. Instead, it is the international
intensity of an economy rather than the size of the economy that now matters (although
only marginally) for corporate tax revenues. The ratio of central banking assets to GDP,
meant to proxy for the size of the financial sector in an economy, is negatively related to
corporate tax revenues. This is the relationship that we would expect if manipulating profits
is relatively easier in the financial sector. We also see that the integration of the personal
and corporate tax is an important factor, as dividend tax policy is a significant determinant
of corporate tax revenues relative to GDP.


6.3       The Impact of the Corporate Tax Base

As we have previously argued, the definition and enforcement of the corporate tax base is a
theoretically important determinant of corporate tax revenues. However, because legislation
that determines these factors is highly complex, it is difficult to obtain a summary measure of
the corporate tax base and, perhaps for this reason, it has been largely ignored in empirical
analysis. Moreover, we have documented that aspects of the corporate tax base often change,
so that even after accounting for persistent differences in tax policy across countries, as in
  43
    Gravelle and Hungerford (2007) do not account for income shifting in their replications that include
country-specific fixed effects.


                                                  32
the country-fixed effects regressions, estimates of the tax-rate responsiveness of corporate tax
revenues are likely to remain biased. Our new measures of corporate tax base changes allow
us to provide estimates of the relationship between corporate tax revenues and corporate tax
rates that more plausibly control for changes to the corporate tax base.
   Ideally, we would like to have a direct measure of the breadth of the corporate tax base
and for simplicity, assume that this could be summarized by a single variable, b. With such
a measure, we would like to include it directly in our previous regressions as follows:


           Rit = β0 + β1 τit + β2 τit2 + β3 b + β4 (τit × b) + β5 (τit2 × b) + X 0 ξ + µt + γi + εit ,   (3)


where β3 provides the estimated impact of a one unit increases in the “breadth” of the tax
base, and β4 and β5 provide the estimated impact of the interaction between the corporate
tax rate and corporate tax base. Recall, however, that our new tax base measures reflect
changes in the corporate tax base, rather than the tax base itself. That is, when the R&D
tax credit amount is increased (so ∆b < 0), the change in b is recorded as -1 in our data.
To accommodate this aspect of our data, we must redefine our model in first differences as
follows:


           ∆Rit = α1 ∆τit + α2 ∆τit2 + α3 Bit + α4 ∆τit Bit + α5 ∆τit2 Bit + Γ∆Xit + µt + νit            (4)


where Bit is a vector of indicator variables that identify changes to the tax base. As defined
in Section 2, these variables are set equal to +1 when there is a change in tax policy that
broadens the corporate tax base, and are set equal to -1 when there is a change in tax
policy that narrows the corporate tax base. These measures enter directly into equation 4
because they are measured as differences. Unobserved cross-country heterogeneity that is
time-invariant is now removed through first-differencing, rather than via a country-specific
fixed effect as in the previous section. Thus, this specification is similar in spirit to that of


                                                       33
Table (5), with the addition of the base variables.
       Table 8 provides regression results where we include an indicator variable that equals
one only when any base broadening measures were implemented, and an indicator variable
that equals one only when any base narrowing measures were implemented.44 Because we
noted earlier that some countries have implemented tax policies that contain measures to
both broaden the tax base and to reduce the tax base in a given year, both of these indicator
variables could be equal to one for a given observation. In some specifications, we also
include the interaction between the change in corporate tax rates and these aggregate base
change measures. We lose several observations through this specification because the first-
differencing requires that we have data for all included variables in consecutive years for
that observation to be included in the model. In addition, we lose the first observation
for each country. The specifications also include control variables that are time-varying in
first-differences. As before, the standard errors reported are clustered at the country level.
       Overall, these regressions do not allow us to reject the null hypothesis that a change in
corporate tax rates has no effect on corporate tax revenues. Given the lack of a tax rate effect
found in the country-fixed-effects regressions, it is not surprising that the coefficients on the
corporate tax rate variables here are not statistically significant, as both identify this effect
from within-country changes. We do, though, find evidence of profit shifting across countries.
As the weighted average of corporate tax rates in other countries falls, there is a statistically
significant decrease in corporate tax revenues in a country. Country-specific macroeconomic
factors are also found to be important, as there is a strong negative relationship between
changes in unemployment rates and changes in corporate tax revenues relative to GDP.
       The final specifications (4) and (5), which include interaction terms and other macroe-
conomic factors, indicate that, as expected, tax policy changes that broaden the corporate
  44
    This procedure does not account for the relative importance of the various types of base broadeners
in the absence of a defensible and data-feasible weighting approach that would apply across countries and
years. Below we investigate the effect of base changes within each category separately, but even this begs
the question of comparability within a category across countries and years.


                                                   34
tax base are associated with increases in corporate tax revenues. This specification also
indicates that the interaction between the change in the corporate tax rate and the tax
rate squared and tax-base-narrowing measures is statistically significant at the 10% level, al-
though each tax rate variable does not have a significant level effect. Intuitively, when there
are reductions to the corporate tax rate and the base to which the rate is applied becomes
narrower, corporate tax rates fall. However, the coefficient on the interaction between the
corporate tax rate squared and the indicator for a base-narrowing measure indicates that
this effect becomes smaller with larger changes in corporate tax rates. The point estimates
suggest that a decrease in the corporate tax rate when there are also base-broadening policy
measures is associated with an increase in corporate tax revenues. While this effects is not
statistically significant, this result is consistent with the conventional wisdom that policies
that reduce the corporate tax rate while broadening the corporate tax base broadening mea-
sures have been constructed in a way to generate additional corporate tax revenues. All in
all, there is not clear evidence for the hypothesis that a broader tax base reduces tax rates
responsiveness.
   To examine the impact of each of our new tax base measures separately, Table 9 provides
regression results where we include variables that indicate that there was a change in each
tax base measure separately. Each base change variable may take on a value of +1 or -1,
depending on the direction of change. In column (1), we include only the tax base measures,
and in column (2) we include changes to other factors as additional controls. In specifications
(1) and (2), we are implicitly assuming that the effect of an increase to some measure of
the corporate tax base on corporate tax revenues is the same in magnitude as a decrease in
that measure on corporate tax revenues, though opposite in sign. To allow base broadening
and base narrowing changes to have different impacts on corporate tax revenues, columns
(3a)-(3b) present the results of a regression that includes for each tax base measure an
indicator variable for the tax base measure being equal to +1 and an indicator variable for


                                              35
the tax base measure being equal to -1. The variables in column (3a) are in first differences.
As previously discussed, the effect of corporate tax rates on corporate tax revenues may
change with changes to the corporate tax base. In columns (4a)-(4c), we present the results
of a regression that includes as independent variables the tax base measures (defined by
the {-1,0,1} method) and their interactions with the change in corporate tax rate variables,
along with the additional control variables. Column (4a) provides the parameter estimates
of the level effects, column (4b) provides the parameter estimates of the tax base measures
interacted with the change in the corporate tax rate, and column (4c) provides parameter
estimates of the tax base measures interacted with the change in the squared corporate tax
rate.
   Several interesting patterns emerge. One surprising result is that implementing or strength-
ening thin capitalization rules is associated with decreases in corporate tax revenues, al-
though this effect is only marginally significant. The statistical significance of this relation-
ship disappears when the thin capitalization variable is interacted with the change in the
corporate tax rate. Reductions to or the elimination of the R&D credit (indicated by the
R&D indicator being set equal to +1) appears to increase corporate tax revenues. This re-
sult is expected as a reduction in a tax credit should increase tax liabilities, ceteris paribus.
However, this short-term increase in revenues may be at least partially offset in the future
due to foregone research and development opportunities. While the taxation of foreign cor-
porations is not statistically significant when entered into the model directly, this masks
an asymmetry in responses depending on the direction of the change. A reduction in the
degree to which foreign corporations are taxed corresponds to an increase in corporate tax
revenues. This relationship is expected if these types of policies are successful at attracting
foreign investment, as many policy descriptions indicate. An extension or expansion to loss
carry-forward allowances is associated with an increase in corporate tax revenues, although
this effect is only marginally significant. None of the other tax base measures is individually


                                               36
statistically significant in the level specifications.
   In the specification that includes interaction terms between changes in the corporate tax
rate and the tax base measures, 4(b), other tax base measures appear to be important.
Measures that increase the tax liabilities of foreign entities are associated with increases
in corporate tax revenues. This relationship is intuitive; the increased taxation of foreign
entities often reflects an extension of the definition of a resident company for corporate
income tax purposes. Thus, this broadening of the set of corporations that are subject to
the corporate income tax increases tax revenues, at least in the contemporaneous period. A
surprising result is that an increase in credits for foreign taxes paid is associated with an
increase in corporate tax revenues, though this relationship is concave.
   The impact of a tax rate or tax base change may not happen immediately, as businesses
may take time to adjust to new tax policy. In addition, corporations may make adjustments
to their business policies in anticipation of future legislative changes that have been passed
but not yet enacted. To explore the potential dynamics of responses, Table 10 provides
regression results that include a lead and a lag of the tax rate and tax base measures.
The first column provides parameter estimates for the variables when the contemporaneous
values are entered, the second column provides the lagged values, while the third provides
the parameter estimates when values are computed one year ahead.
   As we have seen before, once we account for time-invariant heterogeneity across countries
and changes to the corporate tax base, we do not find compelling evidence of a strong
behavioral response of corporate tax revenues to the statutory tax rate. The relationship
between changes to the corporate tax rate and changes to corporate tax revenues relative to
GDP are not statistically significant. There is some evidence of responses to changes in the
corporate tax base, some of which vary over time. The strengthening of thin capitalization
rules is again associated with decreases in corporate tax revenues both in the year that the
rules are enhanced and in the following year. Previously (see Table 9), we found that the


                                                 37
enhanced taxation of foreign companies led to an increase in corporate tax revenues. Now,
when we allow the effect of the treatment of foreign corporations to change over time, we see
that this effect may be driven by intertemporal income shifting. The negative relationship
between a future enhancement in the taxation of foreign corporations and corporate revenues
implies that foreign corporations may shift their profits away from a country in anticipation
of an increased tax burden. The positive relationship between reductions to the R&D credit
and corporate tax revenues is no longer statistically significant, although the magnitude of
the effect is roughly the same. Thus, there may be some intertermporal shifting of corporate
profits because of the R&D credit, although this is not strongly supported at least in a
two-year window.
   Our results from models that incorporate new measures of changes to the corporate
tax base provide further evidence that the large behavioral response of corporate tax rev-
enues (relative to GDP) to corporate tax rates found in the previous literature likely results
from spurious correlation between these two variables. Thus, arguments that corporate tax
revenues could be increased by lowering the statutory corporate tax rate without any adjust-
ments to the breadth of the corporate tax base are flawed. The complexity of the legislation
of corporate tax policy has made it difficult to identify a comprehensive measure of the cor-
porate tax base for studies on corporate taxation, and previous studies have had to use only
loose proxies for the corporate tax base. Using our newly constructed measures of changes
to the corporate tax base, we find that certain aspects of the corporate tax base, namely the
treatment of foreign corporations and the generosity of the R&D credit, significantly impact
corporate tax revenues.
   Although our analysis provides a step towards a better understanding of the nature
of the effect of corporate tax rates and corporate tax bases on corporate tax revenues, it is
limited by these measures being indicator variables that do not account for their quantitative
importance. Ideally, we would like to have continuous measures of each of these components


                                             38
of the corporate tax base in levels that are comparable across countries to provide an in-
depth analysis of the interaction between corporate tax rate and these different aspects of
the corporate tax base over time, and how these have translated into changes in corporate
tax revenues.



7     Conclusions

Citing previous studies of the responsiveness of the corporate tax base to the corporate tax
rate, some have argued that corporate tax revenues could be increased in the U.S. by cutting
the tax rates. In this paper, we first corroborate the findings of Gravelle and Hungerford
(2007) that the statistical relationship does not survive when only within-country changes
are studied, thus eliminating spurious correlation due to unobserved country-specific effects
on both tax rates and revenue. Next, we note that an important aspect of the corporate tax
system, the breadth of the corporate tax base, has been largely ignored in these studies due
to data limitations, causing previous estimates to suffer from an additional bias. To address
this issue, we have compiled a new database that documents changes to key components of
the corporate tax base definition and enforcement, and calculate the relationship between
changes to the corporate tax rate and changes to the corporate tax base. To our knowledge,
this is the first systematic analysis of this relationship. We discover that the conventional
wisdom that tax rate decreases are generally accompanied by base-broadening reforms is
only weakly evident in the data.
    Finding that changes to the corporate tax rate are often coupled with changes to the
corporate tax base, we re-estimate the relationship between the corporate tax rate and
corporate tax revenues, taking into account changes to the corporate tax base. We find
that correcting for omitted variable bias, corporate tax rates no longer have a statistically
significant relationship with corporate tax revenues. We do find evidence that tax policies



                                             39
that broaden the tax base are associated with increases in corporate tax revenues. However,
it is difficult to link particular corporate tax base changes to changes in tax revenue, perhaps
in part because the short-term revenue response of increased investment is generally negative.
Future research should endeavor to estimate these mechanisms more accurately.




                                              40
References

Altshuler, Rosanne and Harry Grubert, “Taxpayer Responses to Competitive Tax
    Policies and Tax Policy Responses to Competitive Taxpayers: Recent Evidence,” Tax
    Notes International, 2004, 34, 1349–1362.

Auerbach, Alan, “Who Bears the Corporate Tax? A Review of What We Know,” in James
    Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 20, MIT Press, 2006, pp. 1–40.

     and James Poterba, “Why Have Corporate Tax Revenues Declined?,” in Lawrence
    Summers, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 1, MIT Press, 1987, pp. 1–28.

Beck, Thorston, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine, “A New Database on Finan-
    cial Development and Structure,” World Bank Economic Review, 2000, 14, 597–605.

Becker, Johannes and Clemens Fuest, “Optimal Tax Policy when Firms are Interna-
    tionally Mobile,” International Tax and Public Finance, 2011, 18, 580–604.

Brill, Alex and Kevin Hassett, “Revenue-Maximizing Corporate Income Taxes: The
    Laffer Curve in OECD Countries,” 2007. AEI Working Paper No. 137.

Chetty, Raj, “‘Is the Taxable Income Elasticity Sufficient to Calculate Deadweight Loss?
    The Implications of Evasion and Avoidance,” American Economic Journal: Economic
    Policy, 2009, 1 (2), 31–52.

Clausing, Kimberly, “Corporate Tax Revenues in OECD Countries,” International Tax
    and Public Finance, 2007, 14, 115–133.

Desai, Mehir, C. Fritz Foley, and James Hines Jr., “Chains of Ownership, Tax
    Competition, and the Location Decision of Multinational Firms,” in H. Herrmann and
    R. Lipsey, eds., Foreign Direct Investment in the Real and Financial Sector of Industrial
    Countries, Springer-Verlag, 2003, pp. 61–98.

                                             41
    ,        , and      , “The Demand for Tax Haven Operations,” Journal of Public Eco-
    nomics, 2006, 90 (3), 513–531.

Desai, Mihir, C. Fritz Foley, and James Hines Jr., “Do Tax Havens Direct Economic
    Activity?,” Economic Letters, 2006, 90, 219–224.

Devereux, Michael, “Developments in the Taxation of Corporate Profit in the OECD
    Since 1965: Rates, Bases, and Revenues,” 2006. Mimeo.

        and Rachel Griffith, “Evaluating Tax Policy for Location Decisions,” International
    Tax and Public Finance, 2003, 10, 107–126.

    ,        , and Alexander Klemm, “Corporate Income Tax Reforms and International
    Tax Competition,” Economic Policy, 2002, 35, 451–495.

Feldstein, Martin, “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study
    of the 1986 Tax Reform Act,” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103, 551–572.

Gordon, Roger and Joel Slemrod, “Are ‘Real Responses to Taxes Simply Income Shift-
    ing between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases?,” in Joel Slemrod, ed., Does Atlas
    Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, Russell Sage Foundation,
    2002, pp. 240–280.

Gravelle, Jane and Thomas Hungerford, “Corporate Tax Reform: Issues for Congress,”
    2007. Congressional Research Service Report RL34229.

Gruber, Jonathan and Joshua Rauh, “How Elastic is the Corporate Income Tax Base?,”
    in Alan Auerbach, James Hines, Jr., and Joel Slemrod, eds., Taxing Corporate Income
    in the 21st Century, Cambridge University Press, 2007, pp. 140–163.

Hall, Robert and Dale Jorgenson, “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior,” The American
    Economic Review, 1967, 57 (3), 391–414.

                                             42
International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation, Annual Report–International Bureau
    of Fiscal Documentation, International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation, 1980-2004.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, “Tax Bases, Tax Rates and the Elasticity of Reported Income,”
    Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89, 2093–2119.

Robinson, Leslie and Joel Slemrod, “Understanding Multidimensional Tax Systems,”
    International Tax and Public Finance, 2012, 19 (2), 237–267.

Romer, Christina and David Romer, “A Narrative Analysis of Interwar Tax Changes,”
    2012. University of California Working Paper.

Saez, Emmanuel, “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Income: A Panel Study of ‘Bracket
    Creep’,” Journal of Public Economics, 2003, 87, 1231–1258.

    , Joel Slemrod, and Seth Giertz, “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect
    to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2012, 50,
    3–50.

Slemrod, Joel, “Methodological Issues in Measuring and Interpreting Taxable Income Elas-
    ticities,” National Tax Journal, 1998, 51 (4), 773–788.

     and Wojciech Kopczuk, “The Optimal Elasticity of Taxable Income,” Journal of
    Public Economics, 2002, 84 (1), 91–112.




                                            43
                               Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                Mean                  Std Dev     Min.      Max.      N
Corp. tax revenues/GDP           2.9                    (1.6)       0.3     12.9     775
Corporate tax rate              34.0                    (9.7)      8.5      56.0     778
Personal tax rate               44.3                   (14.3)      7.0      93.0     765
Classical dividend tax system    0.3                    (0.5)       0.0      1.0     812
Imputation dividend tax system   0.3                    (0.5)       0.0      1.0     812
Mixed dividend tax system        0.0                    (0.1)       0.0      1.0     812
Other dividend tax system        0.1                    (0.3)       0.0      1.0     812
PDV of depreciation allowance    0.8                    (0.1)       0.6      1.0     482
GDP per capita                 20527.2               (14981.8)   1114.0   117954.7   824
GDP growth rate                  2.8                    (2.7)     -14.6     11.5     814
Population growth rate           0.6                    (0.5)      -0.6      2.5     841
Urban population percentage     72.7                   (11.8)      42.8     97.4     841
Unemployment rate                7.4                    (4.0)       1.5     23.9     726
Profit rate                      0.4                    (0.1)      0.2       0.5     291
Corporate share                  0.6                    (0.1)       0.3      0.7     293
FDI stock/GDP                    0.4                    (1.0)       0.0     10.1     759
FDI flow/GDP                     0.1                    (0.3)      -0.6      5.6     765
Central bank assets/GDP          0.1                    (0.1)       0.0      0.9     760
Stock market cap./GDP            0.6                    (0.6)       0.0      4.3     583
Observations                     841
Sources discussed in Section III of the text.




                                                44
          Table 2: Frequency of tax base changes
                                    -1 +1                 0
R&D credit                          16    4              705
Foreign tax credit                  14    7              704
Foreign company taxation            21 16                688
Evasion                              0   78              647
Investment credit                   36 18                671
Accelerated depreciation            22    9              694
Loss carry back                      7    1              717
Loss carry forward                  18    8              699
Thin capitalization rules           0    19              705
CFC legislation                      0   14              711
Other rate changes                  36 40                649
Other broadening measures           15 34                676
Total                              185 248               291
Any base broadeners         190
Any base narrowers          145
Any base change             289
No base changes             436
Source: Authors’ compilation of information from IBFD Annual Re-
ports, 1980-2002, 2004.
Note: Country-years may have both base-broadeners and base-
narrowers, so the number of country-years with any base change is
less than the number of country-years with base-broadeners plus the
number of country-years with base-narrowers.




                                45
          Table 3: Frequency of tax base changes           accompanying rate changes
Change in corporate tax rate            Decrease            Increase No change       Total
Change in corporate tax base measure -1 + 1                 -1 +1 -1         +1   -1     +1
R&D credit                              3      0             0    1   12      3   15       4
Foreign tax credit                      1      2             2    0   9       5   13       7
Foreign company taxation                4      1             2    1   11     12   17      14
Evasion                                 0     14             0    9   0      53   0       67
Investment credit                       4      2             3    0   28     15   35      17
Accelerated depreciation                4      0             1    1   16      8   21       9
Loss carry back                         3      0             0    0   4       1   7        1
Loss carry forward                      5      1             0    0   12      7   17       8
Thin capitalization rules               0      7             0    1   0      11   1       19
CFC legislation                         0      5             0    2   0       7   0       14
Other rate changes                      10     4             3    2   20     28   33      34
Other broadening measures               7     10             0    4   7      19   14      33
Total                                   41 54               11 21 107 172 143            230
Change in corporate tax rate            Decrease            Increase No change       Total
Base broadened (+1)                        37                  17        132          186
Base narrowed (-1)                         33                  9          96          135
Any base change                            60                  23        197          280
No base change                             68                  16        299          383
Total rate changes                         129                 38        495          662
Source: Authors’ compilation of information from IBFD Annual Reports, 1980-2002, 2004.
Note: There are only 662 country-years here, compared to 725 in Table 2 because the data are missing
some consecutive years of corporate tax rate data. Country-years may have both base-broadeners and
base-narrowers, so the number of country-years with any base change is less than the number of country-
years with base-broadeners plus the number of country-years with base-narrowers.




Table 4: Frequency of country-years with base-broadening and base-narrowing measures
                       Number of      Number of base broadeners
                     base narrowers 0        1    2 3      4
                            0         436 112 27 4         1
                            1          82 24 8 4           0
                            2          10    6    0 0      0
                            3          5     2    0 2      0
                            4          2     0    0 0      0
                         Sources: Authors’ compilation of information
                         from IBFD Annual Reports, 1980-2002, 2004.




                                                  46
                   Table 5: Tax Rate and Tax Base Changes, by Country
                                        Frequencies                                         Counts
                                                                                       Base        Base
Country        dt>0          dt<0     dt=0    dBase>0      dBase<0     dBase=0      broadeners narrowers
Australia        2             4       18       10            10          9             16          15
Austria          1             1       22        9            7          11             11          10
Belgium          0             5       19         8           4           13            11           4
Canada           0             5       19        7             2          16             9           4
Czech Republic   1             7        6         3           5           17             3           6
Denmark          2             6       16        5            2           18            8            2
Finland          3             4       17        6             1         18              6           2
France           1             6        17      11             9          8             13          12
Germany          2             5       17        8             8         12             14          16
Greece           4             4        16       5             2          19             6           2
Hungary          0             5        11       8             7          12            12           8
Iceland          1             5        4        0             0         25              0           0
Ireland          1             9        14       6             5          15             6           5
Italy            2             3       19        9             9         12             15           9
Japan            2             5       17       11             5          12            16           9
Korea            1             4       19        8             6         13             10           7
Luxembourg       0             8        16       3            12         12              3          13
Netherlands      1             6        17      12             8         10             13          11
New Zealand      2             1       21         5           1           19            5            1
Norway           1             0       23        3             4          20             3           4
Poland           0             6        8        3             5          18             4           5
Portugal         4             8       12        8             8         12             10           9
Slovak Rep.      0             5         7       0             4          21             0           5
Spain            1             0       23        8            10          9             12          13
Sweden           1             4       19        9             4         13              9           4
Switzerland      1             2        21       0             0          25             0           0
Turkey           3             2        17       4             2          19             4           2
United Kingdom   0             7       17        12            1          12            15           1
United States    1             2       21        9             4         16             14           6
Total           38            129      473      190          145         436           248         185
Sources: Authors’ compilation of information from IBFD Annual Reports, 1980-2002, 2004 and tax rate data as
described in Section III.




                                                47
      Table 6: Replications of key results in Clausing (2007) and Devereux (2006)
                                   (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)           (6)
VARIABLES                          Dependent variable: Corporate tax revenue/GDP

Corp. tax rate                    0.276***    1.285*     0.908**    0.235***     0.368     0.214
                                   (0.072)    (0.704)    (0.344)     (0.075)   (0.700)    (0.685)
Corp. tax rate (sq)              -0.455***   -2.094**   -1.627**   -0.401***    -0.786     -0.735
                                   (0.131)    (0.928)    (0.614)     (0.130)   (1.044)    (1.010)
Worldwide                           0.243                             0.318
                                   (0.377)                           (0.361)
GDP growth rate                     0.057                             0.056
                                   (0.036)                           (0.036)
Unemp. rate                       -0.086**                          -0.089**
                                   (0.040)                           (0.039)
Log GDP-per-cap.                   0.558*                            0.510*
                                   (0.275)                           (0.265)
Individual tax - corporate tax       0.002
                                   (0.015)
International * Tax                  0.025                            0.058
                                   (0.065)                          (0.101)
International * Tax sq.             -0.000                           -0.001
                                   (0.001)                          (0.002)
Big * Tax                         -0.090**                           0.276
                                   (0.041)                          (0.164)
Big * Tax sq.                      0.002**                           -0.003
                                   (0.001)                          (0.002)
Other corp. tax rates                         -0.688                            -0.976
                                             (0.582)                           (0.748)
Depreciation x tax                            -0.014    -0.010**                -0.003     -0.001
                                             (0.009)     (0.004)               (0.009)    (0.009)
Depreciation x tax (sq)                      0.023*     0.018**                  0.006      0.006
                                             (0.011)     (0.007)               (0.013)    (0.013)
Depreciation x other tax rates                 0.004                             0.007
                                             (0.005)                           (0.007)
Personal tax rate                                        -0.064      0.003                 -0.085
                                                        (0.125)     (0.015)               (0.132)
Depreciation x pers. tax rate                             0.001                             0.001
                                                        (0.002)                           (0.002)
International                                                        -0.612
                                                                    (0.932)
Big                                                                -6.595**
                                                                    (2.939)
Depreciation                                                                     -0.334     -0.179
                                                                                (0.318)    (0.186)
Constant                         -6.042**     19.471     0.784      -4.905*     45.357     14.622
                                  (2.916)    (17.862)   (0.486)     (2.800)    (31.795)   (14.363)

Implied revenue-max. rate          30.1       27.5      29.6       29.3        27.8         29.8
Observations                       665        475       472        665         475          472
R-squared                         0.368      0.266     0.260      0.379       0.275        0.263
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                               48
                        Table 7: Regressions with country fixed-effects
                                   (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)           (6)
VARIABLES                          Dependent variable: Corporate tax revenue/GDP

Corp. tax rate                    0.121*     0.773*      -0.097      0.040      0.124      -0.065
                                 (0.059)    (0.424)     (0.176)    (0.042)     (0.490)    (0.445)
Corp. tax rate (sq)              -0.120*    -0.897*      -0.118     -0.070      -0.010     -0.159
                                 (0.068)    (0.473)     (0.399)    (0.063)     (0.625)    (0.660)
GDP growth rate                    0.044                             0.042
                                 (0.027)                           (0.027)
Unemp. rate                       -0.045                            -0.036
                                 (0.031)                           (0.030)
Log GDP-per-cap.                   0.175                            -0.034
                                 (0.539)                           (0.602)
Individual tax - corporate tax     0.038
                                 (0.027)
International * Tax                0.016                            0.082**
                                 (0.022)                            (0.035)
International * Tax sq.           -0.000                           -0.002**
                                 (0.001)                            (0.001)
Big * Tax                         -0.003                             0.200
                                 (0.022)                            (0.135)
Big * Tax sq.                      0.001                             -0.002
                                 (0.001)                            (0.002)
Dividend system=classical          0.233     0.509*      0.392      0.524**      0.512*     0.393
                                 (0.247)    (0.283)     (0.310)     (0.240)     (0.285)    (0.310)
Dividend system=imputation         0.287    0.686**     0.707*      0.641**     0.708**    0.707*
                                 (0.235)    (0.319)     (0.353)     (0.270)     (0.318)    (0.359)
Central bank assets/GDP           -0.359   -12.166**   -9.797**      -0.369   -12.463**   -9.800**
                                 (1.877)    (4.883)     (4.215)     (1.994)     (4.741)    (4.230)
Other corp. tax rates                       -0.637*                            -0.806**
                                            (0.357)                             (0.369)
Depreciation x tax                          -0.010*      0.001                   -0.002    0.001
                                            (0.005)     (0.002)                 (0.006)   (0.006)
Depreciation x tax (sq)                      0.012*      0.002                    0.000    0.002
                                            (0.006)     (0.004)                 (0.008)   (0.008)
Depreciation x other tax rates               0.005                               0.007*
                                            (0.003)                             (0.004)
Personal tax rate                                      0.177***     0.048                 0.178***
                                                        (0.060)    (0.029)                 (0.061)
Depreciation x pers. tax rate                          -0.002***                          -0.002**
                                                        (0.001)                            (0.001)
International                                                      -0.828*
                                                                   (0.433)
Big                                                                 -3.437
                                                                   (2.555)
Depreciation                                                                   -0.232*     0.009
                                                                               (0.128)    (0.113)
Constant                          -3.074    14.016       0.650      -1.234    31.628**     0.003
                                 (6.201)   (10.667)     (1.908)    (6.809)    (12.417)    (8.097)

Implied revenue-max. rate         34.5      75.1        36.3       28.5        76.1         36.6
Observations                      627       449         449        537         449          449
R-squared                        0.400     0.355
                                               49      0.402      0.396       0.361        0.402
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
         Table 8: First-difference regressions with aggregate tax base measures
                                       (1)      (2)        (3)             (4)           (5)
VARIABLES                             Dependent variable: Corporate tax revenue/GDP

Change in corp. tax rate               -0.004    -0.004    -0.0004       0.001           0.005
                                      (0.013)   (0.013)    (0.013)      (0.013)        (0.012)
Change in corp. tax rate (sq)           0.009     0.009    -0.0001     -0.000004        -0.013
                                      (0.021)   (0.020)    (0.019)      (0.025)        (0.026)
Some corp. tax base broadeners                   -0.004     0.069*      -0.0001        0.081**
                                                (0.035)    (0.039)      (0.036)        (0.040)
Some corp. tax base narrowers                     0.050      0.056       0.054           0.065
                                                (0.041)    (0.046)      (0.043)        (0.050)
Change in personal tax rate                                  0.010                       0.011
                                                           (0.014)                     (0.015)
Change in other country corp. rates                         0.045*                      0.047*
                                                           (0.025)                     (0.026)
Change in GDP growth                                         0.001                       0.001
                                                           (0.011)                     (0.011)
Change in unemployment rate                               -0.104***                   -0.105***
                                                           (0.020)                     (0.020)
Change in central bank assets/GDP                           -0.921                      -0.960
                                                           (1.191)                     (1.210)
Change in rate x broadened                                               -0.131         -0.146
                                                                        (0.102)        (0.098)
Change in rate (sq) x broadened                                           0.198          0.233
                                                                        (0.139)        (0.139)
Change in rate x narrowers                                                0.076         0.098*
                                                                        (0.056)        (0.057)
Change in rate (sq) x narrowers                                          -0.101        -0.123*
                                                                        (0.074)        (0.068)

Observations                           614       614       526            614            526
R-squared                             0.000     0.002     0.065          0.007          0.075
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                50
             Table 9: First-difference regressions with individual tax base measures
                                          (1)           (2)         (3a)        (3b)       (4a)         (4b)        (4c)
                                        ∆ Corp.       ∆ Corp.                             Level                   rate (sq)
VARIABLES                             Tax Revenue   Tax Revenue      +1          -1       effect     x∆tax rate    x∆tax

Change in corp. tax rate                 -0.006        -0.003       -0.003                 -0.003
                                        (0.014)       (0.015)      (0.013)                (0.016)
Change in corp. tax rate (sq)            0.010         0.002         0.003                  0.001
                                        (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.019)                (0.023)
Other broadening measures                -0.065        0.061         0.088     0.062       -1.001       0.070       -0.106
                                        (0.080)       (0.064)      (0.090)    (0.094)     (0.709)      (0.043)     (0.063)
Other rate changes                        0.035        0.060         0.134     0.008       -0.787       0.046       -0.059
                                        (0.051)       (0.056)      (0.089)    (0.077)     (0.773)      (0.042)     (0.053)
CFC                                       0.173        0.104         0.108                  2.694       -0.146       0.196
                                        (0.122)       (0.119)      (0.120)                (1.662)      (0.091)     (0.123)
Thin capitalization                     -0.303*        -0.205      -0.285*                  2.613       -0.128       0.135
                                        (0.175)       (0.153)      (0.161)                (1.854)      (0.109)     (0.157)
Loss carry forward                       -0.058        -0.045        0.265    0.200*       -0.009       -0.003       0.005
                                        (0.115)       (0.120)      (0.204)    (0.110)     (0.692)      (0.050)     (0.075)
Loss carry back                          -0.021        0.028        -0.295     -0.153      -1.664       0.109       -0.158
                                        (0.080)       (0.109)      (0.226)    (0.172)     (1.948)      (0.109)     (0.144)
Accelerated depreciation                  0.015        0.076         0.086     -0.114      -1.028       0.057       -0.069
                                        (0.065)       (0.074)      (0.122)    (0.105)     (1.359)      (0.069)     (0.084)
Investment credits                        0.021        -0.005        0.069     0.069        0.481       -0.024       0.029
                                        (0.047)       (0.066)      (0.081)    (0.105)     (0.559)      (0.035)     (0.051)
Anti-evasion measures                    -0.033        0.008        -0.022                  0.016       -0.001       0.004
                                        (0.063)       (0.064)      (0.064)                (0.927)      (0.055)     (0.080)
Taxation of foreign comp.                -0.025        -0.070        0.185    0.273***    5.821**     -0.285**     0.327**
                                        (0.067)       (0.083)      (0.147)     (0.085)    (2.561)      (0.126)     (0.153)
Foreign tax credit                       -0.097        -0.092        0.121      0.175    -9.802***    0.502***    -0.636***
                                        (0.117)       (0.126)      (0.184)     (0.121)    (2.368)      (0.130)     (0.171)
R&D credit                              0.199**       0.195**     0.241***    -0.216**    3.933**      -0.169*      0.180*
                                        (0.092)       (0.079)      (0.078)     (0.086)    (1.810)      (0.085)     (0.100)
Change in personal tax rate                            0.009         0.011                  0.010
                                                      (0.014)      (0.015)                (0.015)
Change in other country corp. rates                    0.028         0.044                  0.036
                                                      (0.024)      (0.026)                (0.026)
Change in GDP growth                                   0.001        -0.002                  0.005
                                                      (0.011)      (0.012)                (0.011)
Change in unemployment rate                          -0.100***    -0.109***              -0.098***
                                                      (0.021)      (0.021)                (0.023)
Change in central bank assets/GDP                      -1.690       -1.253                 -1.624
                                                      (1.097)      (1.067)                (1.325)

Observations                              614           526          526                    526
R-squared                                0.018         0.071        0.101                  0.102
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. ∗ ∗ ∗p¡0.01, ∗ ∗ p¡0.05, ∗p¡0.1.




                                                       51
             Table 10: First-difference regression with dynamics
                                             (1a)           (1b)          (1c)
VARIABLES                             ∆ Corp. Rev./GDP       t-1          t+1

Change in corp. tax rate                    0.0001          -0.003        0.002
                                           (0.005)         (0.008)      (0.005)
Other broadening measures                   0.085            0.048        0.021
                                           (0.075)         (0.046)      (0.051)
Other rate changes                          0.077           -0.057       -0.039
                                           (0.058)         (0.039)      (0.051)
CFC                                          0.161          0.290*       -0.009
                                           (0.128)         (0.160)      (0.180)
Thin capitalization                        -0.344*         -0.315*        0.082
                                           (0.176)         (0.160)      (0.146)
Loss carry forward                          -0.004          -0.035        0.011
                                           (0.130)         (0.087)      (0.072)
Loss carry back                             -0.045          -0.094       -0.036
                                           (0.160)         (0.130)      (0.109)
Accelerated depreciation                     0.062           0.124        0.046
                                           (0.070)         (0.107)      (0.080)
Investment credits                           0.026         -0.121*        0.037
                                           (0.079)         (0.071)      (0.092)
Anti-evasion measures                       -0.015           0.037        0.052
                                           (0.069)         (0.062)      (0.086)
Taxation of foreign comp.                   -0.068           0.104     -0.191***
                                           (0.090)         (0.098)      (0.049)
Foreign tax credit                          -0.127         -0.126*        0.003
                                           (0.138)         (0.067)      (0.139)
R&D credit                                   0.183          -0.028       -0.070
                                           (0.113)         (0.073)      (0.126)
Change in personal tax rate                  0.012
                                           (0.016)
Change in other country corp. rates          0.040
                                           (0.032)
Change in GDP growth                         0.001
                                           (0.011)
Change in unemployment rate               -0.096***
                                           (0.024)
Change in central bank assets/GDP           -1.955
                                           (1.275)

Observations                                  495
R-squared                                    0.114
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                        52
A     Data Appendix

In this Data Appendix, we provide details of the methodology employed to translate sum-
maries of tax policy changes into indicator variables for types of changes to the corporate
income tax base. These indicator variables are derived from summaries of important tax
policies published in the International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation’s Annual Report
publications. For each of the variables, changes that broaden the corporate tax base are
coded as +1 while changes that shrink the tax base are coded as -1.

              Table 11: Description of corporate tax base indicator variables
      Research and development tax credit
      -1   Research and/or development credit (or deduction) was made available or ex-
           tended; Additional deduction of research costs was permitted.
      +1 Research and/or development credit (or deduction) was reduced.

      Credits for foreign taxes paid
      -1   Foreign tax credit was introduced or increased; the foreign tax credit became
           easier to obtain; ability to carry forward or back the foreign tax credit was made
           available or extended; losses could be used to offset foreign source income.
      +1 The scope for the foreign tax credit was reduced or denied; Limitation to the
           offset of foreign-source losses (Germany 1982).

      Tax treatment of foreign companies
      -1   Tax exemptions, deductibility of costs, or other investment incentives aimed at
           attracting foreign investment or multinational headquarter placement; Limited
           taxation or tax-exempt status of (some) non-resident companies; Liberalization
           of inward foreign investment; Reduced corporate taxes on companies with a
           foreign holding; Holdings in foreign corporations granted new exemptions (Ger-
           many 1993); Lower tax rates extended to EU companies where previously only
           applied to resident companies (Greece 2000); Foreign company entry made easier
           (Korea 1994).
      +1 Tax incentives to foreign investors or foreign companies were reduced or with-
           drawn; Benefits to dual resident companies denied; Certain tax rules extended
           to non-resident companies; Definition of a resident corporation was expanded;
           Taxes on income derived from subsidiaries in tax privileged countries was im-
           posed; Limited deduction of expenses of branch offices of non-resident com-
           panies; Final withholding on non-resident corporations increased; Deduction
           for expenses between resident and non-EC companies were disallowed (Italy
           1991/2).




                                                53
Policies that target evasion or avoidance by companies
-1    Increased efforts to combat evasion or avoidance, unless specifically directed
      at the individual level only, including provisions addressing international profit
      shifting, provisions to curtail the underground economy and a temporary tax
      amnesty to encourage the repatriation of capital illegally held abroad.
Investments credits or other tax incentives to promote investment
-1    Investment allowance/premium/deduction was introduced, increased or ex-
      tended; Exclusion of certain investments from taxation; Tax holiday for invest-
      ment projects or capital investments; incentives to promote investment; Safe
      harbor leasing rules for investment credits.
+1 Investment premium or deduction was abolished, reduced or restricted; Compa-
      nies were no longer allowed to allocate profits to a tax-free investment reserve.

Accelerated depreciation or other depreciation allowances
-1   Increased depreciation rates; Depreciation period shortened; Accelerated write-
     off of capital expenditures; Threshold for depreciation was increased; Special
     depreciation allowances granted; Free depreciation scheme introduced.
+1 Use of accelerated depreciation was reduced or abolished; Depreciation rates
     were reduced; Depreciation period was extended.

Other tax rates that may affect the corporate tax base
-1   Additional tax on business: Exceptional company profits or extraordinary busi-
     ness income (Hungary 1998; Portugal 1987); Excess accumulated income (Korea
     1994); Municipal business tax on capital (Luxembourg 1998); Assets tax (Mex-
     ico 1995); Special temporary corporation tax (Japan 1994); Branch profits tax
     (Australia, 1987); Enterprise tax (Japan 1997). Company formation tax: (Hun-
     gary 1998). Capital taxes: Property transfer tax (Austria 1987); Transfer of
     capital (Spain 1980); Income from the increase in invested capital (Italy 1998).
     Development land tax: (UK 1985). Specific business types: Shipping (Portugal
     1991); Foreign technology licensors (Korea 1988).
+1 Additional tax on corporations: Surtax on corporations or surcharge on corpo-
     rate income tax (France 1995 1997; Germany 1991; Turkey 1995); Large cor-
     poration tax on capital (Canada 1989, 1990); Flat tax on tax-reserves of com-
     panies (Greece 1998); Special temporary corporation tax (Japan 1991); Special
     corporate rate on exempt entities (Spain 1987); Branch profits tax (US 1986).
     Specific business types: Large banks, investment funds or financial institutions
     (Austria 1981; Denmark 1989; France 1981; Korea 1982); Life insurance com-
     panies (Australia 1988; Germany 1993; Sweden 1986); Oil companies or oil
     windfall profits tax (France 1980, 1981, 2000; Norway 1980; US 1986); Manu-
     facturing profits tax on computer software and data processing firms (Ireland
     1984); Telecommunications (Turkey 1999). Capital taxes: Immovable property
     (Belgium 1994, Germany 1982; Spain 1991); Movable capital (Portugal 1980,
     1983). Surcharge on the employment fund: Luxembourg 1991, 1994.




                                          54
Loss carry-forward
-1   Loss-carry forward was extended or expanded; Limits for carry-forward loss
     amounts were removed.
+1 Ability to carry forward losses was suspended or restricted.

Loss carry-back
-1   Loss carry-back was introduced.
+1 Ability to carry back losses was restricted.

Thin capitalization rules
+1 Thin capitalization rules were introduced or strengthened (widened); Adjust-
     ments were made to thin capitalization rules (assumed to be positive); debt-to-
     equity ratio was reduced.

Controlled foreign company legislation
+1 CFC legislation was introduced or redefined.

Other changes to the corporate tax base
-1   Eased tax burden of companies generally (Netherlands, 1983)
     New deduction or exemption permitted: Losses from disposal of fixed assets
     (Czech Republic 1995); Investment abroad (France 1988); Payroll (France 1998);
     Cost of issuing new shares (Germany 1984); New employees (Ireland 1982);
     Bonuses to directors (Portugal 1999); Undistributed profits that are wholly rein-
     vested (Greece 1988); Repatriated earnings (Ireland 1988); Income from overseas
     services if not taxed in the source country (Australia, 1980)
     Corporate income tax incentives in the form of a credit (Hungary 2002)
     Participation exemption under the corporate income tax was extended (Luxem-
     bourg 1988)
     Level of income below which a proportion tax reduction is allowed was raised
     (Finland 1984)
+1 Measures to or emphasis on broadening the tax base, without mention of specific
     provisions (Hungary 1994; Japan 1998; Mexico 1987; US 1982; Turkey 1981)
     Taxable base for lower rate was increased (Korea 1989)
     Previous tax incentives restricted or abolished (Poland 1992)
     Credits reformulated resulting in a sharp decrease in benefits (Spain 1988)
     Certain provisions replaced, expected to keep total tax burden unchanged (Swe-
     den 1989)
     Loss of some deduction (Australia 1985; Netherlands 1989); Allowances re-
     stricted (Hungary 1991); Expenses were no longer recognized as business-related
     costs (Hungary 1993); Inventory deduction abolished (Netherlands, 1986)
     Extension of employment deduction for small and medium business; reduction
     of certain tax expenditures (Belgium 1984)
     Certain tax exemptions to promote growth of SME (Belgium 1998)
     Deductions for corporate entertainment restricted (Japan 1994)
     Investment deduction for employee profit sharing schemes eliminated (France
     1985)
     Maximum amount allowed to be credited to bad debt reserve were reduced
     (Japan 1982)
                                           55
     Full carry-over of tax benefits from international or contractual agreements (Por-
     tugal 1989)
     Capital allowances phased out (UK 1984); Corporate AMT extended (US 1986)
