                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 ENDOGENOUS DIVIDEND DYNAMICS AND THE TERM STRUCTURE OF DIVIDEND
                             STRIPS

                                          Frederico Belo
                                      Pierre Collin-Dufresne
                                       Robert S. Goldstein

                                       Working Paper 18450
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18450


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2012




We thank Ravi Bansal, Jules van Binsbergen, Murray Carlson, Long Chen, John Cochrane, Darrell
Duffie, Adlai Fisher, Dana Kiku, Ralph Koijen, Ivan Shaliastovich, Jessica Wachter, Jianfeng Yu and
seminar participants at the University of Pennsylvania (Wharton), University of Minnesota, University
of British Columbia (Sauder), and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (Kenan-Flager) for
many helpful comments. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Frederico Belo, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Endogenous Dividend Dynamics and the Term Structure of Dividend Strips
Frederico Belo, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S. Goldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 18450
October 2012
JEL No. G0,G00,G1,G10,G12

                                             ABSTRACT

Many leading asset pricing models predict that the term structures of expected returns and volatilities
on dividend strips are strongly upward sloping. Yet the empirical evidence suggests otherwise. This
discrepancy can be reconciled if these models replace their exogenously specified dividend dynamics
with processes that are derived endogenously from capital structure policies that generate stationary
leverage ratios. Under this policy, shareholders are being forced to divest (invest) when leverage is
low (high), which shifts risk from long-horizon to short-horizon dividend strips. This framework also
generates stock volatility that is higher than long-horizon dividend volatility, even with constant market
prices of risk.


Frederico Belo                                      Robert S. Goldstein
Carlson School of Management                        University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota                             Finance Department
3-137 CarlSMgmt                                     3-125 Carlson School of Management
321 19th Avenue South                               321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis MN 55455                                Minneapolis, MN 55455
fbelo@umn.edu                                       and NBER
                                                    golds144@umn.edu
Pierre Collin-Dufresne
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 404
3022 Braodway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pc2415@columbia.edu
1         Introduction
Recent advances in consumption-based asset pricing models have provided frameworks
for capturing salient features of security prices (e.g., high excess returns and volatilities
for stocks, low levels and volatilities for interest rates). Primitive inputs to these en-
dowment economies include agent’s preferences, consumption dynamics, and dividend
dynamics. These first two inputs identify the pricing kernel, which provides information
on the risk free rate and market prices of risk. The pricing kernel and dividend dynamics
combine to determine the prices, excess returns and volatilities of stocks.
   While successful in capturing the asset pricing properties mentioned above, many
leading asset pricing models, such as Campbell and Cochrane (CC, 1999) and Bansal and
Yaron (BY, 2004), predict that the term structure of expected returns and volatilities
on dividend strips (i.e., claims to dividends paid over some prespecified interval) are
strongly upward sloping. Yet the empirical evidence reported in Binsbergen, Brandt
and Koijen (BBK, 2011) suggests otherwise. While Boguth, Carlson, Fisher and Simutin
(2011) have questioned some of the findings of BBK, both papers seem to agree that the
strongly upward sloping term structures predicted by BY and CC are inconsistent with
the historical evidence on returns of dividend strips.1
        In this paper we demonstrate that the counterfactual implications of these leading
asset pricing models can be eliminated without altering their proposed preferences or
consumption processes (and thus, their pricing kernels). Rather, all that is necessary
to make these models consistent with the empirical findings of BBK is to replace their
proposed dividend dynamics with processes that are both more economically justifiable
and more consistent with the empirical features of dividend dynamics that we identify
below. Importantly, we show that our proposed changes to dividend dynamics do not
impact these frameworks’ abilities to capture the salient properties of stock returns and
interest rates mentioned previously.
        Instead of specifying an exogenous dividend process as in BY and CC, in this paper
we investigate a framework in which dividend dynamics are derived endogenously from
capital structure policies that generate stationary leverage ratios.2 We show that these
    1
      See also Binsbergen, Hueskes, Koijen, and Vrugt (2011) for updated and additional empirical evi-
dence using international data.
    2
      There are at least two reasons why leverage ratios for an aggregate index are stationary. First, the
literature on optimal dynamic capital structure (e.g., Fischer, Heinkel and Zechner (1989), Goldstein,
Ju and Leland (2001)) shows that firms which wish to maximize shareholder value will follow such a
strategy. Second, firms which perform poorly will be eliminated from the index long before they default.


                                                    1
internally consistent dividend dynamics have a first order impact on both the empirical
properties of dividends and on the excess returns and volatilities of dividend strips.
   By specifying dividend dynamics that are internally consistent with stationary lever-
age ratios, our model is able to capture two important properties which, at first blush,
seem contradictory. First, compared to unleveraged cash flows of a firm (which we will
refer to as EBIT), dividends are a leveraged cash flow. It is thus not surprising that
claims to dividends (i.e., equity) are more volatile and have higher average historical
returns than claims to EBIT (i.e., debt and equity). Yet, over long horizons, EBIT
and dividends should be cointegrated in that, path-by-path, dividends and EBIT should
share the same long run growth rate. Hence, at long horizons, dividends are no riskier
than EBIT.
    This apparent contradiction can be explained by noting that when a firm rebalances
its debt levels over time to maintain a stationary leverage process, shareholders are
being forced to divest (invest) when leverage is low (high). Thus, even if investors
follow a static strategy of holding a fixed supply of stock, their position is effectively
being managed by the capital structure decisions of the firm. Below, we show that these
imposed investments/divestments conceal the leveraged nature of dividends in that, even
though dividends are correctly interpreted as leveraged cash flows, over the long run,
EBIT and dividends are equally risky.
   Interestingly, leading asset pricing models either ignore the leveraged nature of divi-
dends, or its cointegration with unleveraged cash flows, or both. Moreover, even if they
do account for leverage, they do so in a reduced-form way by introducing free parameters
that are not directly tied down to observed leverage ratios. For example, CC specify
consumption and dividends as iid with the same drift, and therefore disregard leverage.
BY capture leverage by assuming that dividends have greater exposure to shocks in
expected growth rates than does consumption. However, their model does not capture
cointegration. Abel (1999, 2005) models cash flows to be of the form y λ , where λ = 0
for fixed income securities, λ = 1 for EBIT, and λ > 1 for dividends. This framework
also does not capture cointegration (in levels).
   To demonstrate the impact of capital structure policies on the properties of divi-
dends in leading asset pricing models, we investigate modified versions of the BY and
CC economies. Instead of specifying dividends exogenously, we exogenously specify
an unleveraged cash flow (i.e., EBIT) process (with the same functional forms as the
dividend processes in BY and CC) and combine it with a dynamic capital structure


                                            2
strategy that produces stationary leverage ratios. These two ingredients generate an
endogenously obtained dividend process that is internally consistent with the EBIT pro-
cess. Claims to this dividend process (i.e., equity) have higher expected returns and
higher volatilities than claims to EBIT (i.e., equity plus debt). Yet, this framework
generates dividend and EBIT processes that are cointegrated.
    Our main findings can be summarized as follows. First, our framework generates a
term structure of expected returns and volatilities for dividend strips that are decreasing
in horizon, consistent with the empirical findings of BBK, and in contrast to the baseline
models of BY and CC. Intuitively, this is due to the implicit divestments (investments)
that the firm’s capital structure policy imposes on stockholders in good (bad) times. As
such, long-maturity dividend strips are not as risky as typically imagined – rather, they
are about as risky as long-maturity EBIT strips, since dividends and EBIT are cointe-
grated. However, claims to all future dividends (i.e., equity) are riskier than claims to
EBIT (ie., equity plus debt). The implication is that dynamic capital structure decisions
that generate stationary leverage ratios shift the risk in dividends from long-horizons to
short horizons, and thus generate a downward shift in the slope of the term structure
of dividend strip returns compared to the slope of EBIT strips. We demonstrate that
this impact is very large for both the CC and BY models. Indeed, calibrating a simple
parsimonious model assuming separation of investment and capital structure decisions,
we obtain downward sloping term structures for dividend strip returns for both the mod-
ified BY and CC models in spite of the fact that their term structures for EBIT strip
returns are upward sloping.3
    Second, our framework generates stock return volatility that is higher than long-
horizon dividend volatility, even if we specify a constant market price of risk. This
result is in contrast to the standard Gordon growth model prediction that long horizon
dividend volatility equals stock return volatility, and in stark contrast to the long-run
risk model of BY, which predicts that stock returns are less volatile than long-horizon
dividends. The intuition for this result is that, since dividends are cointegrated with
EBIT, its long-horizon volatility is equal to the volatility of (unleveraged) EBIT. In
                                                                         1
                                                                           
contrast, stock return volatility is pushed up by a “leverage factor” 1−L   . Thus, for
an average leverage ratio of approximately 40%, the stock price volatility is about 67%
higher than the long-run dividend volatility in a Gordon growth model framework.4
   3
     Moreover, in a robustness section we demonstrate that even if investment is tied to debt issuance,
we still obtain similar results.
   4
     We note that this effect alone does not explain the entire excess volatility puzzle identified by Shiller


                                                      3
   Third, our framework predicts that dividend variance ratios should be a decreasing
function of horizon. We find empirical support for this in the data. This prediction
differs from both CC, where iid dividend dynamics generates constant variance ratios,
and BY, where long run risk generates variance ratios that increase with horizon. In our
model, downward sloping dividend variance ratios are due to the fact that dividends are
a leveraged cash flow in the short run, but are cointegrated with EBIT in the long run.
   Our work is closely related to the large literature on consumption-based asset pric-
ing.5 As discussed in BBK, even though most of the models in this literature do not
attempt to study the pricing of dividend strips, they do provide theoretical predictions
about their values. We focus on the predictions from BY and CC given the importance
of these papers. Lettau and Wachter (2007), Croce, Lettau and Ludvigson (2009) and
Kogan and Papanikolaou (2012) are able to generate a downward sloping term struc-
ture of returns on dividend strips, but their frameworks are substantially different from
BY and CC. We propose a framework that is nearly identical to BY and CC, but we
emphasize the importance of endogenous dividend dynamics that generate dividend and
capital structure policies that are internally consistent.
   Second, our approach is also related to the literature exploring the implications of
cointegration restrictions for asset prices. As discussed in Engle and Granger (1987),
cointegration implies predictability. This is important, since many researchers have
reported that dividends mostly follow a random walk. However, our variance ratio tests
show that this random walk assumption is not supported by the data. Models such
as Menzly, Santos and Veronesi (2004) and Santos and Veronesi (2006) directly model
cointegration between consumption and dividends, but their mechanism is through labor
share, and not stationary leverage ratios, which generates our results here. Many other
papers investigate the asset pricing implications of cointegration between dividends and
consumption. A non-comprehensive list includes Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2001,
2005), Hansen, Heaton and Li (2008), Bansal, Dittmar and Kiku (2009), Bansal, Kiku,
and Yaron (2010). Our paper differs because we focus on the cointegration between
dividends and EBIT and investigate its implications for dividend strips. Further, we
derive the cointegration relationship endogenously through capital structure policies.
   Finally, our paper also relates to the extant literature on the time variation of cor-
(1981). Some amount of time variation in the market price of risk is still needed.
   5
     See Campbell (2003) and Cochrane (2006) for comprehensive review of this literature. Ludvigson
(2011) reviews the empirical literature on consumption-based asset pricing.



                                                4
porate cash flows and discount rates.6 While the early literature on “excess volatility”
focused on the ratio of equity volatility to short-horizon dividend volatility (e.g., Shiller
(1981), LeRoy and Porter (1981)), the fact that managers can (and do, see e.g., Chen
(2009)) smooth dividends suggests that the more economically relevant property is the
ratio of equity volatility to long-horizon dividend volatility. (Marsh and Merton (1986),
Shiller (1986)). Our paper focuses on this property, and shows how modifying the div-
idend process of the BY framework eliminates some of its counterfactual predictions
noted by Beeler and Campbell (2012).
   Other related papers include Campbell and Shiller (1988), who find that variation
in dividend yield is driven mostly by changes in discount rates. However, others have
questioned the power of return predictability (Stambaugh (1999), Campbell and Yogo
(2006)). Further, Larrain and Yogo (2008) find that discount rates do not need to be
so volatile when focusing on the overall cash flows of the firm rather than just divi-
dends, which is also consistent with the findings in Boudoukh, Michaely, Richardson,
and Roberts (2007). The issue of dividend growth predictability and smoothing has
been investigated in Chen (2009) and Chen, Da and Priestley (2011). Our paper adds
to this literature by pointing out long-run variations in dividends are significantly im-
pacted by the capital structure decisions of the firm. Aydemir et al (2007) investigate
the effect of leverage in a habit formation model, in particular, how much of the variation
in stock volatility can be explained by time variation in leverage. Their focus is thus
very different from ours.

       The rest of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we propose a very simple two period
binomial model in order to intuitively demonstrate that imposing stationary leverage
ratios shifts risk from long horizon dividend strips to short horizon. In Section 3 we
provide empirical evidence that dividend variance ratios decrease with horizon. We also
show that, consistent with our model, leverage ratios are stationary. We investigate a
model that captures long-run risk similar to BY in Section 4. We then demonstrate
the robustness of our findings by applying it to a model of habit formation similar to
CC in Section 5. In both cases, even though the term structures of EBIT strip returns
are upward sloping, the term structures of dividend strip returns are downward sloping,
consistent with the empirical evidence of BBK. We conclude in Section 6. Proofs are
   6
    For recent reviews of the literature on return and cash flow predictability see the special issue in
the Review of Financial Studies (Spiegel, 2008), Koijen and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011), Lettau and
Ludvigson (2010) and Cochrane (2006, 2011).


                                                   5
found in the Appendix.


2     A Two Period Binomial Model
In this section we demonstrate within a simple framework the impact that stationary
leverage ratios have on the term structure of dividend strips. In particular, we show
that imposing stationary leverage ratios tends to increase short horizon (and decrease
long horizon) dividend volatility relative to a setup in which managers do not maintain
stationary leverage ratios.
   We investigate a two period (i.e., three date) binomial framework with no bankruptcy
costs or tax benefits, so we are in a Modigliani-Miller (1958) world where capital structure
decisions do not affect firm value. The exogenously specified EBIT process (denoted by
Y ) is given in Figures 1 and 2. The firm liquidates at date-2. We also assume that we
are in a complete markets framework, and that the Arrow-Debreu price of a security
that pays $1 iff an up (down) state occurs is 31 23 . Note that this implies that the risk
                                                   

free rate is zero. Finally, assume that the probability of an up state is one-half for all
states.
   We will compare two firms: one which maintains a constant level of outstanding
debt, and one which maintains a constant leverage ratio (which is an an extreme case
of maintaining a stationary leverage ratio).
    Consider first a firm that has previously issued a bond that pays $25 in period-1,
and will cover these cash flows by issuing another one period bond with face value of
$25. Note that in all states of nature, bondholders are paid off in full, so the corporate
bond is riskless. Moreover, since the risk free rate is zero, the bond price is Bt = $25 in
all states of nature. The dividend paid (denoted by D) in any state is equal to the sum
of EBIT plus the change in the value of the bond position (i.e. Dt = Yt − (Bt − B(t−1) ).
The firm’s equity value Vt can be calculated in all states by backward induction as
EQ
 t
   [D(t+1) +V(t+1) ]. We can verify that at time 0 the equity value is equal to the enterprise
value (P0 = EQ [Y1 + Y2 ] = 100) minus the debt value (B0 = 25), i.e., V0 = P0 − B0 = 75,
consistent with Modigliani-Miller’s theorem. We report these numbers in Figure 1.

    Now, let us compare this to an otherwise identical firm which follows a dynamic
capital structure policy that leads to stationary (in fact, constant) leverage ratios. In
particular, assume that the firm maintains a 25% leverage ratio. In order to do so,


                                               6
                                                               D↑↑ = 246, Y↑↑ = 271
                                                        %
                     B↑ = 25, D↑ = 35, Y↑ = 35, V↑ = 116→D↑↓ = 51, Y↑↓ = 76
                %
V0 = 75, B0 = 25
                &
                     B↓ = 25, D↓ = 20, Y↓ = 20,V↓ = 17 →D↓↑ = 51, Y↓↑ = 76
                                                       &
                                                         D↓↓ = 0, Y↓↓ = 25


Figure 1: Cash flows and security prices of a firm which maintains a constant one-period
debt level of $25, by reissuing new one-period debt in period 1. Arrow-Debreu state
prices are q↑ = 1/3 and q↓ = 2/3 which implies that the risk-free rate is r = 0. The
equity value can be solved as Vt = EQ t
                                        [Dt+1 + Vt+1 ] with V2 = 0 (the firm is liquidated in
period 2). Debt value (Bt ) is risk-free. Modigliani-Miller holds, so that the enterprise
value Pt = Vt + Bt . Actual probabilities are p↑ = p↓ = 1/2.


it must change its level of outstanding debt at date-1. For example, if an up-state
occurs, then after paying off the old debt $25, it will issue $35.25 of new debt (which
is 25% of the claim to EBIT: P↑ = $141), and distribute net difference plus EBIT as
a dividend (D↑ = 35 + 35.25 − 25 = 45.25). Analogously, if a down state occurs, then
after paying off the old debt $25, it will issue $10.50 of new debt (which is 25% of
the claim to EBIT: P↓ = $42), and distribute net difference plus EBIT as a dividend
(D↑ = 20 + 10.50 − 25 = 5.50). Date-2 dividend payments are determined analogously
after noting that there is no new debt issuance at date-2. The relevant security values
and cash flows are shown in Figure 2.
    For both of these firms, which differ only in their capital structure decisions in period
1, we compute i) the standard deviations of period-1 and period-2 dividends, ii) the date-
0 prices of dividend strips V t (0) = EQ
                                       0
                                         [Dt ], iii) their expected returns and variances, and
iv) the expected returns and return variances for the stocks. We report these statistics
in Table 1 below.
    Comparing the results across rows in Table 1 confirms our main insight: imposing
stationary leverage ratios tends to increase the variance of short-horizon dividends and
decrease the variance of long-horizon dividends. In particular, the one-period variance
increases from 56 to 395, and the two-period variance decreases from 8860 to 7491, as we
move from the constant debt model to the constant leverage ratio model. As we show


                                              7
                                                                   D↑↑ = 235.75, Y↑↑ = 271
                                                             %
                    B↑ = 35.25, D↑ = 45.25, Y↑ = 35, V↑ = 105.75
                                                             →D↑↓ = 40.75, Y↑↓ = 76
                %
V0 = 75, B0 = 25
                &
                    B↓ = 10.50, D↓ = 5.50, Y↓ = 20, V↓ = 31.5→D↓↑ = 65.50, Y↓↑ = 76
                                                             &
                                                               D↓↓ = 14.50, Y↓↓ = 25


Figure 2: Cash flows and security prices of a firm which maintains a constant leverage
ratio of one-period debt Bt /(Vt + Bt ) = 25% when re-issuing new debt in period 1. All
parameters are as in Figure 1.


in the theoretical models discussed below, this result is quite general and not specific to
the particular example discussed here.
    Table 1 also shows that this shift in risk from long horizons to short horizons due to
the stationary leverage ratio policy impacts the the properties of dividend strip returns.
Specifically, compared to the firm that holds a constant amount of debt, the firm that
maintains a constant leverage ratio experiences an increase in the expected return and
variance on the one period dividend strip and a decrease in the expected return and
variance on the two period dividend strip.
    Interestingly, note that the one-period expected return and return variance of the
stock at date-0 are not impacted by future capital structure policies, as reported in
the last two rows of Table 1. This result is consistent with Modigliani-Miller’s “divi-
dend irrelevance” theorem. Looking ahead, this dividend irrelevance will imply that the
change in dividend dynamics due to imposing stationary leverage ratios will not nega-
tively impact the ability of the CC and BY models to capture salient features of stock
returns.


3     Empirical Support
In this section, we provide empirical support for the two most fundamental properties
of the model that drive our results. First, we show that dividend variance ratios are
decreasing with horizon. That is, long horizon dividends are not as risky as iid models
would predict, and much less risky than what ‘long-run risk’ models (which, as we show


                                            8
      Statistic                       Definition                  Constant       Stationary
                                                                  Debt level   Leverage Ratio

      Variance Dividend 1             Var0 [D(1)]                    56             395
      Variance Dividend 2             Var0 [D(2)]                   8860           7491
      Dividend 1 Strip Price          V 1 (0) = E Q [D1 ]            25            18.75
      Dividend 2 Strip Price  V 2 (0) = E Q [D2 ]                    50            56.25
                                h           1 (0)
                                                    i
      Expected return strip 1 E D(1)−V
                                     V 1 (0)
                                                                     0.1            0.35
                                   h             1 (0)
                                                        i
      Variance strip 1        Var D(1)−VV 1 (0)
                                                                    0.09            1.12
                                h 2           2 (0)
                                                      i
      Expected return strip 2 E V (1)−V
                                      V 2 (0)
                                                                    0.33            0.22
                                   h 2             2 (0)
                                                         i
      Variance strip 2        Var V (1)−VV 2 (0)
                                                                    0.98            0.44
                                h                          i
      Expected stock return   E V (1)+D(1)−V
                                         V (0)
                                                       (0)
                                                                    0.25            0.25
                                   h                          i
      Variance of stock       Var V (1)+D(1)−V
                                             V (0)
                                                          (0)
                                                                    0.58            0.58




Table 1: Calculations of various key statistics corresponding to two different leverage
policies represented in figures 1 and 2


below, generate dividend variance ratios that increase with horizon) predict. Second, we
provide support for the assumption that the aggregate leverage ratio is stationary. In
addition, we also characterize certain business cycle properties of leverage that will be
used to calibrate the modified versions of BY and CC below. In particular, we focus on
the correlation between leverage and the main state variables of these models (namely,
expected cash flows in BY, market price of risk in CC).

3.1    Data
The two main variables required for our empirical work are: i) the dividends on the
aggregate stock market, and ii) the aggregate leverage ratio. In this section we explain
how these variables are constructed.
   We consider three alternative measures of aggregate dividends to help establish the


                                                    9
robustness of the findings. We perform the analysis using annual data to avoid the
seasonality in dividend payments.7 The use of an annual dividend series implies that we
need to take a stance on how dividends received within a particular year are reinvested.
We consider two alternative reinvestment strategies. In the first strategy, we assume
the monthly dividends are reinvested in the aggregate stock market. As in Binsbergen
and Koijen (2009), we refer to this dividend series as market-invested dividends. This
measure of dividends is by far the most common in the dividend-growth and return-
forecasting literature, and thus we focus on this definition for the main part of our
analysis.8 In the second strategy, we invest the monthly dividends in cash, and obtain
a time series of annual dividends which we call cash-invested dividends. As shown by
Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) and Chen (2009), the two dividend series have different
time series properties in the post-war sample period.
   We obtain the data for the two dividend series from Long Chen’s webpage (the data
is used in Chen (2009)). We use this dataset because it covers a long sample period
from 1873 to 2008, thus covering the pre Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP)
period. Focusing on this long sample allows us to obtain more robust results (and also to
address Merton’s (1987) concern about the lack of research in the pre-CRSP period). To
construct the two dividend series, Chen (2009) combines the pre-CRSP data compiled
by Schwert (1990) with the data from the CRSP (NYSE/Amex/Nasdaq) value-weighted
market portfolio at monthly frequency. We refer the reader to Chen (2009) for additional
details on the construction of the two dividend series.
   In addition to the previous two dividend series, we investigate a third alternative
measure of dividends that includes share repurchases. The data for this alternative
dividend series is available from Motohiro Yogo’s webpage (the data is used in Gomes,
Kogan and Yogo (2009)), and covers a relatively shorter sample period from 1927 to
2007. Examining this alternative definition of dividends is motivated by the observa-
tion that firms have increased the fraction of payouts to shareholders via repurchase
programs compared to dividends in recent years (Fama and French (2001), Grullon and
Michaely (2002)). As discussed in Lettau and Ludvigson (2005), still, large firms with
high earnings have continued to increase traditional dividend payouts over time (DeAn-
gelo, DeAngelo and Skinner, 2004). The impact on aggregate dividends is therefore
   7
     For a similar approach, see also Cochrane (1994), Lettau and Ludvigson (2005), and Binsbergen
and Koijen (2010).
   8
     A non comprehensive list of studies that use this measure of dividends includes Lettau and Lud-
vigson (2005), Cochrane (2008), and Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008).


                                                10
unclear. To show that our main findings are not altered by adjusting dividends to ac-
count for share repurchase activity, since 1971, we consider a dividend series augmented
with equity repurchases using Compustat’s statement of cash flows.
   We transform all nominal dividends into real dividends by deflating the annual divi-
dends by the consumer price index (CPI), which is available from Robert Shiller’s web-
page.
      Finally, to construct the time series of the aggregate leverage ratio, we use data from
the Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States (Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, 2005). The aggregate leverage ratio is defined as the ratio of total
value of liabilities to the sum of the total value of liabilities and the total market value
of equity. Liabilities are the sum of accounts payable; bonds, notes, and mortgages
payable; and other liabilities. The data is for the nonfarm, nonfinancial corporate sector
and is available annually since 1946. Larrain and Yogo (2008) extend the data back to
1927. We use this dataset which is available on Motohiro Yogo’s webpage, but this data
ends in 2004. As such, we update the data to 2008 by collecting the updated aggregate
total liabilities data from the Flow of Funds Accounts, and by constructing the total
market value of equity in the nonfarm, nonfinancial corporate sector by replicating the
approach in Larrain and Yogo (2008). We refer the reader to Larrain and Yogo (2008)
for further details on the data construction.

3.2       Dividend Variance Ratios
If dividends follow a random-walk, then the variance of dividend growth increases linearly
with the observation interval. That is, for example, the variance of two year dividend
growth will equal twice the variance of one year dividend growth, implying that the
ratio of the two variances per unit of time equals unity. Following the approach of Lo
and MacKinlay (1988), we construct the dividend variance ratio statistic (VR) across
horizons from one to twenty years for each of the three alternative dividend series. We
then show that dividend variance ratios are decreasing with horizon.
  To compute the VR statistic, we directly apply the test formulas from Lo and
MacKinlay (1988) (see their Section 1). For completeness, and to help in the cali-
bration of the theoretical model proposed below, we also report the dividend volatilities
at each horizon. We define dividend volatility over a given horizon using two different
approaches.9 First, the more standard approach is to specify dividend volatility over a
  9
      These formulas are not the ones used in the variance ratio test of Lo and MacKinlay (1988), who


                                                  11
horizon T as
                                     s               
                             T         1           D(T )
                            σD,1   =      Var0 log         .                                      (1)
                                       T           D(0)

We also consider a second definition:
                               v          "                       #
                               u 
                               u 1          E  [D 2 (T )/D 2 (0)]
                       T                     0
                     σD,2  = t        log                      2 .                               (2)
                                    T       E0 [D(T )/D(0)]

Note that for the case of log-normal (i.e., iid random walk) dynamics
                                       dD
                                          = g dt + σ dz,                                          (3)
                                       D
which in integral form can be expressed as
                                                        2 /2)T +σ z(T )
                                D(T ) = D(0)e(g−σ                         ,                       (4)

                                     T      T
both definitions produce the result σD,1 = σD,2 = σ for all horizons T . The reason we
consider the second definition is that it is defined even if dividends are negative (that
is, if equity issuances are larger than dividend payments.)
     Table 2 reports the VR test results for the three alternative measures of dividends.
It reports the per-year variance of dividend growth across each horizon T for the two
alternative definitions of dividend variance (σD,1 and σD,2 ). In addition, it reports the VR
test statistic at each horizon, the corresponding standard errors (s.e.(VR)), and its p-
value. The p-value is for the test of the null hypothesis that dividends follow a random
walk, in which case the VR test statistic is 1. In specifying the null hypothesis, we
consider the most general case in which the shocks to dividends can be heteroskedastic,
not necessarily iid.
   Table 2 shows that dividends do not follow a random walk. The VR test statistic
decreases strongly with horizon for the three alternative dividend measures, implying
predictability in dividends. Both definitions of dividend variance show that the variance
of dividend growth is much smaller at long horizons than at short horizons. Regardless of
the measure of dividends used and of how dividend variance is computed, the difference
between short (1-year)- and long (10 or 20 years)-run dividend volatility is always greater
instead use unbiased estimators of the variance by appropriately adjusting for the degrees of freedom.
As a result, the variances reported here do not exactly match the variances used in the reported VR
statistics, but the difference between the two is minimal.


                                                 12
than 5.2%. The conclusion that dividend variance decreases with horizon thus seems
to be robust to how the monthly dividends are reinvested during the year, and to the
inclusion of share repurchases in the measurement of dividends.10

       For the first measure of dividends (market-invested dividends), Table 2 shows that
the VR test statistic rejects the hypothesis that dividends follow a random walk at the
10% significance level for the 4-and 15-year horizon, and at the 5% significance level
for the 6-, 8- and 10-year horizon. Using the first definition of dividend variance, the
volatility is 15.0% for the one year horizon, but only 7.5% for the 20-year horizon, a large
difference of 7.5%. Using the second definition (σD,2 ), the difference between short- and
long-run dividend volatility is even larger. The volatility is 14.7% for the one year
horizon, and only 6% for the 20-year horizon, a difference of 8.7%. For the other two
alternative measures of dividends, the statistical rejection of the random walk hypothesis
is weaker, but it is clear that the volatility of dividends decreases significantly with the
horizon as well. For the second measure of dividends (cash-invested dividends), the
difference between short- and long-run dividend volatility is 6.2% using the first definition
of dividend variance, and is 7.3% using the second definition of dividend variance. For
the last measure of dividends (with equity repurchases), the corresponding differences
using the two dividend variance definitions is 8.3% and 9.1%, respectively.
       The previous results have implications for the evaluation of leading asset pricing
models. To illustrate the implications in a clear manner, Figure 3 graphically demon-
strates the results in Table 2. The figure focuses on the main definition of dividends
(market-invested dividends). The large difference between short- and long-run dividend
volatility implies that we can strongly reject the random walk assumption of CC in spec-
ifying dividend dynamics, which naturally implies a dividend variance that is constant
across the different horizons and hence a VR test statistic that is always equal to one.
Moreover, we can reject even more strongly the long run risk dividend dynamics posited
  10
    Table 2 shows that the variance of dividend growth for the first two measures of dividends (market-
invested and cash-invested) is very similar. This result seems in contrast with the descriptive statistics
reported in Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) who show that the volatility of the cash-invested dividend
growth is almost half the volatility of the market-invested dividend growth. The difference is the sample
period. In Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) the sample period is from 1946 to 2007, whereas we examine
a larger sample from 1873 to 2008. When we restrict the analysis to the shorter sample from 1946 to
2007, we confirm the Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) results using Chen’s (2009) measure of cash-invested
dividends. The larger volatility of cash-invested dividends in the pre-1946 period makes the properties
of the two dividend series more similar in the full sample. Chen (2009) reports a similar sub-sample
analysis and confirms that the different properties of the two series varies across sub-samples.



                                                   13
in BY (using their calibration), which we also plot in Figure 3. Here, due to long run
risk, dividend growth volatility increases with horizon, in sharp contrast with the data.
These results confirm (using more data) the analysis of Beeler and Campbell (2012),
who show that dividend variance ratios in the U.S. aggregate stock market increase with
horizon in the long run risk model, but not in the real data, using a sample of annual
dividend data for the 1930 to 2008 period.


                           Data
              18
                           BY
              16

              14

              12
        (%)




              10
          D
       σ




              8

              6

              4

              2

              0
                   0   1          2   3   4       5        6      7     8     9   10
                                                Maturity



Figure 3: Expected dividend growth volatility as a function of horizon in the data and
in Bansal and Yaron (2004). The data are annual from 1873 to 2008.


   At a fundamental level, the finding that the dividend variance decreases with hori-
zon must reflect negative serial correlation in the dividend growth series. To show this
formally, we consider a simple econometric approach based on linear regression. Specifi-
cally, we investigate if past values of dividend growth help predict future dividend growth
by running a regression of the form:
                                              K
                                              X                     
                            dt+1 − dt = a +         bk dt+1−k − dt−k + εt ,            (5)
                                              k=1

where dt is log dividend at time t, and K is the number of lagged observations of dividend
growth included in the regression. We consider K=1 and 2 (the main conclusion is robust


                                                14
to including other lags). By construction, this test is designed to capture the existence of
serial correlation in dividend growth, which is ruled out by the random walk assumption.
    The results reported in Table 3 show that past values of dividend growth help pre-
dict future dividends. In particular, in specification 2, the twice-lagged value of dividend
growth helps forecasting dividends growth (the slope coefficient of b2 is significantly dif-
ferent from zero with a p-value of 1%). When the one- and two-year lagged values of
dividend growth are included (specification 2), the chi-squared test rejects the hypothesis
that all the slope coefficient are zero with a p-value of 4%. Finally, the slope coefficient
on the lagged values of dividend growth are negative. Thus, an unusually high value of
dividends growth today predicts lower dividend growth. It is this negative autocorrela-
tion that drives the decreasing pattern of dividend volatility across maturities.


3.3     Properties of Aggregate Leverage
In this section we provide empirical support for the assumption that the aggregate lever-
age ratio is stationary. In addition, we characterize the relationship between aggregate
leverage and the two state variables in BY and CC models.
    Previous studies show that leverage ratios are stationary. As discussed in Collin-
Dufresne and Goldstein (2001), at an aggregate (industry) level, leverage ratios have
remained within a fairly narrow band even as equity indices have increased ten-fold over
the past thirty years. At the firm level, Opler and Titman (1997) provide empirical
support for the existence of target leverage ratios within an industry.11 Further, dy-
namic models of optimal capital structure by Fischer, Heinkel, and Zechner (1989), and
Goldstein, Ju and Leland (2001) find that firm value is maximized when a firm acts to
keep its leverage ratio within a certain band.
    Our empirical measure of aggregate leverage ratio is stationary as well. To demon-
strate this, we run a regression of changes in log aggregate leverage ratio on lagged
values of the log aggregate leverage ratio. We obtain the following results (Newey-West
corrected t-statistics in parenthesis):

      ∆Levt+1 = −0.129 − 0.137 × Levt + et+1 ,              R2 = 5.90%,         σ(et+1 ) = 0.12.
                   (−2.92)    (−2.99)

The negative slope coefficient on the lagged value of leverage implies mean reversion in
the aggregate leverage ratio.
  11
     Additional studies providing empirical support for the claim that leverage ratios are stationary at
the firm level include Flannery and Rangan (2006) and Fama and French (2002).


                                                  15
      The time-series properties of the aggregate leverage ratio are an important input
for the calibration of the theoretical models that we present below. In addition, it
is important to characterize the relationships between aggregate leverage ratio and the
state variables in the BY and CC economies that we study in this paper. We discuss these
two models in detail in the theoretical section, but report here the relevant empirical
links to help in the calibration of these models.
      The relevant summary statistics of aggregate leverage are the following. The mean
leverage ratio in our sample is 39.5% (in logs, the mean is -0.957 ± 0.05). The standard
deviation of the aggregate leverage ratio is 9.69% (0.242 in logs) and the first order
autocorrelation is 87.8% (in logs the autocorrelation is 86.6%).
      In the theoretical sections below we will be modeling log-leverage dynamics in con-
tinuous time as an AR1 process similar to:

                                    d` = κ(` − `) dt + σ` dz.                           (6)

The data above allows us to calibrate this model with the parameter estimates: (` =
−0.957 ± 0.05, κ = 0.147 ± 0.046, σ` = 0.12 ± 0.01.)
      In BY, the main state variable is the time-varying expected growth rate of cash-flows
(which, in BY, is measured by consumption). Following BY, we denote expected growth
rate of cash-flows by the variable x. In the one-channel version of the long-run risk
BY model that we study here, the x variable is the main business cycle variable and
the main source of systematic risk in the model. We use the time-series estimate of x
reported in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2007).12 The correlation between changes in (log)
leverage and changes in xt is −38%. Since positive shocks to x are good news, this
correlation suggests that the leverage ratio is countercyclical, that is, leverage is higher
in bad economic times. This is consistent with intuition and with the fact that equity
is riskier than debt.
   Turning to the CC model, the main state variable is the consumption surplus ratio,
which is the source of variation in the price of risk. Following Wachter (2006), the
consumption surplus is constructed as a smoothed average of the past 40 quarters of the
consumption of nondurables and services real growth rate:

                            CSPLSt = Σ40   j
                                      j=1 φ ∆ct−j , with φ = 0.97.

We annualize the quarterly data by taking the observation in the last quarter of each
year as the annual value. High values of consumption surplus are associated with low
 12
      We thank Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron for sharing their data with us.


                                                  16
degrees of risk aversion, and hence with good economic times. The correlation between
shocks to CSPLSt (measured as the growth rate in CSPLS) and changes in (log) leverage
is −37%. As in the BY model, this negative correlation also suggests that the leverage
ratio is countercyclical, that is, leverage is higher in bad economic times.


4      Endogenous Dividend Dynamics in a ‘Long Run
       Risk’ Model
Here we investigate a model which captures the essential features of the “one-channel
long-run risk model” of Bansal and Yaron (BY, 2004). In particular, we specify a state
price density and aggregate cash-flow processes that correspond to a continuous time
version of the exponential affine (approximate) solution presented in BY (2004).13 BY
demonstrate that their model can capture high expected returns, volatility and Sharpe
ratios of stocks even with moderate levels of risk aversion. However, rather than exoge-
nously specifying dividend dynamics as BY did, here we specify EBIT dynamics that
are similar to BY’s dividend dynamics, and then combine that with a dynamic capi-
tal structure policy in order to determine dividend dynamics endogenously. Specifying
EBIT dynamics and leverage dynamics separately is consistent with the standard ap-
proach in the capital structure literature of assuming a separation of investment and
capital structure policies. In the Appendix we show that allowing for debt-financed
investment does not significantly impact our main results.

4.1     EBIT Dynamics
We specify the dynamics for log-EBIT yt to have a small but persistent shock to its
expected growth xt :
                                                          !
                                                   σy2
                              dy =       g+x−                 dt + σy dz1                        (7)
                                                      2
                             dx = −κx x dt + σx1 dz1 + σx2 dz2 .                                 (8)
  13
    BY show that the affine approximation is very accurate relative to the numerical approximation of
the exact model. See also Appendix C1 in Chen, Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2009), who provide a
continuous time approximation of the original Epstein-Zin representative agent economy similar to the
one used here.




                                                 17
Since state vector dynamics are affine, it follows that date-t expectations of the first two
moments of date-T EBIT take the exponential affine forms:
                                Et [eyT ] = eyt +A0 (T −t)+xt A1 (T −t)                               (9)
                               Et e2yT = e2yt +A2 (T −t)+xt A3 (T −t) ,
                                      
                                                                                                     (10)
where the deterministic coefficients {A0 (τ ), A1 (τ ), A2 (τ ), A3 (τ )} are given in the Ap-
pendix.
    The term structure of EBIT expected growth rates over horizon τ is defined as
                                   
                                    1
                                        log E0 eyτ −y0
                                                        
                           gy,τ ≡
                                    τ
                                   
                                    1
                                =       [A0 (τ ) + x0 A1 (τ )] .                  (11)
                                    τ
Similarly, define the term structure of EBIT volatilities to be
                                   v           " 
                                   u                 2(yτ −y0 )
                                                                  #
                                   u 1           E  0 e
                          σy,τ ≡ t         log
                                        τ        (E0 [eyτ −y0 ])2
                                   s 
                                        1
                                =          [A2 (τ ) − 2A0 (τ )].                                     (12)
                                        τ
Interestingly, we find σy,τ is independent of x. This is due to A3 (τ ) = 2A1 (τ ).
   We plot these term structures at their long run mean (xt = 0) in Figure (4) using the
parameter values in Table 1 below. Note that the term structure of volatilities is upward
sloping. Intuitively, this is because over short horizons, the random variable xT does not
differ too much from its current value x0 , and therefore log-EBIT approximately follows a
random walk (with volatility approximately equal to σy ). Over longer horizons, however,
the future value of xT becomes more uncertain (hence the name, “long run risk”), in
turn generating an increasing term structure of volatilities.

4.2     EBIT Strips
BY demonstrate that their specified endowment dynamics combined with recursive pref-
erences (Epstein Zin (1989)) generate pricing kernel dynamics that are well-approximated
by constant market prices of risk:14
                           dΛ
                                 = −r dt − θ1 dz1 − θ2 dz2 .                                         (13)
                            Λ
  14
     For simplicity, we have set the risk free rate to a constant since it has no bearing on the issues at
hand.


                                                   18
               EBIT Expected Growth Rate                                                       Term structure of EBIT Volatility
          ER                                                                             Vol

      0.020

                                                                                      0.06
      0.015


                                                                                      0.04
      0.010



      0.005                                                                           0.02



                                                     Time Horizon HyearsL                                                               Time Horizon HyearsL
               5          10          15        20                                              5             10            15     20



Figure 4: Term structure of EBIT expected growth rate (equation (11)) and volatilities
(equation (12)) for the BY economy. Parameters are set as in Table 4.



This implies that risk-neutral dynamics are:
                                                                                  !
                                                                            σy2
                                 dy =                gQ + x −                          dt + σy dz1Q                                                            (14)
                                                                            2
                     dx = κx (xQ − x) dt + σx1 dz1Q + σx2 dz2Q ,                                                                                               (15)
                                                          
                                                  θ σ +θ σ
where we have defined g Q ≡ (g − σy θ1 ), xQ ≡ − 1 x1κ 2 x2 .
                                                                                                 x
   The date-t price P T (t, xt , yt ) of the security whose payoff is the date-T EBIT flow
eyT is:

                                           P T (t, xt , yt ) = e−r(T −t) EQ
                                                                          t
                                                                            [eyT ] .                                                                           (16)

The solution takes the exponential affine form:

                                       P T (t, xt , yt ) = eyt +F (T −t)+G(T −t) xt ,                                                                          (17)

where the deterministic functions (F (τ ), G(τ )) are derived in the Appendix.
   Expected excess returns on the EBIT strips satisfy
            T
                                                 dΛ dP T (t, xt , yt )
                                                                     
      1     dP (t, xt , yt )               1
         E                     − r dt = − E
      dt     P T (t, xt , yt )             dt     Λ P T (t, xt , yt )
                                                                
                                       = θ1 σy + G(T − t)σx1 + θ2 [G(T − t)σx2 ] .                                                                             (18)

EBIT strip volatility is
                                                     s                   2
                                     P,τ             dP t+τ (t, xt , yt )
                                                          1
                                 σ           ≡
                                                     P t+τ (t, xt , yt )
                                                          dt
                                               q                2
                                             =   σy + G(τ )σx1 + (G(τ )σx2 )2 .                                                                                (19)

                                                                            19
We calibrate this model using the parameter values in Table 4, and plot the resulting
term structures in Figure (5). We choose the parameter θ1 = 0.0 to be small and θ2 = 0.4
to be large in order to capture the intuition of BY that compensation for consumption
risk is low – it is uncertainty related to future expected consumption growth that agents
with Epstein-Zin (1989) preferences are extremely averse to.15
                  EBIT Strip Expected Return                                                   EBIT Strip Return Volatility
            ER                                                                    Volatility
                                                                                  0.10
        0.035
                                                                                  0.08
        0.030

        0.025
                                                                                  0.06
        0.020

        0.015                                                                     0.04

        0.010
                                                                                  0.02
        0.005

                                                      Time Horizon HyearsL                                                          Time Horizon HyearsL
                 5            10           15    20                                            5           10             15   20



Figure 5: Term structure of EBIT strip excess returns (equation (18)) and volatilities
(equation (19)) for the BY economy. Parameters are given in Table 4.


   As noted in Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen (2011), this long-run risk model generates
an upward sloping term structure of expected returns and volatilities. That is, the return
variances on EBIT strips have inherited the upward sloping term structure associated
with the variance ratios of the EBIT cash flows.
    The enterprise value of the firm is equal to the present value of the claim to all EBIT
strips:
                                            Z ∞
                       P (xt , yt ) = e  yt
                                                dT eF (T −t)+G(T −t) xt .               (20)
                                                                             t

As noted by Bansal and Yaron (2004) and others, this can be well-approximated by a
log-linear approximation:

                                                P (xt , yt ) ≈ eyt +F +G xt ,                                                                              (21)

where the coefficients (F, G) are given in Table 5 below.16 Figure 6 plots the exact and
  15
      These parameters are similar to the parameters obtained in the exponential affine approximation
of an Epstein-Zin-utility representative agent economy with the same aggregate output dynamics (see,
e.g., appendix C1 in Chen, Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2009)).
   16
      Since we know the closed-form solution in equation (20), we choose the parameters of the exponential
affine approximation in equation (21) to minimize the expected squared difference between the two. See
the Appendix for more details. We use the approximate solution instead of the exact solution because
it simplifies our calculations of the levered equity value below. An alternative would be to change the
definition of the EBIT process so that the solution in equation 21 is exact. This can be accomplished
by choosing EBIT to be of the form (a0 + a1 x)ey+bx for a suitable choice of (a0 , a1 , b).


                                                                             20
approximate solution, and shows the accuracy of the log-linear approximation.
                                Exact vs. Approximate Enterprise value to EBIT ratio
                                                       PHx,yLy



                                                       40


                                                       35


                                                       30


                                                       25


                                                                                       x
                                      -0.05                              0.05



Figure 6: Exact and approximate solutions to the enterprise value as given in respectively
equations (20) and (21) for the parameters given in Table 4. The x-axis covers −4 to
+4 standard deviations of the unconditional distribution of x.


    In this “one-channel” model, the expected return and volatility of the claim to EBIT
are constant under the log-linear approximation:

                      (µP − r)BY ≈ θ1 σy + Gσx1 + θ2 (Gσx2 ) .
                                                    
                                                                                     (22)
                                       q
                                                      2
                               P
                                          σy + Gσx1 + (Gσx2 )2 .
                                                    
                             σBY   ≈                                                 (23)

Their values, given the calibrated parameters, are given in the Table 5.

4.3    Dividend Dynamics
At this point we could choose to close the model by exogenously specifying dividend
dynamics so that, in the short run, dividends are riskier than EBIT, but over longer
horizons, dividends and EBIT are cointegrated. In unreported results, we investigate
such a model and calibrate it to match the downward sloping dividend variance ratios
from the previous section. We find that such a model generates term structures of
dividend strip excess returns and volatilities that are downward sloping, consistent with
the empirical finding of BBK.
   Instead, however, here we attempt to be a bit more ambitious and provide an eco-
nomic mechanism that explains why dividends are riskier than EBIT in the short run,
and why variance ratios are downward sloping. Specifically, we argue that a payout
policy consistent with a firm maintaining a stationary leverage ratio will generate these
predictions endogenously. As such, we first specify a capital structure policy that leads
to stationary leverage ratios. Then, we combine this policy with the EBIT dynamics
specified above to endogenously determine dividend dynamics.

                                                         21
    Assume that at all dates-t, the firm issues riskless debt that matures at date-(t + dt)
with present value equal to
                                             B(`t , xt , yt ) = e`t +yt +F +Gxt
                                                                 ≈ e`t P (xt , yt ).                       (24)
                            B(`t ,xt ,yt )
We interpret e`t ≈           P (xt , yt )
                                             as the leverage of the firm. Since it is riskless, the firm must
        r dt
pay e          B(`t , xt , yt ) at date (t + dt). It does so by issuing at this time debt with face
value B(`t+dt , xt+dt , yt+dt ), with all residual cash flows paid out as dividends. As such,
dividends dD(t) = D(t + dt) − D(t) paid out at date-(t + dt) are
                    dD(t)         =      B(`t+dt , xt+dt , yt+dt ) − er dt B(`t , xt , yt ) + eyt+dt dt.
                              O(dt)
                                  =      dB(`t , xt , yt ) − rB(`t , xt , yt ) dt + eyt dt.                (25)
We choose the dynamics of log-leverage so that i) it is mean-reverting, and ii) dividend
payments are locally deterministic, that is, cumulative dividend dynamics are of the
form: dD(t) = Dt dt, with no diffusion term. We emphasize that these conditions are
chosen for parsimony and impose a lot of structure on the model, as they significantly
reduce the number of free parameters in leverage dynamics to three drift parameters
      P
(κ` , ` , α) and zero diffusion parameters.17 In particular, we choose18
                            P                            
               d`t = κ` ` + αx − ` dt − Gσx1 + σy dz1 − Gσx2 dz2
                            Q         
                    = κ` ` + αx − ` dt − Gσx1 + σy dz1Q − Gσx2 dz2Q ,
                                                           
                                                                                                           (26)
where
                                                          
                               Q              P       1                             
                              `       = ` +                     θ1 Gσx1 + σy + θ2 Gσx2 .                   (27)
                                                      κ`
Since the combination (d` + dy + G dx) is locally deterministic, dividends paid out over
the interval (t, t + dt) are equal to D(t) dt, where
              "                                                  !#
                                                       2
                                                     σ
D(t) = eyt 1 + e`t +F +Gxt κ` ` + αx − ` + g + x − y − Gκx x − r
                                                
                                                     2
              "                                                          !#
                                                           2
                                     Q                 σ
       = eyt 1 + e`t +F +Gxt κ` ` + αx − ` + g Q + x − y + Gκx xQ − x − r (28)
                                                                     
                                                                            .
                                                         2
  17
     We emphasize that by imposing dividend dynamics to be locally deterministic, not only are we
forcing our model to look like the rest of the literature, but we are also making it more difficult to
generate a downward sloping term structure of dividend variance ratios. Indeed, dividend dynamics
that are not locally deterministic have very high short-horizon volatilities.
  18
     Note that for D to be locally deterministic it is sufficient that B (and therefore log B) be locally
deterministic. Since d log Bt = d`t + dyt + Gdxt , it is clear that our choice below achieves this objective.


                                                                 22
Note that the terms inside the square bracket follow a stationary process. Hence, divi-
dends are cointegrated with EBIT eyt .19
    We calibrate the leverage ratio parameters as in Table 6. Note that our parameters
(e` = 0.35, κ` = 0.11) are well within a one standard deviation estimate of the empirical
results (e` = 0.39, κ` = 0.14), although admittedly our implied leverage volatility σ` =
0.06 is significantly lower than the empirical observation σ` = 0.12. Moreover, in this
model the conditional correlation between log-leverage and the x process is -0.95. This
is in contrast to the empirical estimate of -0.38 reported in the previous section. In the
Appendix, we present a model with debt-financed investment which allows us to improve
our fit for both leverage volatility and this correlation.
    Consistent with the analysis in the empirical section, we define the term structures
of i) expected growth rates and ii) standard deviations of dividends over horizon T as:
                                                      
                                       1              DT
                          gD,T ≡           log E0                                  (29)
                                       T              D0
                                     v            "
                                     u                   #
                                     u 1             E 0  DT2
                          σD,T ≡ t            log               .                  (30)
                                         T          (E0 [DT ])2
We plot these term structures for xt = 0 in Figure (7). Note that, in contrast to the
upward sloping variance ratios of EBIT, the dividend variance ratios are downward
sloping, consistent with our reported empirical results.
                                                                                      Term structure of Dividend Volatility
                                                                                Vol


                    Expected Dividend Growth                                0.15
           Growth


         0.020
                                                                            0.10
         0.015

         0.010
                                                                            0.05

         0.005

                                                    Time Horizon HyearsL                                                           Time Horizon HyearsL
                       5       10      15      20                                        5             10            15       20



Figure 7: Term structure of expected dividend growth rate (equation (29)) and dividend
volatility (σD,T in equation (30)) for the BY economy. Parameters are set as in Table 4.


    In this section we have reported the term structure of instantaneous dividends es-
timated at the long-run mean of the state vector. This allows us to make use of the
  19
     Our model does not restrict leverage to be less than unity, or dividends to be positive. In the
Appendix we discuss an extension of the model which imposes these more realistic restrictions. We find
that the main quantities of interest (dividend variance ratios, strip expected returns and volatilities),
are very similar to the results presented here.


                                                                           23
closed-form solutions for all the prices and moments of returns. In contrast, in the
empirical section we investigated dividends that were time-aggregated over a period of
one year. In the Appendix, we show that aggregating dividends in this model does not
significantly impact our results.

4.4        Dividend Strips
Here we provide a closed-form expression for the price of dividend strips, defined as:
                                           −r(T −t)
                            V T (t) = EQ
                                                          
                                        t
                                           e         D(T )  .                       (31)

As noted previously, at date-T , the firm will issue risk-free debt of value e`T +yT +F +GxT ,
and will retire debt of value er dt e`T −dt +yT −dt +F +GxT −dt . The date-t value of these claims
are:

                   W T (t, `t , xt , yt ) = EQ e−r(T −t) e`T +yT +F +GxT
                                                                           

                   U T (t, `t , xt , yt ) = EQ e−r(T −t) er dt e`T −dt +yT −dt +F +GxT −dt
                                                                                          

                                         = W T −dt (t, `t , xt , yt ).                                        (32)

It therefore follows that the date-t present value of a claim to date-T dividends is:20

    V T (t, `t , xt , yt ) dt = W T (t, `t , xt , yt ) − W T −dt (t, `t , xt , yt ) + dt EQ e−r(T −t) eyT
                                                                                                         
                                                                               
                                   ∂     T                      T
                              =      W (t, `t , xt , yt ) + P (t, xt , yt ) dt.                            (33)
                                  ∂T
       From its definition, e−rt W T (t, `t , xt , yt ) is a Q-martingale, implying that
                                                                                                      !
                                    Q
                                                                                               σy2           σ`2
0 = −rW + Wt + W` κ`                 ` + αx − ` + Wx κx (xQ − x) + Wy              gQ + x −               +       W (34)
                                                                                                 2            2 ``
              σx2      σ2                           2
                                                                            
          +       Wxx + y Wyy − W`x σx1 Gσx1 + σy + Gσx2   − W`y σy Gσx1 + σy + Wxy σx1 σy ,
              2         2
  20
     There are at least three alternative approaches to derive the solution to   the dividend strip in our
                                                                   −r(T −t)
context. First, one can directly estimate V T (t, xt , yt ) = EQ
                                                               t
                                                                 e          D(T ) , where D(t) is defined in
equation (28). Second, the solution can also be computed using equation (33). Given the log-linear
approximation used above, the two closed-form solutions will not agree exactly. However, we have
verified that the difference between the two is very small (at our parameter values, the difference is less
than 10−14 ). A third approach is to compute the present value of future dividends as the difference
between the spot stock price V (t) = P (xt , yt )(1 − e`t ) and the futures price F T (t) = EQt
                                                                                                [V (T )] using
                                       −r(T −t) T
                                                           RT s
the cash-and-carry formula: V (t) = e          F (t) + t V (t) ds. In turn, differentiating with respect
                                                                                                      T
to T gives yet another expression for Dividend strip: V T (t) = re−r(T −t) F T (t) − e−r(T −t) ∂F∂T(t) . All of
these approaches would give exactly the same values if the log-linear approximation to the enterprise
value is not used. In practice, for our parameter choices, the differences between these three approaches
are negligible.


                                                       24
where we have defined
                                                                 2
                                     σ`2 ≡        Gσx1 + σy           + (Gσx2 )2
                                     σx2 ≡ σx1
                                            2     2
                                               + σx2 .                                              (35)

Since the dynamics of the state vector are affine, it is known (e.g., Duffie and Kan
(1996)) that the solution takes an exponential-affine form:

                       W T (t, `t , xt , yt ) = eyt +H(T −t)+I(T −t)`t +J(T −t)xt ,                 (36)

where the deterministic coefficients are determined in the Appendix.
  Expected excess returns on the dividend strips satisfy
              T                                               T                           
        1     dV (t, `t , xt , yt )                     1      dΛ        dV (t, `t , xt , yt )
           E                          − r dt = − E
        dt     V T (t, `t , xt , yt )                   dt      Λ        V T (t, `t , xt , yt )
                                              = θ1 Ω1 (τ, `t , xt , yt ) + θ2 Ω2 (τ, `t , xt , yt ), (37)
                                                           
where the terms Ω1 (τ, `t , xt , yt ), Ω2 (τ, `t , xt , yt ) are given in the Appendix. Dividend
strip volatility is
                                         s                                2
                              P, τ           1        dV T (t, xt , yt )
                          σ          ≡
                                             dt        V T (t, xt , yt )
                                         q
                                     =    Ω21 (τ, `t , xt , yt ) + Ω22 (τ, `t , xt , yt ).          (38)

   We report the dividend strip expected return and volatility term structures in Fig-
ure (8) below. This figure shows one of our main results: whereas the term structures
of EBIT strips (and dividend strips in the original BY model) as shown in Figure (5)
are upward sloping, in our modified BY framework, we obtain downward sloping term
structures for dividend strips, consistent with the empirical findings of BBK.

4.5     Equity Returns
The value of equity equals the claim to all dividends:
                                 Z ∞
             V (`t , xt , yt ) =      dT V T (t, `t , xt , yt )
                                 Zt ∞                                                  
                                                ∂   T                     T
                               =      dT          W (t, `t , xt , yt ) + P (t, xt , yt )
                                  t            ∂T
                               = P (xt , yt ) − B(`t , xt , yt )
                               ≈ P (xt , yt ) 1 − e`t .
                                                      
                                                                                                    (39)

                                                           25
              Dividend Strip Expected Excess Return                                                 Dividend Strip Return Volatility
         ER                                                                                   vol

      0.06
                                                                                           0.15
      0.05

      0.04
                                                                                           0.10

      0.03

      0.02                                                                                 0.05

      0.01

                                                               Time Horizon HyearsL                                                         Time Horizon HyearsL
                  5             10          15            20                                         5            10             15    20



Figure 8: Term structures of dividend strip excess returns (equation (37)) and volatilities
(equation (38)) for the BY economy. Parameters are given in Tables 4 and 6.



This equation is intuitive – it states that equity equals enterprise value minus debt
outstanding. Indeed, it follows from Modigliani-Miller’s capital structure irrelevance
theorem (V (t) = P (t) − B(t)).
   Excess return on equity is equal to excess return on EBIT (equation (22) scaled by
the leverage factor:
                                                                         
                            V                                1                                         
                        µ −r =                                                  θ1 σy + Gσx1 + θ2 (Gσx2 ) .                                                        (40)
                                                          1 − e`t

This equation captures “dividend irrelevance” in that future capital structure decisions
do not impact equity returns (or equity value) today. Similarly, equity return volatility
is scaled up by the same factor
                                                                       q
                                                         1                                           2
                      V
                     σ =                                                              σy + Gσx1            + (Gσx2 )2 .                                            (41)
                                                      1 − e`t

With our current calibration, we find excess returns and volatilities on stocks to be well
below excess returns and volatilities of short-maturity dividend strips, consistent with
the findings of BBK.

4.6    Discussion
We have shown that if we start from an economy similar to that of BY, but endoge-
nously derive dividend dynamics from an assumption about stationary (mean-reverting)
leverage ratios, then, consistent with the empirical findings of BBK, short-maturity divi-
dend strip returns have higher expected excess returns and higher volatilities than stock
returns. Indeed, we find that the term structure of dividend strip return variances is
downward sloping. This is in contrast to the term structure of EBIT (i.e., total firm

                                                                                      26
cash flows) strip return volatilities, which are upward sloping. The downward shift in
the slope of the term structure of dividend strip returns compared to the slope of EBIT
strips is due to the implicit divestments (investments) that the firm imposes in good
(bad) times on stockholders via capital structure decisions, which generates stationary
leverage ratios. As such, long-maturity dividend strips are not as risky as typically imag-
ined – rather, they are about as risky as long-maturity EBIT strips, since dividends and
EBIT are cointegrated. However, claims to all future dividends (i.e., equity) are riskier
than claims to EBIT (ie., equity plus debt). The implication is that dynamic capital
structure decisions that generate stationary leverage ratios shift the risk in dividends
from long-horizons to short horizons.
    Interestingly, this model also generates long horizon ‘excess volatility’ in that stock
                   V                                                           D
return volatility σBY = 0.126 is higher than long-horizon dividend volatility σBY = 0.10.
This prediction is more in line with observation compared to the BY model, which
predicts that long-horizon dividend volatility is larger than stock volatility. This occurs
despite the fact that we have a model with a constant market price of risk! As is well
understood, (Campbell and Shiller (1987) and Cochrane (1991, 2007)) ‘excess volatility’
can be traced back to time variation in discount rates or predictability in dividends.
In our framework, we have both, in that leverage predicts both future dividends (see
equation (28)) and expected excess returns on equity (equation (40)). Expected excess
returns on stocks are time-varying despite the fact that risk-premia are constant, simply
due to the time variation in leverage.


5     Endogenous Dividend Dynamics in an ‘External
      Habit Formation’ Model
Here we investigate a modified version of the habit formation model of Campbell and
Cochrane (CC, 1999). In contrast to the BY model, which has a constant market price
of risk and cash flows that have a predictable component, the framework we consider
here has no predictability in aggregate cash flows, but generates predictability in excess
returns via time variation in risk-premia. Specifically, we assume that cash flows follow
an iid process, and that shocks to the market price of risk are negatively correlated with
shocks to these cash flows. But instead of modeling dividend dynamics exogenously as
in CC, we specify EBIT dynamics and combine them with a dynamic capital structure
policy that generates stationary leverage ratios in order to endogenously determine div-


                                            27
idend dynamics. Because much of the theory is very similar to the BY framework, we
present here only the main results, and relegate the derivations to the Appendix.

5.1    EBIT Dynamics
Instead of exogenously specifying dividend dynamics as in CC, we specify the dynamics
for log-EBIT yt to be iid
                                                       !
                                                 σy2
                               dy =         g−             dt + σy dz.              (42)
                                                 2
The term structure of EBIT expected growth rate over horizon τ is defined as
                                   
                                    1
                                        log E0 eyτ −y0
                                                      
                          gy,τ ≡
                                    τ
                               = g      ∀τ.                                         (43)

Similarly, the term structure of EBIT volatility is defined as:
                                             "                 #
                                                   2(yτ −y0 )
                            2        1         E0  e
                           σy,τ  ≡       log
                                     τ         (E0 [eyτ −y0 ])2
                                  = σy2 .                                           (44)

Note that the term structure of volatilities is flat.

5.2    EBIT Strips
CC provide a framework that generates a pricing kernel with a constant risk free rate and
a countercyclical market price of risk. We approximate their model with the following
dynamics:
                               dΛ
                                     = −r dt − θt dz,                           (45)
                                Λ
where innovations in the market price of risk are driven by the same Brownian motion
that drives EBIT innovations:
                                             
                                dθ = κ θ − θt dt − ν dz.                            (46)

Thus, risk-neutral dynamics for the state variables follow
                                                  !
                                       σy2
                        dy =      g−       − σy θt dt + σy dz Q                     (47)
                                       2
                                        Q
                            dθ = κQ (θ − θt ) dt − ν dz Q ,                         (48)

                                                 28
                                                                                       Q
where we have defined κQ ≡ (κ − ν), and κQ θ ≡ κθ.
    The date-t price P T (t, θt , yt ) of the security whose payoff is the date-T EBIT flow
eyT is:

                                            P T (t, θt , yt ) = e−r(T −t) EQ
                                                                           t
                                                                             [eyT ] .                                                                          (49)

The solution takes the exponential affine form:

                                         P T (t, θt , yt ) = eyt +F (T −t)−G(T −t) θt ,                                                                        (50)

where the deterministic functions (F (τ ), G(τ )) are derived in the Appendix.
   Expected excess returns on the EBIT strips satisfy (τ = (T − t)):
                    T
                                                         dΛ dP T (t, θt , yt )
                                                                             
              1     dP (t, θt , yt )                1
                 E                     − r dt = − E
              dt     P T (t, θt , yt )             dt     Λ P T (t, θt , yt )
                                                              
                                               = θt σy + νG(τ ) .                                                                                              (51)

   EBIT strip volatility is
                      s                       2
                          1 dP T (t, θt , yt )                  
                                                  =  σy + νG(τ )   .                                                                                           (52)
                         dt P T (t, θt , yt )
We calibrate this model using the parameter values in the following table. We report
the results in Figure (9). As noted in Binsbergen, Brandt and Koijen (2011), the CC
model generates an upward sloping term structure of expected returns and volatilities.
                   EBIT Strip Expected Return                                                      EBIT Strip Return Volatility
              ER                                                                      Volatility
          0.020
                                                                                      0.05

          0.015
                                                                                      0.04


                                                                                      0.03
          0.010

                                                                                      0.02
          0.005
                                                                                      0.01


                                                       Time Horizon HyearsL                                                             Time Horizon HyearsL
                   5           10           15    20                                               5           10             15   20



Figure 9: Term structure of EBIT Strip Expected Return (equation (51)) and volatility
(equation (52)) for the CC economy. Parameters are set as in Table 8.


   The enterprise value of the firm is equal to the present value of the claim to all EBIT
strips:
                                                                       Z          ∞
                                    P (θt , yt ) = e             yt
                                                                                      dT eF (T −t)−G(T −t) θt .                                                (53)
                                                                              t

                                                                              29
This can be well-approximated by a log-linear approximation:

                                     P (θt , yt ) ≈ eyt +F −G θt ,                                                    (54)

where the coefficients (F, G) are given in Table 9 below. Figure 10 plots the exact and
approximate solution, and shows the accuracy of the log-linear approximation.
                                     Exact vs. Approximate Enterprise value to EBIT ratio
                                                           PHΘ,yLy



                                                            50


                                                            48


                                                            46


                                                            44


                                                            42


                                                            40


                                                            38
                                                                                                  Θ
                              -0.6    -0.4       -0.2        0.0          0.2      0.4      0.6



Figure 10: Exact and approximate solutions to the enterprise value as given in respec-
tively equations (20) and (21) for the parameters given in Table 8. The x-axis covers
−4 to +4 standard deviations of the unconditional distribution of θ.


   Under this log-linear approximation, expected return and volatility of the claim to
EBIT are:

                                (µP − r)CC ≈ θt σy + νG
                                                                                            
                                                                                                                      (55)
                                        P
                                                      
                                       σCC ≈ σy + νG .                                                                (56)

   Their values given the calibrated parameters are given in Table 9:

5.3    Dividend Dynamics
Assume that at all dates-t, the firm issues riskless debt that matures at date-(t + dt)
with present value equal to

                                 B(`t , θt , yt ) = e`t +yt +F −Gθt
                                                            ≈ e`t P (θt , yt ).                                       (57)
                                                                      B(`t ,θt ,yt )
As in the previous model, we interpret e`t ≈                           P (θt , yt )
                                                                                         as the leverage of the firm. Using
an argument analogous to the previous section, we specify leverage dynamics as:
                                                        
                  d`t = κ` ` + αθ − ` dt − νG + σy dz
                       = κ` ` + αQ θ − ` dt − νG + σy dz Q ,
                                                           
                                                                                                                      (58)

                                                             30
where
                                                                              νG + σy
                                                  αQ = α +                            .                                                                     (59)
                                                                                κ`
Since the combination (d` + dy − G dθ) is locally deterministic, dividends paid out over
the interval (t, t + dt) are equal to D(t) dt, where
              (                "                                     #)
                                                        2
                                                      σ
D(t) = eyt 1 + e`t +F −Gθt κ` ` + αθ − ` + g − r − y − Gκ θ − θ
                                                                   
                                                                              (60)
                                                      2
              "                "                                              #)
                                                          2
                                                       σ               Q   
       = eyt 1 + e`t +F −Gθt κ` ` + αQ θ − ` + g − r − y − σy θ − GκQ θ − θ
                                                
                                                                                 .
                                                        2
Note that the terms inside the square bracket follow a stationary process. Hence, divi-
dends are cointegrated with EBIT eyt .
   We define the term structures of expected growth rates and volatilities for dividends
over horizon T as in equations (29)-(30). We plot these term structures for θ0 = θ in
Figure (11).
                 Expected Dividend Growth                                               Term Structure of Dividend Volatility
        Growth                                                                    Vol

                                                                               0.15


      0.015

                                                                               0.10

      0.010


                                                                               0.05
      0.005



                                                  Time Horizon HyearsL                                                               Time Horizon HyearsL
                 5          10          15   20                                            5             10            15       20



Figure 11: Term structure of expected dividend growth rate (equation (29)) and dividend
volatility (σD,T in equation (30)) for the CC economy. Parameters are set as in Table 8.


Note that the term structure of volatilities is downward sloping, consistent with our
reported empirical evidence.

5.4       Dividend Strips
As in the previous section, we provide a closed-form expression for the price of dividend
strips defined as:
                                             V T (t) = EQ
                                                        t
                                                          [e−r(T −t) D(T )]
in terms of the claim:
                                                              −r(T −t) ` +y +F −Gθ 
                                 W T (t, `t , θt , yt ) = EQ
                                                           t
                                                              e        eT T        T  ,

                                                                         31
which admits a closed-form exponential affine solution, which we derive in the Appendix:

                                       W T (t, `t , θt , yt ) = eyt +H(T −t)+I(T −t)`t −J(T −t)θt .                                                                     (61)

The date-t present value of a claim to date-T dividends is, as before,
                                                                                 
               T                          ∂  T                      T
             V (t, `t , θt , yt ) dt =      W (t, `t , θt , yt ) + P (t, θt , yt ) dt.                                                                                  (62)
                                         ∂T

   Expected excess returns on the dividend strips satisfy
             T                                       T                              
        1    dV (t, `t , θt , yt )              1         dΛ       dV (t, `t , θt , yt )
          E                         − r dt = − E
       dt    V T (t, `t , θt , yt )             dt         Λ       V T (t, `t , θt , yt )
                                            = θΩ(τ, `t , θt , yt )                                                                                                      (63)

where Ω(τ, `t , θt , yt ) is given in the Appendix. Dividend strip volatility is
                                           s                      2
                                    P, τ      1 dV T (t, θt , yt )
                                  σ      ≡
                                             dt V T (t, θt , yt )
                                         = Ω(τ, `t , θt , yt ).                                                                                                         (64)

We calibrate the leverage ratio parameters as in Table 10.
  We report the dividend strip return and volatility term structures in Figure (12)
below. This figure captures one of the main results of the paper, namely, that our
modified version of the CC-model generates downward sloping term structures for both
expected returns and volatilities of dividend strips, consistent with the empirical findings
of BBK, even though Figure (9) shows that the term structure of EBIT strips expected
returns and variances are upward sloping.
                       Dividend Strip Expected Excess Return                                             Dividend Strip Return Volatility
       Excess Return                                                                               vol

                                                                                                0.15
        0.05


        0.04
                                                                                                0.10
        0.03


        0.02
                                                                                                0.05

        0.01


                                                                    Time Horizon HyearsL                                                         Time Horizon HyearsL
                           5            10           15        20                                         5            10             15    20



Figure 12: Term structure of Dividend Strip expected returns (equation (63)) and volatil-
ities (equation (64)) for the CC economy. Parameters are set as in Table 8 and 10.




                                                                                           32
5.5    Equity Returns
The value of equity equals the claim to all dividends:

                           V (`t , θt , yt ) ≈ P (θt , yt ) 1 − e`t .
                                                                   
                                                                                      (65)

Excess return on equity is equal to excess return on EBIT (equation (55)) scaled by the
leverage factor:
                                                         
                           V                       1                 
                          µ −r =                              σy + Gν θt .            (66)
                                                1 − e`t

This equation captures “dividend irrelevance” in that future capital structure decisions
do not impact equity returns (or equity value) today. Similarly, equity return volatility
is scaled up by the same factor
                                                        
                                   V              1                  
                               σ       =                      σy + Gν .               (67)
                                               1 − e`t

    Results of our calibration are in Table 11.

5.6    Discussion
Even though in this section we focus on a different asset pricing framework than in
the previous section, with time-varying expected return and no cash-flow predictability,
we find similar patterns when looking at the term structure of dividend strip return
volatilities. With endogenous dividend dynamics derived from a similar mean-reverting
process for aggregate leverage, we find that the short term dividend claims are riskier
than long-term claims. As a result they display higher volatility and expected returns
than long-term claims.


6     Conclusion
Many leading asset pricing models such as Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Bansal
and Yaron (2004) predict that the term structure of excess returns and volatilities of div-
idend strips are strongly upward sloping. However, the empirical findings of Binsbergen,
Brandt and Koijen (2011) suggest otherwise. We first show that, in contrast to the pre-
dictions of these leading models, empirical estimates for the variance ratios of dividends
are decreasing with horizon. We then modify these leading models by retaining their

                                                   33
pricing kernels, but replacing their dividend dynamics with processes that are consistent
with this empirical fact. We show that this modification allows these models to retain
their ability to match salient features of stock and bond returns while simultaneously
generating and dividend strips with decreasing term structures of expected returns and
volatilities.
   More ambitiously, we provide an economic mechanism that explains why dividend
variance ratios should be decreasing with horizon. Specifically, we determine ‘endoge-
nous’ dividend dynamics consistent with exogenously specified unlevered cash flow (i.e.,
EBIT) dynamics, and with a dynamic capital structure policy that generates stationary
leverage ratios. This approach generates dividends that are riskier than EBIT in the
short run, but cointegrated with EBIT in the long run. Intuitively, this is because when
a firm rebalances its debt levels over time to maintain a stationary leverage process,
shareholders are being forced to divest (invest) when the firm does well (poorly). This
interaction transfers risk from long horizon dividends to short horizon dividends, pushing
downward the term structure of dividend strip volatilities.
   Our modified dividend process also helps explain long-horizon “excess volatility” in
that it generates models where stock returns are more volatile than long-horizon dividend
volatility, even if the market prices of risk are constant. This prediction is more in line
with observation, and eliminates a counterfactual prediction of the original BY model
that stock return volatility should be significantly smaller than long horizon dividend
volatility.




                                            34
7       Appendix
7.1      Proof of Equation(9)
Since

                                   M1T (t, xt , yt ) ≡ Et [eyT ]                                      (68)

is a P-martingale, it follows that
                                                         !
                                                   σy2           σy2           σx2
          0 = Mt − κx xMx + My          g+x−                 +         Myy +       M + σy σx1 Mxy .   (69)
                                                    2            2             2 xx

Since state vector dynamics are exponentially affine, it is well known that the solution
is of the form:

                           M T (t, xt , yt ) = eyt +A0 (T −t)+xt A1 (T −t) .                          (70)

Defining τ = (T − t), we identify initial conditions via

                             ET [eyT ] = eyT +A0 (τ =0)+xt A1 (τ =0) ,                                (71)

and hence A0 (τ = 0) = 0, A1 (τ = 0) = 0.           Plugging equation (70) into equation (69),
collecting terms linear and independent of x, we obtain the ODE’s

                                 A01 = 1 − κx A1
                                           σ2
                                 A00 = g + x A21 + σy σx1 A1 .                                        (72)
                                            2
The solutions are
                   1
                      1 − e−κx τ
                                 
        A1 (τ ) =
                  κx
                                                  2 
                         σy σx1                      σx                 κ 
                                                                          x   2
                                                                                    
        A0 (τ ) = gτ +             (τ − A1 (τ )) +        τ − A1 (τ ) −      A  (τ )  . (73)
                          κx                        2κ2x                 2    1




7.2      Proof of Equation(10)
Since

                                  M T (t, xt , yt ) ≡ Et e2yT
                                                             
                                                                                                      (74)


                                                  35
is a P-martingale, it follows that
                                                       !
                                                 σy2         σy2  σx2
       0 = Mt − κx xMx + My            g+x−                + Myy + Mxx + σy σx1 Mxy .   (75)
                                                  2         2     2

Since state vector dynamics are exponentially affine, it is well known that the solution
is of the form:

                         M T (t, xt , yt ) = e2yt +A2 (T −t)+xt A3 (T −t) .             (76)

Defining τ = (T − t), we identify initial conditions via

                         ET e2yT = e2yT +A2 (τ =0)+xt A3 (τ =0) ,
                                 
                                                                                        (77)

and hence A2 (τ = 0) = 0, A3 (τ = 0) = 0. Plugging equation (76) into equation (75),
collecting terms linear and independent of x, we obtain the ODE’s

                           A03 = 2 − κx A3
                                                  σx2 2
                           A02 = 2g + σy2 +          A + 2σy σx1 A3 .                   (78)
                                                  2 3
The solutions are
           2
             1 − e−κx τ
                        
A3 (τ ) =                                                                               (79)
          κx
                                                      2 
          
                2
                           2σy σx1                      σx                   κ 
                                                                                x   2
                                                                                          
A2 (τ ) = 2g + σy τ +                 (2τ − A3 (τ )) +        4τ − 2A3 (τ ) −      A  (τ )  .
                              κx                        2κ2x                   2    3




7.3    EBIT strip in the BY economy
Here we derive the solution to Equation (17):

                            P T (t, xt , yt ) = e−r(T −t) EQ
                                                           t
                                                             [eyT ] .                   (80)

   Note that e−rt P T (t, xt , yt ) is a Q-martingale, implying that

  0 = EQ d e−rt P T (t, xt , yt )
                                     

                                                    1           σ2
     = −rP + Pt + (g Q + x)yPy + κx (xQ − x)Px + y 2 σy2 Pyy + x Pxx + σy σx1 yPxy(81)
                                                                                   ,
                                                    2           2
where we have defined σx2 ≡ σx1
                             2     2
                                + σx2 . Since the state vector dynamics are affine, it
is well known (see, for example, Duffie and Kan (1996)) that the solution takes the
exponential affine form:

                          P T (t, xt , yt ) = eyt +F (T −t)+G(T −t) xt .                (82)

                                                36
Plugging this functional form into equation (81) and then collecting terms linear and
independent of x, we find that the deterministic functions F (τ ) and G(τ ) (where τ ≡
(T − t)) satisfy the Ricatti equations:

                        Gτ = 1 − κx G                                                     (83)
                                                                                  2
                                                                                  σx 2
                        Fτ = (g Q − r) + G(σy σx1 + κx xQ ) +                       G,    (84)
                                                                                  2
with boundary conditions G(0) = 0, F (0) = 0. The solutions are
          1
              1 − e−κx τ
                         
G(τ ) =
         κx
                                                 2 
            Q              σy σx1    Q                σx              κx 2 
F (τ ) = (g − r) τ +              +x     τ − G(τ ) +       τ − G(τ ) − G (τ ) (85)
                                                                               .
                            κx                       2κ2x             2

7.4    Enterprise Value in BY Economy
Here we derive the constants F and G used in equation (21). Enterprise value can be
determined via
                                                     Z       ∞                   
                                                 Q                   −r(s−t) ys
                          P (xt , yt ) = Et                       ds e       e        .   (86)
                                                          t

The exact solution is
                                             Z   ∞
                            P (xt , yt ) =           P T (t, xt , yt ) dT.                (87)
                                             t

This explicit solution can be approximated very accurately by an expression of the form:

                                 P (xt , yt ) ≈ eyt +F +Gxt ,                             (88)

where the constants (F, G) can be derived by some local Taylor expansion argument as
in Campbell-Shiller, or by minimizing some global error metric as in the appendix of
Chen, Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2009). Since in our case, the closed-form solution
is known, we simply minimize the mean-square error between the approximation and
the closed-form solution. Results are shown in the main text. The approximation error
(difference between exact and approximate solution) in absolute terms is less than 0.002,
and in relative terms less than 0.005.




                                                     37
7.5     Solution for dividend strips VtT in the BY economy
Recall that                                                                     
                     T                   ∂  T                      T
                 V (t, `t , xt , yt ) =    W (t, `t , xt , yt ) + P (t, xt , yt ) .
                                        ∂T
where

                     W T (t, `t , xt , yt ) = EQ
                                                  −r(T −t) ` +y +F +Gx 
                                               t e         eT T           .                     (89)
                                                                       T




Therefore all we need is an analytic expression for W T (t). Given that the state vector
dynamics are affine, it is well known that the solution is of the form:

                         W T (t, `t , xt , yt ) = eyt +H(T −t)+I(T −t)`t +J(T −t)xt ,           (90)

where the functions H, I, J satisfy the PDE in equation (34). After defining time to
maturity τ ≡ (T − t), we find that they solve the following system of equations:

  I 0 (τ ) = −κ` I
  J 0 (τ ) = ακ` I − κx J + 1
                     Q                   σ2      σ2
 H 0 (τ ) = −r + κ` ` I + κx xQ J + g Q + ` I 2 + x J 2 − σx1 Gσx1 + σy + Gσx2
                                                                            2
                                                                             
                                                                                 IJ
                                         2       2
              −σy Gσx1 + σy I + σx1 σy J.                                        (91)

The initial conditions are H(0) = F , I(0) = 1, J(0) = G.                   The solutions are

I(τ ) = e−κ` τ
                                                        
                 1         ακ`       −κx τ   1         ακ`
J(τ ) = G −        −                e      +    +              e−κ` τ
                κx       κx − κ`             κx      κx − κ`
                             h Q                      iZ τ                          τ
                                                                                    Z
                 Q                                                        Q
                                                                    
H(τ ) = F + g − r τ + κ` ` − σy Gσx1 + σy                  ds I(s) + κx x + σx1 σy      ds J(s)
                                                        0                             0
          σ`2 τ                σx2 τ                                       τ
               Z                  Z                                         Z
                           2                 2                          2
                                                                
        +          ds I(s) +          ds J(s) − σx1 Gσx1 + σy + Gσx2           ds I(s)J(s),
          2 0                  2 0                                           0
                                                                                            (92)




                                                     38
where
   Z              τ
                                  1
                                        1 − e−κ` τ
                                                   
                      ds I(s) =
              0                   κ`
               τ
                                                                                                    ακ2`
         Z                                                                                            
                                   1          1          ακ`              −κx τ       1
                                                                                                               1 − e−κ` τ
                                                                                                                         
                      ds J(s) =          G−      −                   1−e          + τ+
             0                    κx         κx        κx − κ`                        κx          κx − κ`
         Z   τ
                                   1
                   ds I 2 (s) =          1 − e−2κ` τ
                                                     
             0                    2κ`
         Z    τ                                                2                                                 2
                                    1          1           ακ`              −2κx τ          τ            1          ακ`
                  ds J 2 (s) =                                                                                                  1 − e−2κ`
                                                                                    
                                          G−       −                   1−e            +            +
         0                        2κx         κx        κx − κ`                             κ2x         2κ`      κx − κ`
                                                                                                        
                                      2         1          ακ`              −κx τ           2            ακ`
                                                                                                                    1 − e−κ` τ
                                                                                                                              
                                  + 2 G−            −                  1−e          +
                                     κx         κx       κ − κ`                            κx κ`      κx − κ`
                                                     x                                  
                                              1          ακ`            ακ`              1
                                                                                                    1 − e−(κx +κ` )τ
                                                                                                                     
                                  +2 G −          −
                                             κx        κx − κ`        κx − κ`       κx + κ`
Z    τ                                                                                                  
                                         1               1         ακ`                −(κx +κ` )τ          1
                                                                                                                   1 − e−κ` τ
                                                                                                                             
         ds I(s)J(s) =                            G−        −                 1−e                   +
 0                                  κx + κ`             κ        κx − κ`                                 κx κ`
                                                     x
                                            α
                                                        1 − e−2κ` τ .
                                                                    
                                  +                                                                                                    (9
                                        2(κx − κ` )

Hence, defining τ ≡ (T − t), we have

                                ∂  yt +H(T −t)+I(T −t)`t +J(T −t)xt 
V T (t, `t , xt , yt ) =            e                                     + P T (t, xt , yt )
                               ∂T
                             = W T (t, `t , xt , yt ) [−κ` I(τ )`t + xt (ακ` I(τ ) − κx J(τ ) + 1) − r        (94)
                                                                          2             2
                                    Q                                   σ            σ
                               +κ` ` I(τ ) + κx xQ J(τ ) + g Q + ` I 2 (τ ) + x J 2 (τ ) + P T (t, xt , yt )
                                                                         2            2
                                                                          2
                                                                                                               
                               −I(τ )J(τ ) σx1 (Gσx1 + σy ) + Gσx2           −I(τ )σy (Gσx1 + σy ) − J(τ )σx1 σy .

7.6                Identification of Ω1 and Ω2
Applying Itô’s lemma to V T (t) ≡ V T (t, `t , xt , yt ) we find
                                                                 
dV (t) = rV (t) dt + V` (t) σ`1 + Vx (t) σx1 + Vy (t) σy dz1Q (t) + V`T (t) σ`2 + VxT (t) σx2 dz2Q (t),
  T              T          T             T                 T
                                                                                             


where we have defined

                                                σ`1 = −(Gσx1 + σy )                                           (95)
                                                σ`2 = −Gσx2 .                                                 (96)




                                                            39
Therefore
                                   (V`T (t) σ`1 + VxT (t) σx1 + VyT σy )
                        Ω1 =                                                            (97)
                                               V T (t)
                                (V`T (t) σ`2 + VxT (t) σx2 )
                        Ω2    =                              .                          (98)
                                          V T (t)

All derivatives can be computed in closed form based on the closed-form expression for
V above.

7.7    Solution to the EBIT strip price in the CC economy
Here we derive the solution to the EBIT strip price in the CC economy:

                             P T (t, θt , yt ) = e−r(T −t) EQ
                                                            t
                                                              [eyT ] .                  (99)

   From equation (49), we see that e−rt P T (t, xt , yt ) is a Q-martingale, implying that

   0 = EQ d e−rt P T (t, xt , yt )
                                  

                          σy2                 Q Q
                                                          σy2   ν2
     = −rP + Pt + (g −         − σy θt )Py + κ (θ − θ)Pθ + Pyy + Pθθ − σy νPθy
                                                                            (100)
                                                                               ,
                           2                              2     2
Since the state vector dynamics are affine, it is well known (see, for example, Duffie and
Kan (1996)) that the solution takes the exponential affine form:

                          P T (t, θt , yt ) = eyt +F (T −t)−G(T −t) θt .              (101)

Plugging this functional form into equation (100) and then collecting terms linear and
independent of θ, we find that the deterministic functions F (τ ) and G(τ ) (where τ ≡
(T − t)) satisfy the Ricatti equations:

                       Gτ = σy − κQ G                                                 (102)
                                                                      2
                                                             Q      ν 2
                       Fτ = (g − r) + G(σy ν − κQ θ ) +               G,              (103)
                                                                    2
with boundary conditions G(0) = 0, F (0) = 0. The solutions are
          σ         Q
                        
G(τ ) = Qy 1 − e−κ τ                                                                 (104)
         κ
                                   Q
                                     !
                       σy ν − κQ θ
                                                     2                            
                                                         ν      σy              1 2
F (τ ) = (g − r) τ +                   σy τ − G(τ ) +              σy τ − G(τ ) − G (τ ) .
                            κQ                          2κQ     κQ               2


                                                40
7.8     Enterprise Value in the CC Economy
The enterprise value can be determined via
                                          Z                    ∞                     
                                        Q                              −r(s−t) ys
                        P (θt , yt ) = Et                           ds e          e       .                     (105)
                                                            t

The exact solution is:                              Z   ∞
                                   P (θt , yt ) =           P T (t, θt , yt ) dT.
                                                    t
   We approximate this exact solution using an expression of the form:

                                      P (θt , yt ) ≈ eyt +F −Gθt .                                              (106)

The coefficients (F, G) are chosen to minimize the mean-square error between the ap-
proximate and the closed-form solution. Results are shown in the main text. The
approximation error (difference between exact and approximate solution) in absolute
terms is less than 0.06, and in relative terms less than 0.0012.

7.9     Solution for dividend strips VtT in the CC economy
Recall that                                                                       
                     T                     ∂  T                      T
                   V (t, `t , θt , yt ) =    W (t, `t , θt , yt ) + P (t, θt , yt ) .                           (107)
                                          ∂T
where

                     W T (t, `t , θt , yt ) = EQ
                                                  −r(T −t) ` +y +F −Gθ 
                                               t e         eT T           .                                     (108)
                                                                       T



It can be shown that W T (t, `t , θt , yt ) satisfies the PDE
                                                                                              !
                                               Q
                                                                            σy2                             Q
                                                                                                  + Wθ κQ (θ − θt )
                                   
   0 = −rW + Wt + W` κ` ` + α θ − ` + Wy                               g−         − σy θt
                                                                            2
              σ`2      σ2      ν2
          +       W`` + y Wyy + Wθθ − σ` σy W`y + νσ` W`θ − νσy Wyθ ,                                           (109)
              2         2      2
where we have defined
                                                               
                                          σ` ≡          Gν + σy .                                               (110)

Since the dynamics of the state vector are affine, the solution takes an exponential-affine
form:

                         W T (t, `t , θt , yt ) = eyt +H(T −t)+I(T −t)`t −J(T −t)θt ,                           (111)

                                                        41
To find the functions (H(τ ), I(τ ), J(τ )) we plug equation (111) into equation (109) and
then collect terms linear in θ, linear in `, and independent of (θ, `) to obtain three
coupled Riccatti equations:

       I 0 (τ ) = −κ` I
       J 0 (τ ) = σy − κQ J − κ` αQ I
        0                           Q Q                   ν 2 2 σ`2 2
       H (τ ) = g − r + (νσy − κ θ )J + (κ` ` − σy σ` )I + J + I − νσ` IJ. (112)
                                                          2     2
Initial conditions are I(0) = 1, J(0) = −G, H(0) = F . Solutions are

        I(τ ) = eκ` τ
                                                            
                     κ` αQ      −κ` τ
                                                 κ` αQ       σy        Q      σ
        J(τ ) =            Q
                               e      − G+             Q
                                                           + Q e−κ τ + Qy              (113)
                  κ` − κ                       κ −κ          κ                κ
                                            Z τ `                         Z τ
                                          Q
        H(τ ) = (g − r)τ + (νσy − κQ θ )        J(s) ds + (κ` ` − σy σ` )     I(s)ds
                                             0                             0
                  ν2 τ 2               σ`2 τ 2
                      Z                   Z                 Z τ
                +          J (s)ds +         I (s)ds − νσ`      I(s)J(s)ds.            (114)
                   2 0                 2 0                   0

All integrals can be obtained in closed-form but not reported for the sake of brevity.
Finally V T (t, `t , θt , yt ) can be obtained in closed-form from the expression for W T (t)
and P (t) using equation (107) above.
   Applying Itô’s lemma to V T (t) we find:
                                                                   
            dV T (t) = rV T (t) dt + VyT σy − VθT ν − V`T (νG + σy ) dzt .             (115)

Thus
                                        (VyT σy − VθT ν − V`T (νG + σy ))
                    Ω(τ, `, θ, y) =                                         .          (116)
                                                     V T (t)

7.10        Guaranteeing positive dividends and risk-free debt: Asset
            sales
Our specified dynamics for log-leverage, and in turn the endogenously implied dividend
dynamics, have two shortcomings. First, log-leverage can become positive, which is
inconsistent with the assumption that debt is risk-free if there is limited liability for
equityholders. Second, our process does not guarantee that dividends remain positive
at all times. While negative dividends (i.e., total payouts are cash-dividends plus share

                                              42
repurchases minus share issuances) are possible, empirically this is rarely observed at
the aggregate level. Thus, to make the model more realistic, we extend it by introducing
asset sales that (a) maintain a strictly negative log-leverage ratio, and (b) maintain
positive dividends. We find that for the parameter vector used in the benchmark case,
the differences between the closed-form presented in the text and solution with asset
sales are small. In our simulation, we find that guaranteeing positive dividends seems to
be sufficient to rule out positive log-leverage ratios, therefore we only discuss in detail
how to guarantee positive dividends.21 The approach to guarantee negative log-leverage
is similar.
    In order to guarantee positive dividends, we introduce a reflecting boundary near zero
dividends. In particular, we assume that when the instantaneous dividend approaches
zero, the firm sells assets in order to repurchase some outstanding debt, in turn lowering
the leverage ratio. Thus, for example, if the current dividend is equal to zero, and the
current state vector is (yt , θt , `t ), it follows that the current enterprise value and current
value of debt is

                                      P (yt , θt ) = eyt +F −Gθt
                                   B(yt , θt , `t ) = e`t +yt +F −Gθt .                           (117)

Let us assume that the firm sells assets so that the new enterprise value is

                                 P (yt − ∆yt , θt ) = eyt −∆yt +F −Gθt
                     B(yt − ∆yt , θt , `t − ∆`t ) = e`t −∆`t +yt −∆yt +F −Gθt .                   (118)

All funds raised by the asset sale are used to reduce the outstanding debt, implying that

         P (yt − ∆yt , θt ) − P (yt , θt ) = B(yt − ∆yt , θt , `t − ∆`t ) − B(yt , θt , `t ).     (119)

This implies that for a given ∆`, the value of ∆y is determined via

                                                1 − e`t
                                                         
                              ∆y = − log                    .                                     (120)
                                              1 − e`t −∆`
  21
     While intuitively, guaranteeing positive dividends would seem to be sufficient to insure that equity
always has positive value, and therefore log-leverage would be negative, we were not able to prove
this rigorously, due to the endogenous nature of our dividends, which are a function of the leverage
dynamics, and depend on the assumption that debt is risk-free. It is thus simpler to impose that
log-leverage remains negative to guarantee that this assumption is verified.



                                                   43
Hence, to maintain positive dividends, we modify the state vector dynamics for (yt , xt , `t )
from equations (7), (8), (26) to:
                                       !
                                 σy2
            dy =       g+x−                dt + σy dz1 + ∆y.                            (121)
                                 2
            dx = −κx x dt + σx1 dz1 + σx2 dz2 .
                     P                        
            d`t = κ` ` + αx − ` dt − Gσx1 + σy dz1 − Gσx2 dz2 + ∆`.                     (122)

In our numerical implementation, we exogenously choose the the amount ∆` by which to
                                                                             √
‘reflect’ the process. For the numerical results below, we choose ∆` = 10.0σ` dt, where
σ` is the diffusion volatility of the leverage process and dt is the numerical discretization
time step.
   In Figure 13 below we compare the term structures of dividend strip expected returns
and volatilities as reported in the main text (for the CC economy), and compare them
to the same quantities obtained via simulations for the model that implements asset
sales to keep dividends positive and maintain leverage ratios below one. We see from
the figure that the numerical solution are very similar to the closed-form solution, indi-
cating that, for our parameter choices, the probability of dividends going negative does
not significantly affect our results. In fact, the simulation also differs from the closed-
form solutions because, to be closer to our empirical approach, we also time-aggregate
dividends over one year, as we explain next. However, both effects, time aggregation
and asset sales, appear to have minimal effects on our results relative to the closed-form
solution reported in the text.

7.11     Time Aggregation of Dividends
In the theory part we present the term structure of dividend strips defined as claims to
the instantaneous dividends, and estimated at the long-run mean of the state vector.
This allows us to make use of the closed form solutions for all the prices and moments
of returns. Instead, in empirical work typically, we consider dividends aggregated over
one full year.
   For example, aggregating over one year, the computation of expected dividend growth




                                                  44
                      Dividend Strip Expected Excess Return                                                           Dividend Strip Return Volatility
      Excess Return                                                                                   vol

                                                                                                   0.15
       0.05


       0.04
                                                                                                   0.10
       0.03


       0.02
                                                                                                   0.05

       0.01


                                                                       Time Horizon HyearsL                                                                          Time Horizon HyearsL
                           5           10            15           20                                                   5            10             15           20
             Asset Sales: Cumulative Dividend Strip Expected Return                                         Asset Sales: Cumulative Dividend Strip Volatility
         ER                                                                                           vol

                                                                                                   0.15
      0.05


      0.04
                                                                                                   0.10
      0.03


      0.02
                                                                                                   0.05

      0.01


                                                                       Time Horizon HyearsL                                                                          Time Horizon HyearsL
                       2          4         6             8       10                                              2            4           6             8      10



Figure 13: Term structure of Dividend Strip expected returns (equation (63)) and volatil-
ities (equation (64)) for the CC economy versus similar term structure for claims in a
model where asset sales are implemented whenever leverage reaches one to maintain
positive dividends and guarantee that leverage cannot go above unity. Parameters are
set as in table 8 and 10.



and variance ratio becomes:
                                                                                 !
                                                                  E0 DT +1 − DT
                                                         
                                                         1
                                         gD,T         ≡     log
                                                         T          E0 [D1 − D0 ]
                                                                     h              2 i 
                                                         
                                                         1        E 0   D T +1
                                                                               − D T
                                          2
                                         σD,T         ≡     log                     2  .                                                                                               (123)
                                                         T
                                                                      
                                                                   E0 DT +1 − DT

   Also, the dividend strip claims considered by BBK are typically claims to the sum of
all dividends paid out by the index over the year. In this section we compare the effects
of aggregating dividends over one year for various statistics presented in the paper, and
show that the difference is not economically significant. In Figure 13 above we compare
the term structures of dividend strip expected returns and volatilities as reported in the
main text, which refer to claims to future instantaneous dividend flows, to the expected
returns and volatilities on claims to the cumulative dividends aggregated over one year
                                                                         RT
before maturity (so the payout at the maturity T of the dividend strip is T −1 D(s) ds).
We see from the figure that the slopes on the cumulative dividend claims are almost
indistinguishable from the claims to the instantaneous dividend strips (note that the

                                                                                              45
cumulative dividend picture also differs from the main text model, because it imposes
that dividends remain positive at all times, as explained in the previous section, but
both effects have almost no impact on the predictions of the model).

7.12     Accounting for Investment
Our benchmark framework specifies an exogenous EBIT process and combines that with
a capital structure policy that generates stationary leverage ratios. In this section, we
demonstrate that modifying this framework to account for debt-financed investment still
generates downward sloping variance ratios and term structures of dividend strips (in
fact, even more downward sloping). This robustness check also has the added advantage
that it allows us to better match both the historical one-year volatility of changes in
(log) leverage σ(e) = 0.12 and the conditional correlation between changes in leverage
and changes in x in the BY model that we estimated in the empirical section.
   In order to capture debt-financed investment as parsimoniously as possible, we will
assume all investments are zero net present value projects. In particular, we model
investments (disinvestments) as a simultaneous increase (decrease) in both EBIT y and
leverage `. Intuitively, we are modeling an investment that is paid for by debt (hence,
an increase in debt, and therefore leverage), and immediately generates a permanent
increase in EBIT. Specifically, recall that enterprise value and the current value of debt
are

                                     P (yt , xt ) ≈ eyt +F +Gxt
                                 B(yt , xt , `t ) = e`t +yt +F +Gxt .                         (124)

Now, consider an investment opportunity that will permanently impact EBIT by ∆y. In
order to pay for this increase, debt is issued, which in turn increases the level of leverage
by ∆`. It follows that the new enterprise value and outstanding debt levels become:

                               P (yt + ∆yt , xt ) = eyt +∆yt +F +Gxt
                    B(yt + ∆yt , xt , `t + ∆`t ) = e`t +∆`t +yt +∆yt +F +Gxt .                (125)

For reasons of parsimony, we consider only investments (or disinvestments) that are zero
NPV. As such, enterprise value changes by the same amount that outstanding debt value
changes (leaving equity unchanged). Hence,

        P (yt + ∆yt , xt ) − P (yt , xt ) = B(yt + ∆yt , xt , `t + ∆`t ) − B(yt , xt , `t )   (126)

                                                  46
This implies that for a given ∆`, the value of ∆y is determined via

                                 1 − e`t
                                          
            ∆y     =     log
                               1 − e`t +∆`
                          `                    "        2  ` #
                 O(∆`)2      e             1   2      e`           e
                   =             `
                                    ∆` + (∆`)            `
                                                             +          .             (127)
                           1−e             2        1−e          1 − e`

   Hence, to account for investments, we modify state vector dynamics for (yt , xt , `t )
from equations (7), (8), (26) to:
                                     !
                               σy2
            dy =      g+x−               dt + σy dz1 + ∆y.                            (128)
                                2
           dx = −κx x dt + σx1 dz1 + σx2 dz2 .
                    P                        
           d`t = κ` ` + αx − ` dt − Gσx1 + σy dz1 − Gσx2 dz2 + ∆`.                    (129)

We plot the results in Figure (14) for the case ∆` = 0.0 dz3 and ∆` = 0.10 dz3 . All other
parameters are the same as in the benchmark (although we impose positive dividends
as discussed in the previous section.) We choose this parameter value to match the
empirical one year volatility of log leverage changes. Interestingly, we find that the slope
of the term structure of dividend strip volatilities becomes even more steep. Intuitively
this is because long run dividend volatility is cointegrated with EBIT volatility, and the
investment process we consider barely impacts long horizon EBIT volatility. However,
the addition of another source of risk increases overall volatility. Stationary leverage
ratios tend to shift this risk to the shorter horizons.

7.13     The basis between dividend strips extracted from options
         and dividend swaps
Given the discussion in the literature about dividend swaps (e.g., BBK), here we point
out that dividend strip prices extracted from index options and dividend strip prices
obtained directly from dividend swap strikes, should not, even in theory, be equal.
Indeed, the former are a claim to the dividends as they get paid over the maturity of
the option contract, whereas the latter are a claim to the undiscounted sum of dividends
paid out over the maturity of the swap. Especially for long maturities this can lead to
a substantial difference. And, of course, the sum of all dividend swap strikes should
not be equal, in equilibrium, to the stock value. More specifically, the dividend strip


                                                47
                  Positive Dividends via Asset Sales:                                                     Positive Dividends via Asset Sales:
               Cumulative Dividend Strip Expected Return                                                 Cumulative Dividend Strip Volatility
          ER                                                                                       vol

       0.06
                                                                                                0.15
       0.05

       0.04
                                                                                                0.10

       0.03

       0.02                                                                                     0.05

       0.01

                                                                Time Horizon HyearsL                                                                 Time Horizon HyearsL
                  2          4          6          8       10                                            2            4         6          8    10
                      Debt-financed investment:                                                             Debt-financed investment:
               Cumulative Dividend Strip Expected Return                                                 Cumulative Dividend Strip Volatility
          ER                                                                                       vol


       0.06

       0.05                                                                                     0.15


       0.04
                                                                                                0.10
       0.03

       0.02
                                                                                                0.05
       0.01

                                                                Time Horizon HyearsL                                                                 Time Horizon HyearsL
                  2          4          6          8       10                                            2            4         6          8    10



Figure 14: Term structure of Dividend Strip expected returns (equation (63)) and volatil-
ities (equation (64)) for the BY economy. The upper panel presents the results for the
case, where dividends are time-aggregated and we impose that dividends remain positive
and log-leverage negative at all times, as explained in section 7.10. The bottom panel,
presents the case where in addition debt may be issued to finance continuously arriving
investment projects. Parameters are set as in table 4 and 6.



extracted from options or futures, as the difference between the spot price V (t) and the
discounted Futures prices F T (t) = EQ
                                     t [V (T )] is, by absence of arbitrage, equal to:
                                                                Z       T                                    Z    T
                                 −r(T −t)
               V (t) − e                          T
                                              F (t) =                           s
                                                                            V (t)ds ≡ E [                Q
                                                                                                                      e−r(s−t) D(s)ds].                                     (130)
                                                                    t                                         t

   Instead, dividend swaps pay the undiscounted sum of all dividends paid out over
the life of the swap, minus the swap strike (say KtT ) at maturity. Thus the arbitrage
free swap strike satisfies:
                                        Z T
                                T     Q
                              Kt = E [      D(s)ds].                             (131)
                                                                                       t

In turn we see that the option implied (cumulative) dividend strips should always be
lower than the dividend swap strike prices. Figure 15 shows that the difference becomes
significant at longer horizons.




                                                                                           48
                        Option implied versus dividend swap cumulative strip prices
                    price
                   14

                   12

                   10

                    8

                    6

                    4

                    2

                                                                                      Time Horizon HyearsL
                                      5             10            15             20


Figure 15: Term structure of dividend Strip prices extracted from options (or futures)
compared to the fair dividend swap strike. Because the latter omits discounting it is
always higher than the former. Parameters are set as in Table 8 and 10.



References
 [1] A. Abel. Risk premia and term premia in general equilibrium. Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 43:3–33, 1999.

 [2] A. Abel. Equity premia with benchmark levels of consumption, leverage, imperfect
    correlation of consumption and dividends, and distorted beliefs: closed form results.
    Working Paper, 2005.

 [3] A. C. Aydemir, M. Gallmeyer, and B. Hollifield. Financial leverage and the leverage
    effect - a market and firm analysis. Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University,
    2007.

 [4] R. Bansal, R. F. Dittmar, and D. Kiku. Cointegration and consumption risks in
    asset returns. The Review of Financial Studies, 22(3):1343–1375, 2009.

 [5] R. Bansal, R. F. Dittmar, and C. Lundblad. Consumption, dividends, and the cross
    section of equity returns. Working paper, Duke University, 2001.

 [6] R. Bansal, R. F. Dittmar, and C. Lundblad. Consumption, dividends, and the cross
     section of equity returns. Journal of Finance, 60:1639–1672, 2005.

 [7] R. Bansal, D. Kiku, and A. Yaron. Long run risks, the macroeconomy, and asset
     prices. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 100(2):1343–1375, 2010.


                                                            49
 [8] R. Bansal, D. Kiku, and A. Yaron. Risks for the long run: estimation and inference.
    Working paper, Duke University, 2010.

 [9] R. Bansal and A. Yaron. Risks for the long run: a potential resolution of asset
     pricing puzzles. Journal of Finance, 59:1481–1509, 2004.

[10] J. Beeler and J. Campbell. The long-run risks model and aggregate asset prices:
    an empirical assessment. Critical Finance Review, 1:141–182, 2012.

[11] J. H. V. Binsbergen, W. Hueskes, R. S. J. Koijen, and E. B. Vrugt. Equity yields.
    Working paper, Northwestern University, 2011.

[12] O. Boguth, M. Carlson, A. J. Fisher, and M. Simutin. Dividend strips and the term
    structure of equity risk premia: A case study of limits to arbitrage. Working paper,
    University of British Columbia, 2011.

[13] J. Boudoukh, R. Michaely, M. Richardson, and M. Roberts. On the importance
    of measuring payout yield: implications for empirical asset pricing. Journal of
    Finance, 62:877–915, 2007.

[14] J. Campbell. Consumption-based asset pricing. Handbook of the Economics of
    Finance, pages 803–887, 2003.

[15] J. Campbell and J. Cochrane. By force of habit: a consumption-based explanation
    of aggregate stock return behavior. Journal of Political Economy, 107:205–251,
    1999.

[16] J. Campbell and R. Shiller. The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
    dividends and discount factors. The Review of Financial Studies, 1:195–228, 1988.

[17] J. Campbell and M. Yogo. Efficient tests fo stock return predictability. Journal of
    Financial Economics, 81:27–60, 2006.

[18] L. Chen. On the reversal of dividend and return predictability: A tale of two
    periods. Journal of Financial Economics, 92(1):128–151, 2009.

[19] L. Chen, P. Collin-Dufresne, and R. Goldstein. On the relation between the credit
    spread puzzle and the equity premium puzzle. The Review of Financial Studies,
    22(9):3367–3409, 2009.


                                            50
[20] L. Chen, Z. Da, and R. Priestley. Dividend smoothing and predictability. Forth-
    coming, Management Science, 2011.

[21] J. H. Cochrane. Volatility tests and efficient markets: A review essay. Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 27:463–485, 1991.

[22] J. H. Cochrane. Permanent and transitory components of gdp and stock prices.
     109:241–265, 1994.

[23] J. H. Cochrane. Financial markets and the real economy. Handbook of the Equity
    Premium, pages 237–325, 2007.

[24] J. H. Cochrane. The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability. The
     Review of Financial Studies, 21(4):1533–1575, 2008.

[25] P. Collin-Dufresne and R. S. Goldstein. Do credit spreads reflect stationary leverage
    ratios? Journal of Finance, 56(5):1929–1957, 2001.

[26] M. Croce, M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson. Investor information, long-run risk, and
     the duration of risky cash-flows. Working Paper, UC Berkeley, 2000.

[27] H. DeAngelo, L. DeAngelo, and D. J. Skinner. Are dividends disappearing? div-
    idend concentration and the consolidation of earnings. Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics, 72:425–456, 2004.

[28] D. Duffie and R. Kan. A yield-factor model of interest rates. Mathematical Finance,
     6(4):379–406, 1996.

[29] R. Engle and C. Granger. Co-integration and error-correction: representation,
    estimation and testing. Econometrica, 55:251–276, 1987.

[30] L. G. Epstein and S. E. Zin. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior
     of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica, 57:937–
    969, 1989.

[31] E. Fama and K. French. Disappearing dividends: Changing firm characteristics or
    lower propensity to pay. Journal of Financial Economics, 60 (1):3–43, 2001.

[32] E. Fama and K. French. Testing trade-off and pecking order predictions about
    dividends and debt. Review of Financial Studies, 15:1–33, 2002.

                                           51
[33] E. Fischer, R. Heinkel, and J. Zechner. Dynamic capital structure choice: theory
    and tests. Journal of Finance, 44:19–40, 1989.

[34] M. J. Flannery and K. P. Rangan. Partial adjustment toward target capital struc-
     tures. Journal of Financial Economics, 79:469–506, 2006.

[35] R. Goldstein, N. Ju, and H. Leland. An EBIT-based model of dynamic capital
    structure. Journal of Business, 74:483–512, 2001.

[36] J. Gomes, L. Kogan, and M. Yogo. Durability of output and expected stock returns.
    Journal of Political Economy, 117:941–86, 2009.

[37] G. Grullon and R. Michaely. Dividends, share repurchases, and the substitution
    hypothesis. Journal of Finance, 57(4):1649–1684, 2002.

[38] L. P. Hansen, J. C. Heaton, and N. li. Consumption strikes back?: measuring long
    run risk. Journal of Political Economy, 116(2):260–302, 2008.

[39] L. Kogan and D. Papanikolaou. A theory of firm characteristics and stock returns:
    the role of investment-specific shocks. Working paper, Northwestern University,
    2012.

[40] R. Koijen and S. V. Nieuwerburgh. Predictability of stock returns and cash flows.
    Annual Review of Financial Economics, 3:467–491, 2011.

[41] B. Larrain and M. Yogo. Does firm value move too much to be justified by subse-
    quent changes in cash flow? Journal of Financial Economics, 87:200–226, 2008.

[42] S. F. LeRoy and R. D. Porter. The present-value relation: tests based on implied
    variance bounds. Econometrica, 49:555–574, 1981.

[43] M. Lettau and S. Ludvigson. Expected returns and expected dividend growth.
     Journal of Financial Economics, 76:583–626, 2005.

[44] M. Lettau and S. Ludvigson. Measuring and modeling variation in the risk-return
    tradeoff. Handbook of Financial Econometrics, 1:617–690, 2010.

[45] M. Lettau and S. V. Nieuwerburgh. Reconciling the return predictability evidence.
    The Review of Financial Studies, 21(4):1607–1652, 2008.


                                         52
[46] M. Lettau and J. A. Wachter. Why is long-horizon equity less risky? a duration-
    based explanation of the value premium. Journal of Finance, 62:55–92, 2007.

[47] A. W. Lo and A. C. MacKinlay. Stock market prices do not follow random walks:
    Evidence from a simple specification test. Review of Financial Studies, 1:41–66,
    1988.

[48] A. W. Lo and A. C. MacKinlay. Stock market prices do not follow random walks:
    Evidence from a simple specification test. The Review of Financial Studies, 1:41–66,
    1988.

[49] S. Ludvigson. Advances in consumption-based asset pricing: empirical tests. Forth-
     coming, Handbook of the Economics of Finance, 2011.

[50] T. Marsh and R. Merton. Dividend variability and variance bounds tests for the
    rationality of stock market prices. American Economic Review, 76:483–448, 1986.

[51] L. Menzly, T. Santos, and P. Veronesi. Understanding predictability. Journal of
     Political Economy, 112:1–47, 2004.

[52] M. Miller and F. Modigliani. The cost of capital, corporation finance, and the
    theory of investment. American Economic Review, 48:261–297, 1958.

[53] T. Opler and S. Titman. The debt-equity choice: An analysis of issuing firms.
    Working paper, Ohio-State University, 1997.

[54] T. Santos and P. Veronesi. Labor income and predictable stock returns. Review of
    Financial Studies, 19:1–44, 2006.

[55] G. W. Schwert. Indexes of u.s. stock prices from 1802 to 1987. Journal of Business,
    63:399–426, 1990.

[56] R. Shiller. Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in
    dividends? American Economic Review, 71:421–436, 1981.

[57] R. Shiller. The marsh-merton model of managers’ smoothing of dividends. American
    Economic Review, 76:499–503, 1986.

[58] M. Spiegel. Forecasting the equity premium: where we stand today. The Review of
    Financial Studies, 21(4):1453–1454, 2008.

                                          53
[59] R. Stambaugh. Predictive regressions. Journal of Financial Economics, 54:375–421,
    1999.

[60] J. van Binsbergen, M. W. Brandt, and R. S. Koijen. On the timing and pricing of
     dividends. American Economic Review.

[61] J. H. van Binsbergen and R. Koijen. Predictive regressions: A present-value ap-
    proach. Journal of Finance, 65(4):1439–1471, 2010.

[62] J. A. Wachter. A consumption-based model of the term structure of interest rates.
    Journal of Financial Economics, 79:365–399, 2006.




                                         54
                                                                                   Diff     Diff
  Maturity (T)        1       2       4          6    8       10       15     20   1-10     1-20

  Dividend Definition 1:   Market-invested dividends
    T
  σD,1           15.04     14.59 12.62 10.92 9.13 8.07 7.95 7.45                   6.97     7.59
    T
  σD,2           14.74     14.06 11.82 9.96 8.21 7.14 6.70 5.99                    7.60     8.87
  VR              1.00      0.97 0.72 0.54 0.42 0.32 0.31 0.32                       −        −
  s.e.(VR)          −       0.09 0.17 0.23 0.28 0.31 0.37 0.48                       −        −
  p-value           −       0.74 0.10 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.06 0.15                       −        −

  Dividend Definition 2:   Cash-invested   dividends
    T
  σD,1           13.27     13.88 12.44     10.63 9.21 8.00 7.91 7.10               5.27     6.17
    T
  σD,2           12.99     13.36 11.66      9.71 8.27 7.07 6.67 5.73               5.92     7.26
  VR              1.00      1.10 0.87       0.64 0.51 0.38 0.40 0.35                 −        −
  s.e.(VR)          −       0.10 0.21       0.28 0.34 0.38 0.45 0.53                 −        −
  p-value           −       0.30 0.54       0.19 0.15 0.11 0.18 0.22                 −        −

  Dividend Definition 3:   With equity repurchases
    T
  σD,1           13.71     14.14 13.60 10.43 7.43 7.24 6.96 5.44                   6.47     8.27
    T
  σD,2           13.40     13.62 12.73 9.58 6.70 6.36 5.80 4.28                    7.04     9.12
  VR              1.00      1.08 1.02 0.54 0.32 0.31 0.36 0.21                       −        −
  s.e.(VR)          −       0.13 0.23 0.30 0.35 0.39 0.49 0.54                       −        −
  p-value           −       0.53 0.92 0.12 0.05 0.08 0.19 0.14                       −        −

Table 2: Dividend variance ratio test demonstrates that dividend volatility drops signif-
icantly with horizon in the data. We can reject the hypothesis that dividends follow a
random walk. The data for dividend definitions 1 and 2 are annual from 1873 to 2008,
and the data for dividend definition 3 are annual from 1927 to 2007.



                       Parameter Estimates                  Tests
                                                          2        2
        Spec.             a     b1      b2             R χ (b = 0)             p-val(χ2 )
        1        Slope 1.18 −0.04                    −0.58    0.19                  0.66
                 p-val 0.38   0.67
        2        Slope 1.32 −0.05 −0.21               3.15             6.29         0.04
                 p-val 0.32   0.61    0.01

Table 3: Predictability regressions of real dividend growth on lagged values of dividend
growth demonstrates that dividend growth is not a random walk. Data are annual from
1872 to 2008.



                                            55
                    g       σy      κx σx1         σx2        r         θ1    θ2
                  0.018   0.025    0.15 0.0       0.015     0.025       0.0   0.4

                 Table 4: Calibrated Parameters for the BY model.



                             F        G   (µP − r)BY              P
                                                                 σBY
                           3.343    5.332    0.031              0.082


Table 5: Enterprise value expected return and volatility for the BY model with param-
eters set in equation 4.



                                      e`     α      κ`
                                     0.35   2.0    0.11


          Table 6: Parameters for the log-leverage process in the BY model.



                                    (µV − r)BY        V
                                                     σBY
                                       0.048        0.126


Table 7: Stock return expected return and volatility for the modified BY model. Pa-
rameters are given in Table 4.

                            g       σy      θ     κθ       ν       r
                          0.018    0.03   0.35    0.2     0.1    0.025

                 Table 8: Calibrated Parameters for the CC model.



                             F        G   (µP − r)CC              P
                                                                 σCC
                           3.780    0.241    0.019              0.054


Table 9: Enterprise value expected return and volatility for the CC model with param-
eters set in equation 4.


                                            56
                                   e`  α         κ`
                                  .47 −0.5      0.11


Table 10: Parameters for the log-leverage process in the CC Model. (Note that the long
run mean of the log-leverage process `t is ` + αθ = log(0.4).)




                              (µV − r)CC      V
                                             σCC    ShVCC
                                 0.036      0.103    .35


Table 11: Stock return expected return and volatility for the CC model with parameters
set in Table 8.




                                           57
