                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE ECONOMICS OF CHILD WELL-BEING

                                           Gabriella Conti
                                          James J. Heckman

                                        Working Paper 18466
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18466


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




This research was supported in part by the American Bar Foundation, the JB & MK Pritzker Family
Foundation, Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation, NICHD R37HD065072, R01HD54702, a grant
the Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Global Working Group- an initiative of the Becker
Friedman Institute for Research and Economics funded by the Institute for New Economic Thinking
(INET), and an anonymous funder. We acknowledge the support of a European Research Council
grant hosted by University College Dublin, DEVHEALTH 269874. The views expressed in this paper
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the funders or persons named here. We thank
Zidi Chen for excellent research assistance, and Pietro Biroli for help with the ALSPAC data. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Gabriella Conti and James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Child Well-Being
Gabriella Conti and James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 18466
October 2012
JEL No. D03,D04,I21,J13

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper presents an integrated economic approach that organizes and interprets the evidence on
child development. It also discusses the indicators of child well-being that are used in international
comparisons. Recent evidence on child development is summarized, and policies to promote child
well-being are discussed. The paper concludes with some open questions and suggestions for future
research.


Gabriella Conti
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gconti@uchicago.edu

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
                                       Introduction



There is a growing interest in the well-being of children. Such interest is supported by
recent evidence from both the biological and the social sciences, which points to the
importance of the early years in shaping the capabilities that promote well-being across
the lifecourse (Knudsen et al. [2006]). It is now recognized that human development is a
dynamic process that starts in the womb. Capabilities interact synergistically to create
who we are and what we become. The foundations for adult success and failure are laid
down early in life. Children raised in disadvantaged environments start behind and
usually stay behind throughout their lifetimes. Gaps in cognitive and behavioral traits
emerge very early. The risk of disease increases more rapidly with age in
disadvantaged populations. Inequality among families in early childhood environments
is a major producer of inequality in the capabilities that promote successful functioning
in society. In the absence of interventions to alter their trajectories, children growing up
in disadvantage are at increasing risk – both socioeconomic and biological. These
observations are highly relevant in light of the evidence that families are under stress.
By many measures the early life environments of a large swathe of children have
declined in recent decades (McLanahan, [2004], Heckman, [2008]).

Prevention is more cost effective than remediation. As implemented, most adolescent
and adult remediation programs are ineffective (see Cunha et al. [2006]) and have
much lower returns than early childhood programs that prevent problems before they
occur. The message of this paper is that high quality early interventions that alter early
life conditions are effective ways to promote well-being and human flourishing across
the life cycle.

Key to this analysis is a concept of child well-being recently developed in economics
(Cunha and Heckman, [2007], Heckman, [2007]). It envisions a core set of capabilities
as capacities to function including cognition, personality, and biology. This approach
views the child in her entirety as a human being in fieri—as a work in progress. This
notion is embedded in a lifecycle framework of human development that distinguishes
the determinants of child well-being that can be manipulated by policy, the

                                             2
measurements that proxy the underlying traits that generate outcomes, and the
outcomes themselves. In order to develop effective policies it is important to understand
the various aspects of child well-being and their causes and consequences. We need to
understand the capabilities and mechanisms that produce success across multiple
dimensions of human activity, including crime, earnings, health, mental health, and
education. Linking the capabilities acquired in the early years to performance on a
variety of adult outcomes and understanding the channels through which early life
conditions affect them enhances our understanding of human development. A strategy
of early prevention—rather than adult and adolescent remediation—promotes well-
being from childhood into advanced old age.

This paper is structured along the following lines. Section I discusses the indicators
used for measuring child well-being in international studies. We review the early work
on the economic approach to child well-being in Section II. We present the recent
developmental approach in Section III. Recent empirical findings are summarized in
Section IV. Section V presents evidence from interventions that promote child well-
being. Section VI concludes and offers some suggestions for future research.




                                           3
I.     What is Child Well-Being?

While the notion of well-being has been promoted by the World Health Organization
since 1948,1 there is still little consensus as to how it should be measured. This is partly
because research has tended to divide into two different interpretations of what is meant
by well-being (Ryan and Deci [2001]). The hedonic viewpoint (Kahneman et al. [1999])
focuses on subjective well-being or happiness, and is usually defined in terms of
avoidance of pain and attainment of pleasure. The eudaimonic viewpoint, instead,
focuses on psychological well-being, defined more broadly to incorporate dynamic
processes such as self-realization and the degree to which a person is fully functioning
in society (Ryff and Singer [1998]). The latter is the approach adopted in the recent
literature in economics (Sen, [1999], Cunha and Heckman, [2007, 2008, 2009]) and the
point of view of this paper.

Recent years have witnessed a steady increase in the efforts to measure and monitor
the status of children.2 The trend has been to move away from an exclusive focus on
composite indices of poverty or deprivation, towards indicators encompassing multiple
dimensions of child well-being. However, as noted in Ben-Arieh and Frones [2011],
despite the development of numerous “indicators” of child well-being, the field is
fragmented and lacks a unifying taxonomy. We present as examples two indicators of
child well-being used at the international level, and discuss their structure and economic
content. We refer the interested reader to the survey by Fernandes et al. [2010] for a
review and comparison of different Indexes (including the one developed for the U.S. by
Land et al. [2007], and for the E.U. by Bradshaw and Richardson [2009]) by main
domains.

UNICEF (2007) considers 6 different dimensions of child well-being.3,4




1
  “Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of
disease or infirmity”. WHO, Preamble to the Constitution of the World Health Organization as adopted by
the International Health Conference, New York, 19-22 June 1946, and entered into force on 7 April 1948.
2
  See Ben-Arieh [2008] for a summary of the history and development of the field.
3
  Each dimension can have multiple components, and each component multiple indicators.
4
  Before the 2007 report, income poverty was used as a proxy measure for overall child well-being.

                                                  4
    1.     Material well-being: % of children living in relative income poverty, in
           households without jobs, and in reported deprivation (in terms of low family
           affluence, few educational resources and fewer than 10 books in the home).
    2.     Health and safety: health at age 0-1 (mortality and low birthweight),
           preventative health services (immunizations) and safety (deaths from
           accidents and injuries).
    3.     Educational well-being: school achievement at age 15 (average achievement
           in reading, mathematical and science literacy), beyond basics (% staying in
           education 15-19) and transition to employment (% 15-19 not in education,
           employment, or training, or expecting to find low-skilled work).
    4.     Family and peer relationship: family structure (% of children in single-parent
           families or stepfamilies), family relationships (% of children eating the main
           meal with parents more than once per week, % of children reporting parents
           spend time ‘just talking’ to them) and peer relationships (% of children
           reporting their peers ‘kind and helpful’).
    5.     Behaviors and risks: health behaviors (% of children who eat breakfast/fruit
           daily; are physically active/overweight), risk behaviors (% of children who
           smoke/have been drunk/use cannabis/have sex by 15/use condoms and
           teenage fertility rate) and experience of violence (% of children involved in
           fighting and being bullied).
    6.     Subjective well-being: health (% of children rating their health as ‘fair’ or
           ‘poor’), school life (% of children ‘liking school a lot’) and personal well-being
           (% of children rating themselves above the mid-point of a ‘Life Satisfaction
           Scale’ and % of children reporting negatively about personal well-being).5

In a study based on data from 23 rich countries, this index was shown to be negatively
correlated with income inequality and the proportion of children in relative poverty
(Pickett and Wilkinson [2007]).




5
 Young children are asked to agree or disagree with three statements about themselves: “I feel like an
outsider or left out of thing”, “I feel awkward and out of place” and “I feel lonely”.

                                                  5
These indicators cover a wide array of aspects related to child development. Yet they
are unsatisfactory in at least two respects. First, no clear distinction is made among
proxies of underlying well-being (e.g. self-reported health, birthweight), inputs amenable
to interventions (e.g. parenting time and quality) and outcomes (e.g. education and
health behaviors), which are a function of both previous components. Second, no
temporal, developmental distinction is made. Components of these indices related to
different stages of childhood are lumped together, without any regard to the timing of
measurements and investments, and with little importance given to the prenatal period
and the very first years.

These serious shortcomings are being addressed in indices currently being developed. 6
The fact that these indicators have scope for improvement is noticed in the UNICEF
report:

          “No single dimension of well-being stands as a reliable proxy for child well-being
          as a whole and several OECD countries find themselves with widely differing
          rankings for different dimensions of child well-being”. (p.3)7
The framework presented in Section III places each of the components used to define
the UNICEF indicators in a lifecycle developmental perspective. That framework clearly
distinguishes which indicators measure which aspects of human development and
flourishing, what factors are amenable to policy intervention, the mechanisms producing
capabilities, and how to evaluate different policies to promote child well-being.

Child well-being is also high on the policy agenda of the OECD [2009], which has also
produced a framework including outcome indicators with the following six dimensions:

          1.     Material well-being: average disposable income, children in poor homes
                 and educational deprivation.



6
  The Index currently being developed by UNESCO, the Holistic Early Childhood Development Index
(HECDI) scheduled to be delivered in 2013, will, instead, overcome this shortcoming and cover child
development from antenatal life to 8 years of age.
7
  The United Kingdom and the United States find themselves in the bottom third of the rankings for five of
the six dimensions reviewed. European countries dominate the top half of the overall league table, with
Northern European countries claiming the top four places.

                                                    6
        2.      Housing and environment:                overcrowding and poor environmental
                conditions.
        3.      Educational well-being: average mean literacy score, literacy inequality
                and youth NEET (not in education, employment or training) rates.
        4.      Health and safety: infant mortality, low birthweight, breastfeeding rates,
                vaccination rates, physical activity and suicide rates.
        5.      Risk behaviors: smoking, drunkenness and teenage births.
        6.      Quality of school life: bullying and liking schools.
Neither set of indices distinguish among indicators, inputs, and outcomes, a problem
common to all indices. The OECD indicators do not include either subjective well-being
or the child’s relationship with parents. Additionally, measures of early cognitive
development and mental health are not included.8

Indices of child well-being have also been developed by individual countries. For the
United States, a comprehensive composite state-level index of child well-being is the
Foundation for Child Development’s (FCD) Child Well-Being Index (CWI) (O’Hare et al.
[2012]), which is updated annually and describes how young people in the United
States have fared since 1975. It is the nation’s most comprehensive measure of trends
in the quality-of-life of children and youth. It combines national data from 28 indicators
across seven domains (family economic well-being, health, safe/risky behavior,
educational attainment, community engagement, social relationships, emotional/spiritual
well-being) into a single index that reflects overall child well-being. The index is used as
a tool to inform policymakers and the public on how well children are doing. It was
created to provide a broader measure of children’s quality of life not captured by GDP,
which only measures income. In the United Kingdom, the National Statistician recently
convened a Well-being Forum (Office for National Statistics [2011]). The respondents to
the public consultation identified the well-being of the children as an area of particular
concern. Subsequently, the Office for National Statistics formed a working group to
8
  One exception to this is the case of Australia, where, based on research and consultation, the Strengths
and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) was strongly supported as the most appropriate tool for measuring
social and emotional well-being in children. It has been recommended that a Children’s Headline Indicator
for social and emotional well-being be defined as the proportion of children scoring ‘of concern’ on the
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire, since this instrument has been extensively validated, and is
used widely.

                                                    7
develop and assess measurement of well-being for this age group (Beaumont [2011]).
They concluded that satisfactory indices must measure children’s well-being as a multi-
faceted concept that needs to take into account the many areas that affect their well-
being at different ages. In the first year of work, the ONS launched a consultation on a
first set of domains and measures of national well-being. An updated list has just been
published (ONS [2012]), and currently includes a list of ten domains, 9 each of them
comprising between three and five measures.10




    II.     Child Well-Being in the Early Literature of Economics

Theoretical Literature on Child Well-Being. While improving child well-being is an
important social goal, in the past, the theoretical literature in economics has largely
focused on the human capital of the child. This is usually related to its earnings
potential. The basic idea is that a household maximizes its utility, which has a measure
of child quality as one of its inputs. This concept of quality encompasses the various
skills that the child develops under the care and investment of its parents—skills which
later contribute to its adult socioeconomic success.

A pioneering study of the role of the family in shaping child outcomes is Leibowitz
[1974]. The author notes that by the time children enter first grade there are significant
differences among them in terms of verbal and mathematical competence, which reflect
variations in both inherent ability and the amounts of human capital acquired before
school entry. These stocks of acquired human capital reflect, in turn, different inputs, in
terms of both time and other resources, by parents, teachers, siblings, and the child
herself. The author compares the process of acquiring preschool human capital to the




9
   The ten domains are: individual well-being, our relationships, health, what we do, where we live,
personal finance, education and skills, the economy, governance, and the natural environment.
10
   For example, the health domain includes four measures: healthy life expectancy at birth; percentage
who report a long-term illness and a disability; percentage who were somewhat, mostly or completely
satisfied with their health; percentage with some evidence indicating probable psychological disturbance
or mental ill health.

                                                   8
acquisition of human capital through schooling or on-the-job training.11 In her empirical
analysis, she uses the endowments of the mother as proxies for parental investment in
children. The model does not consider life cycle dynamics of the child.

The paper by Becker and Tomes [1986] is a seminal contribution in the economics
literature. The authors develop a one-period-of-childhood model of the transmission of
economic status from parents to children. They identify the forces that determine
intergenerational income mobility, and offer explanations for the channels of
intergenerational transmission of status. Their model assumes that the parents
maximize their own utility and are concerned about their own consumption and the adult
utility of their children. They feature parental altruism toward the child under different
assumptions about the ability of parents to borrow against the child’s future income. As
part of their analysis, they consider parental investment in child skills.

Since theirs is a one-period model of childhood, they do not make an early-late
childhood distinction that is a crucial feature of recent research on child development
reviewed in Section III. Additionally, they assume uni-dimensionality of child skills,
corresponding to “general human capital,” and do not distinguish among the different
components of child well-being (e.g. cognition, personality, health). They also assume
that the initial endowments of the child are not affected by parental investments. While
including the adult utility of the child as an input into parental utility sounds like directly
modeling the child’s well-being, they ignore the well-being of the child as a child. The
only ways that a parent can increase the utility derived from that of a child is to invest in
her human capital (which directly increases her adult earnings) or to leave bequests.
Thus, the focus in this research is on increasing adult earnings and adult wealth.

Each generation of children inherits biological and cultural endowments from their
parents. However, the heritability of these endowments is less than perfect. This implies
that endowments regress to the mean. Children with well-endowed parents tend to have
above-average endowments but, on average, are less than those of the parents,


11
   She applies a version of the Ben-Porath [1967] model of human capital accumulation to explain
investment in children. The Ben-Porath model [1967] is a model of on-the-job investment in human
capital.

                                               9
whereas children with poorly endowed parents tend to have below-average
endowments that on average are larger relative to their parents’ levels. Parents not only
pass on their endowments, but also influence the adult earnings of their children via
investments in human capital. As a result, adult human capital and earnings are
determined by endowments, parental investments in children, and bequests as well as
by public expenditures.

The authors analyze the two cases of “perfect” and “imperfect” capital markets. In the
analysis of perfect capital markets, parents can borrow against the future income of the
child to finance investments in children. These debts are allowed to become the
obligations of children when they become adults. Parents borrow to finance
expenditures on children human capital up to a point where the rate of return to human
capital (the annual yield on investment) equals the market interest rate. An important
implication of the model with perfect credit markets is that, for a given inherited ability
level, the child’s level of human capital and labor earnings would be independent of their
parents’ asset and earnings because poor parents can always borrow against their
child’s earnings to finance investment expenditures. Rich parents leave more bequests.
Hence, for the same level of ability, the income of children from wealthier families will be
higher solely because of these bequests. In the case of imperfect capital markets,
parents can’t borrow against the future earnings of the child. Instead they have to
reduce their personal consumptions to finance private expenditures on children. In
imperfect capital markets, parental investments in children and consumptions are
reduced if borrowing constraints are binding. This reduces the earnings of poor children
when they are adults, so their adult incomes are lower for two reasons: (a) lower
bequests and (b) lower human capital.

Empirical Literature on Child Well-Being. Consistent with the terminology used in the
theoretical literature, in the empirical literature in economics there are very few studies
which explicitly mention child well-being as their object of investigation.12 When this is
the case, the focus of this work is usually on the effect of welfare policies (Grogger and


12
  On the other hand, there is an expanding economic literature on subjective well-being in adult, see e.g.
Dolan et al. [2011].

                                                   10
Karoly [2007]), and income and family structure (Evenhouse and Reilly [2004]). We
defer discussion of the empirical evidence to section IV. Here we refer the reader to
recent surveys which provide comprehensive reviews of the economic evidence on
different aspects of child well-being: parental investments and child development
(Cunha et al. [2006]), parental socioeconomic status, child health, and adult success
(Currie [2009]), family background and intergenerational transmission (Bjorklund and
Salvanes [2011]), and early-life conditions (Almond and Currie [2010]).

Availability of Data. We next consider the availability of data to study child well-being
and its long-term consequences. U.S.-based research is hampered by the fact that few
datasets contain extensive longitudinal information on all parts of the lifecycle. As a rule,
many U.S. data sources cover the late part of the lifecycle and collect retrospective
information on early childhood circumstances, as in the case of the MIDUS (Midlife in
the United States), PSID (Panel Study of Income Dynamics) and WLS (Wisconsin
Longitudinal Study). Some cover the transition from late childhood/adolescence to
adulthood (again, with some retrospective information), as in the case of the National
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (AddHealth), and of the two National
Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY79 and NLSY97). Others cover a substantial
portion of the childhood, but with no later life follow-up: the Child Development
Supplement of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (CDS-PSID), the Children of the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (CNLSY79), the two Early Childhood
Longitudinal Studies – Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) and Kindergarten Cohort (ECLS-K), and
the Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development (NICHD-SECCYD).13 In the
United Kingdom lifecourse research has a long tradition. Several cohort studies have
been started in the past 50 years: in 1946 (the National Survey of Health and
Development), in 1958 (the National Child Development Study), in 1970 (the British
Cohort Study) and in 2000 (the Millennium Cohort Study). 14


13
   Another dataset which has been used extensively is the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study,
which follows a cohort of nearly 5,000 children born in large U.S. cities between 1998 and 2000 (roughly
three-quarters of whom were born to unmarried parents).
14
   Another valuable resource available to researchers is the ALSPAC (Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents
and Children), a cohort study of children born in the former county of Avon (England) during 1991 and
1992.

                                                  11
III.      Conceptualizing Child Well-Being and Its Development within an Integrated
Developmental Framework

This section presents the developmental approach to child well-being. It reviews the
work in Cunha and Heckman [2007] and Heckman [2007] and extensions. This
approach is distinct from both the traditional approach in economics which focuses on
specific aspects of child well-being, and from the various interdisciplinary attempts to
construct summary measures which lack any underlying theory and so do not
distinguish between observable indicators of child well-being and determinants which
causally affect it (e.g. household income or the quality of parenting) -- and which can be
changed by policy.

As compared to the previous literature, this approach has several features:
       (1) It is guided by an integrated theoretical framework – a lifecycle approach to the
       origins and development of the capabilities which promote well-being across the
       lifecycle which allows focus on specific stages and intergenerational transmission
       mechanisms;
       (2) It clearly distinguishes indicators (measurements) of child well-being from their
       causes/determinants (inputs) and consequences/outcomes (output), hence providing
       guidance for policy;
       (3) It inherently deals with the complexity of the issue at hand, by allowing for child
       well-being to be multidimensional (composed of capabilities of different nature);
       (4) It facilitates investigation of the mechanisms through which child well-being
       shapes adult outcomes, the possibilities of remediation for adverse early life
       experiences, the extent to which intervening factors can alter lifecourse trajectories,
       and the timing when they operate.
The last point is particularly important. Understanding the multiple channels of influence
in promoting human capabilities allows analysts and governments to compare and
prioritize alternative policies over the lifecycle.

Before describing the framework, we present some evidence that gaps in child
capabilities by family environments emerge very early. Figure 1 shows the proportion of


                                               12
children born with low birthweight15 in two British cohorts born in 1958 (National Child
Development Study, NCDS) and in




                          Figure 1. Low Birthweight by gender and Social Class.
                        Source: own calculations based on NCDS and BCS data.
Note: the labels to the bars refer to the social class at birth of the mother’s husband for the NCDS, and of the father
for the BCS. Both these data use the Registrar General’s classification of Social Class (SC): Social Class I (I) include
professional occupations; Social Class II (II) include managerial and technical occupations; Social Class IIIN (IIIN)
include skilled non-manual occupations; Social Class IIIM (IIIM) include skilled manual occupations; Social Class IV
(IV) include partly-skilled occupations; Social Class V (V) include unskilled occupations.


1970 (British Cohort Study, BCS), respectively. For both cohorts and genders, we
observe a clear SES/health gradient, where children born in more disadvantaged
households have almost twice the chance of being born with a low birthweight as

15
     Low birthweight is defined as weight at birth less than 2,500 grams.

                                                           13
compared to those born in more affluent families. While inequality in family
environments is already present at birth, it becomes amplified throughout childhood.
Children born in disadvantaged families not only start off with worse initial conditions,
but also receive less investment from the early years of their lives. Evidence on this
latter point is presented in Figure 2, where we see that, at age 5, children raised in
families belonging to low SES are read to on average two days less per week than
children born in more advantaged environments.




      Figure 2. Number of days the child is read to in last week by gender and Social Class.
                              Source: own calculations based on BCS data.
Note: the labels to the bars refer to the social class of the father at age 5. The BCS uses the Registrar General’s
classification of Social Class (SC): Social Class I (SCI) include professional occupations; Social Class II (SCII)
include managerial and technical occupations; Social Class IIIN (SCIIIN) include skilled non-manual occupations;
Social Class IIIM (SCIIIM) include skilled manual occupations; Social Class IV (SCIV) include partly-skilled
occupations; Social Class V (SCV) include unskilled occupations.


Given these mechanisms, in the absence of interventions, inequalities present at birth
can get under the skin and affect the biology of the child, propagate throughout
childhood, and persist into adulthood. In Figure 3, we see evidence of a gradient in C-
Reactive Protein (an inflammatory marker associated with a variety of cardiovascular
risk factors) at age 44 by social class at birth which mimics the gradient in low
birthweight seen in Figure 1.


                                                        14
Such complex evidence needs to be conceptualized and interpreted within a lifecycle
framework linking early-life conditions through late-life outcomes by accounting for
intervening mechanisms and a variety of exposures at different levels.




               Figure 3. Log of C-Reactive Protein by gender and Social Class at birth.
                              Source: own calculations based on NCDS data.
Note: the labels to the bars refer to the social class at birth. The NCDS uses the Registrar General’s classification of
Social Class (SC): Social Class I (I) include professional occupations; Social Class II (II) include managerial and
technical occupations; Social Class IIIN (IIIN) include skilled non-manual occupations; Social Class IIIM (IIIM) include
skilled manual occupations; Social Class IV (IV) include partly-skilled occupations; Social Class V (V) include
unskilled occupations.


The framework proposed in this paper is based on Cunha and Heckman [2007, 2008,
2009], Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach [2010] and Heckman [2007], who build a
model of human development with four main ingredients: (A) a measurement framework
relating how capabilities causally affect a variety of child and adult outcomes; (B) a
dynamic framework (the “technology of capability formation”) characterizing how
environments and investments joined with stocks of capabilities affect the evolution of
capabilities; (C) the preferences of the parents which help shape the investments in


                                                          15
skills; (D) the constraints that the families face, reflecting both access to credit markets
and the availability of time. In the following we focus on the first two aspects, since
parental preferences are not yet well understood (see, however, Del Boca, Flinn, and
Wiswall [2011]), and the strength of the other constraints depends on the level of
development of the institutions in a particular society.

(A) The first component of the framework is the outcome k {1,, Kt} at age t                         Y 
                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                            k



which is the output of child well-being—for example an educational qualification or a
risky behavior. The outcomes are generated in part by a vector of capabilities at age t ,
denoted as t , which constitute the different dimensions of child wellbeing. The

dimensionality of the vector  t does not have to be specified a priori by the researcher.

However in the following we simplify the discussion and consider it as a three-

dimensional object t  tC,tN,tH  where tC denotes a vector of cognitive capabilities,

tN is a vector of noncognitive or personality traits and tH is a vector of health
capacities.16 Outcome k at age t            Y 
                                               t
                                                   k
                                                       is thus generated as a function of capabilities

and effort:
                                        Equation 1. Outcomes

                                         Yt k   k  tC ,  tN ,  tH , etk                          (1)

where etk is effort devoted to activity k (a range of activities can be performed within a
certain set, i.e. k  1,..., K t ) at age t  1,..., T . 17 An important aspect of function (1) is that

it allows for many different ways to achieve a given outcome, so that a shortfall in one
dimension of child capabilities might be compensated by greater strength in another.
For example, a low level of cognition can be compensated by greater motivation and
perseverance, so as to allow the child to achieve a certain level of education or a level
of earnings. In the next section we provide some recent evidence on the importance of
the different dimensions of child well-being for adult outcomes.

16
   Each component can be further characterized by several dimensions, e.g., fluid and crystallized
intelligence for cognition; the Big Five for personality; mental and physical health.
17
   The effort the individual devotes to a certain activity depends not only on her capabilities, but also on
the rewards that she will receive for performing that activity.

                                                        16
(B) The second component of the framework is a dynamic process for the formation of
capabilities, which is governed by a multistage technology. The technology of capability
formation (Cunha and Heckman [2007]) captures essential features of human

development. It expresses the stock of period t  1 capabilities t 1  in terms of period t

capabilities  t  , investments  I t  , environments ht  , and parental traits  t :
                                                                                        P
                                                                                                                             
                                                                    Equation 2. Capability Dynamics

                                                                             t 1  f t  t , I t , ht , tP                           (2)

I t can be interpreted very broadly to include investments by parents, schools, and
interventions; the latter can refer to time spent with parents, interventions at a preschool
center, teachers, or materials that stimulate the development of the capabilities.  0 is a
vector of initial endowments determined at conception, and I 1 is in utero investments.
The different dimensions of the well-being of the child display self-productivity (earlier
capabilities beget later capabilities). For example, a healthy child, or a child who is
better able to pay attention in class, learns more and produces a greater store of
cognitive ability. The function is increasing in all arguments: t 1  as t  . Equation 2

captures the notion that capabilities at one age enhance capabilities at later ages, and
the development of capabilities in subsequent periods depends on the set of capabilities
already present, and on investments, both at home and at school. If investment effects
are especially strong in one period, it is called a sensitive period.18 If investments are
productive in only one period, that is called a critical period.19 A key determinant of
productivity is the degree of complementarity – how much the capabilities affect the
productivity of investments. A crucial feature of the technology that helps to explain


18        ft          ft '  
     If               >                for all   t ' t   ,    t   is a sensitive period. Sensitive periods exist when the investment has a
            It            It '

higher payoff in that period than in any other one (but the payoff in other periods is not necessarily zero).
For example, learning a second language is easier before age 12.
19        ft  
     If              0   for      t t * ,   then   t*       is a critical period for that investment; in other words, a period is defined as
           It

being critical if an investment has no effect in any other period. For example, a child born with a cataract
will remain blind if the cataract is not removed on time, making any future investment in the child’s
eyesight futile.

                                                                                            17
many findings in the literature on skill formation is complementarity of capabilities with
investment, i.e. investment is more productive in children with higher stocks of
capabilities.20

Two types of complementarity can be distinguished in this framework. The first type is a
form of static complementarity between period t capabilities and period t investments:
the higher the stock of capability t , the higher the productivity of investment.

Complementarity can occur both within a certain dimension (smarter children are better
learners), or across different dimensions (more motivated children are better learners).
The second type is dynamic complementarity, i.e. complementarity between investment
in life cycle period               t 1   and investment in period s, s  t  1 . This dynamic
complementarity arises because early investments make later investments more
productive. In other words, a high initial investment will improve skills at later periods,
which in turn increases the productivity of later investments: and this happens because
 t and I t are complements. This mechanism works both ways: complementarity also
implies that later investments raise the value of earlier investments. In limiting special
cases, later investments are crucial for earlier ones to be effective. Thus early childhood
interventions are not enough. To be effective, they have to be followed up with quality
schooling and parenting.

Dynamic complementarity explains the evidence that early nurturing environments
affect the ability of animals and humans to learn. It explains why investments in
disadvantaged young children are so productive: because early investments enhance
the productivity of later investments. It also explains why investments in low-ability
adults often have such low returns: because the stock of  t is low.

Figure 4 demonstrates how adult outcomes are shaped by sequences of investments
over the life cycle of the child. Hence, the importance of the early years depends on
how easy it is to compensate for adverse early effects with later investment. Empirical
relationships between early conditions and adult outcomes that ignore intervening

20                        
      2 ft t , It , ht ,tP
                              0
            t It'


                                                     18
investments and environments neglect potentially important determinants of adult
outcomes and the possibilities of remediation and compensation. The evidence that we
will review in the next sections shows that resilience and remediation are possible, but
are more costly at later stages.

The dynamics of this model suggest some interesting logical possibilities that are borne
out in the empirical evidence discussed in Section IV. Because of dynamic
complementarity, investment in disadvantaged adolescents may be economically
inefficient. Unmotivated and low ability children may not make good investments from a
purely economic point of view. This evidence is consistent with the high economic
returns to education found for high ability adolescents (see Carneiro et al., 2003) and
the low returns to remediation for low ability adolescents (see Heckman, LaLonde, and
Smith, 1998). On humanitarian grounds, society may choose to invest in low ability,
unmotivated adolescents, but there is a sharp tradeoff between equity and efficiency.
This is the dark side of the economics of human development.

The bright side is that because of dynamic complementarity, investing early—laying the
base for enhancing the productivity of adolescent investments—can have a substantial
benefit. The returns to early investments can be higher for the children of disadvantaged
parents compared to children of advantaged parents, even those born with cognitive
and emotional deficits (see Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach, 2010).

Estimating the Model The model lends itself to estimation using latent variable-factor
analysis (Jöreskog [1977]) — state space models (Hamilton [1994]). The literature
documents substantial measurement error in investments, capabilities, and family
environments (see Cunha and Heckman, 2008, and Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach,
2010, and the references cited therein) and these frameworks account for such error.

A commonly used linear specification writes for measurement vector M:

      Equation 3. Measurements on Investments, Environments, and Capabilities

                               M t     Qt  t                                        (3)



                                              19
                                    θT: Capabilities at T
                                    IT: Investment at T
                                hT: Environment at time T
                                     θT+1 = fT(θT, IT, hT)




            Figure 4. A Lifecycle Framework for Conceptualizing Child Well-Being.




where M t is a vector of measurements at age t , Qt is a vector of factors (capturing  t ,

I t , ht and  tP ) and t is measurement error. The factors are the latent capabilities,
investments, environments and parental traits which are proxied by the measurements
Mt .




                                              20
This methodology allows analysts to address several issues in the child indicators field.
First, it allows for multiple inputs in the production of child well-being, and for each input
and each dimension of child well-being to be proxied by several indicators which
measure each dimension with error. Second, the fact that there are specific equations
for the measurements allows analysts to address issues of differential reliability and
cross-culture comparability which plagues the indicators usually constructed across
countries.21 Hence, such an approach is useful not only in general for the creation of a
taxonomy of child well-being, but in particular for the case of mental health and
emotional well-being, which are dimensions difficult to measure, especially in a cross-
country context (as noticed in UNICEF [2007] and Kieling et al. [2011]).


IV.     Evidence on the Determinants and Consequences of Child Well-Being

In this section we review recent evidence on the long-term effects of child well-being, its
determinants and dynamics, with a focus on studies based on the framework exposited
in Section III.

The Long-Term Effects of Child Well-Being. One of the first studies to apply this
framework and go beyond the traditional focus on cognition, predominant in the
economics literature, is Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua [2006].22 The authors analyze
adult outcomes as produced by a two-dimensional construct (cognition and personality
traits). They investigate the effect of cognitive and personality traits on schooling and a
variety of other outcomes, while also accounting for the reverse effect of schooling on
the measured traits. They use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), a
dataset which has measures on the components of the Armed Services Vocational
Battery (ASVAB) that are used to create the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT), a
widely used measure of cognition. In addition, the NLSY79 has two measures of
personality: the Rotter Locus of Control Scale, designed to capture the extent to which
individuals believe that they have control over their lives through self-motivation as


21
   One solution recently adopted in the literature, especially in relation to subjective well-being and health
measurement, is the use of vignettes to account for heterogeneity in response styles. However, the extent
to which this approach helps in solving the problem is subject to debate (Van Soest and Vonkova [2012]).
22
   They build on the work of Bowles and Gintis [1976, 2001].

                                                     21
opposed to the extent that the environment controls their lives, and the Rosenberg Self-
Esteem Scale, which assesses the level of self-esteem. They show that the low-
dimensional measures of child capabilities explain a large array of diverse outcomes,
ranging from schooling, to labor market outcomes (employment, work experience,
occupational choice) and risky behaviors (smoking, drug use, incarceration and teenage
pregnancy). We summarize their estimates of the effects of capabilities on college
graduation in Figure 5, where it is shown that both cognitive and personality traits have
strong effects on graduating from a 4-year college at all deciles of the capability
distribution.23 In particular, the bottom right panel shows that moving from the lowest
decile to the highest decile in the dimension of personality (holding cognitive ability at its




         Figure 5. Probability of Being a 4-year College Graduate or Higher at age 30, Males.
     (a) By Decile of Cognitive and Noncognitive Factors. (b) By Decile of Cognitive Factor. (c) By
            Decile of Noncognitive Factor. Dotted lines are 2.5-97.5% confidence intervals.
          Source: Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua [2006], who discuss the control variables and
                                                  methodology.




23
     The dotted lines are confidence intervals.

                                                      22
mean) increases the probability of graduating from college more than a similar
percentile change in the cognitive trait distribution.

Carneiro et al. [2007] follow this approach and also recognize that assuming a uni-
dimensional set of capabilities is an unsatisfactory view of child well-being. In their
analysis of the British National Child Development Study (NCDS, the 1958 cohort), they
show that low social skills, as measured by the Bristol Social Adjustment Guide, are
large risk factors for smoking. They also emphasize that the importance of cognitive
skills in affecting educational attainment and health outcomes depends on the level of
social skills. Murasko [2007] adopts a lifecourse approach and shows that child
personality traits (greater internal locus of control and greater self-esteem at age 10) are
predictive of health at age 30, beyond their effect of education. Jones et al. [2010]
analyze the same dataset as used by Carneiro et al. [2007], and confirm that the social
adjustment of the child is the strongest predictor of adult physical and mental illness.
However, once they control for these traits, they find little effect of the quality of the
school attended on adult health.

More recent work has also included health as a dimension of child well-being, in
addition to cognitive and behavioral components. Conti, Heckman, and Urzua
[2010,2011] and Conti and Heckman [2010] conceptualize child capabilities as being
three-dimensional (cognition, self-regulation and physical health), and use a variety of
indicators for each of the dimensions (cognitive test scores, personality scales, and
anthropometric indicators, respectively). They estimate a developmental model of how
early life endowments give rise to labor market and health disparities by education,
which complement the traditional studies which have relied on quasi-experimental
evaluations. The authors develop a general latent variable model that explicitly accounts
for how the traits affect education, and how these early life endowments and education
affect later outcomes. They separately identify selection effects from causal effects and
provide guidance on the effects of educational interventions.

They analyze the British Cohort Study—a survey of all babies born after the 24th week
of gestation from Sunday, April 5, to Saturday April 11, 1970, in the United Kingdom.
There have been seven follow-ups to track all members of this birth cohort: 1975, 1980,

                                              23
1986, 1996, 2000, 2004 and 2008. Very rich information has been collected from
several sources (parents, teachers, and doctors during a medical visit). They analyze
information taken from the birth sweep (1970), from the second sweep (1980), and from
the fifth follow-up sweep (2000). Information from the birth sweep includes the “family
endowments”, i.e. the parental resources that form the foundations for early learning
experiences: the mother’s age, education, father’s social class and parity at birth. This is
supplemented with family information at age 10 that includes gross family income,
whether the child has lived with both parents since birth, and the number of children in
the family at age 10. Measurements in the second follow-up sweep include scores on
standard cognitive tests such as math, English, language comprehension and word
definition; measurements of the child’s personality taken from tests on locus of control,
perseverance and persistence were also included. These measurements were
supplemented by basic anthropometric measurements (height, head circumference, and
the height of the child’s parents) to proxy for child physical health. Their procedure
accounts for measurement error, which they find to be substantial. The adult (age 30)
outcomes they analyze include the final level of education achieved (whether the
individual has stayed on beyond compulsory education), labor market outcomes
(employment and wages), healthy behaviors (daily smoking and engaging in regular
exercise), and health status (obesity, depression, and self-reported health).

We present their results on the effects of the early life endowments on two particular
dimensions of adult well-being, smoking, and obesity. We report results on the effects of
education in the next section. Figure 6 plots the average probability of being a daily
smoker (left panel) or of being obese (right panel) along the distribution of each of the
three dimensions of child well-being, while fixing the other two dimensions at their mean
values.24 The figure is constructed so that such probabilities are normalized to zero for
an individual at the bottom of each dimension of the well-being distribution at age 10, to
set the scale and ease comparisons of the magnitude of the effects both across the
different capabilities, and across genders. The first striking result is that, while child
cognition displays an important role in determining educational choices and labor

24
  The adult outcomes and the child capabilities are simulated from the estimates of our model and from
the data.

                                                 24
market outcomes, it plays very little role in determining health and risky behaviors,
especially for males. Conti and Heckman [2010] show that, when cognition is
considered as the only dimension of child well-being (i.e. it is assumed to be uni-
dimensional), it shows significant effects on all the adult outcomes considered. These
effects vanish once they control for non-cognitive traits. The second result is that both
non-cognitive dimensions (self-regulation and early physical health) are important
determinants of adult outcomes, of equal strength for the non-labor market outcomes.
The left panel of Figure 6 shows that an early intervention which improves the capacity
of the child to self-regulate (holding his cognitive ability and health endowment constant
at their mean levels) by moving him up from the 20th to the 80th percentile of the
noncognitive distribution, would reduce the probability of being a daily smoker at age 30
by more than ten percentage points. An effect of comparable magnitude is obtained for
the physical health of the child. The only exception to this pattern is found for obesity,
for which the early health dimension is the single most important determinant. As shown
in the right panel of Figure 6, an early intervention that would improve the physical
health of the child (by moving her from the bottom to the top percentile of the respective
distribution) would bring about a reduction in the probability of being obese at age 30 by
approximately 20 percentage points.

Further evidence on the importance of the non-cognitive dimensions of child well-being
is given in more recent work. Goodman et al. [2011] investigate the long-term effects of
childhood psychological wellness and physical health in a cohort of children born in
Britain in 1958, again using NCDS data. They find that childhood mental well-being,
more than physical well- being, impacts negatively on a variety of adult outcomes,
ranging from income and personal relationship, to cognitive and emotional health.
Interestingly, they find that adult education does not seem to be an important pathway. 25
Kaestner and Callison [2011] find that cognitive ability and self-esteem have a
significant association with adult well-being, but locus of control has a lesser role. Conti



25
  However, Daly [2011], in his response to Goodman et al. [2011], shows that intelligence seems to
account for a large portion of the relation between childhood emotional maladjustment and adult
socioeconomic status. However, his analysis relies on the 1970, rather than on the 1958, cohort.

                                               25
and Hansman [2012], using also NCDS data, show that child personality contributes to
the education-health gradient to an extent nearly as large as that of cognition.




                   \




Figure 6. Effect of age 10 capabilities on smoking (top panel) and obesity (bottom panel), males.
                               Source: Conti and Heckman (2010).

The Dimensionality of Child Capabilities. The current indicators of child capabilities
used in international comparisons construct indices by taking simple averages of the
components      constituting    each   dimension.     This   simple    way    of   aggregating
measurements is in widespread use in most of the literature on child well-being. While
there is an evolving literature in psychometrics on methods to determine the number of
dimensions in factor models, thus far it has not been applied to understand the


                                               26
dimensionality of child well-being. A recent exception is the paper by Conti et al. [2012],
in which the authors develop a novel methodology for constructing indices over a large
number of error-laden measures of related, but distinct, dimensions of human capability,
without specifying the weights to be assigned to the indicators of the different
dimensions, the assignment of the indicators to the dimensions, and the number of
dimensions required to reduce the high dimensional data set.

They compare their approach to traditional approaches used in psychometrics to select
the number of dimensions using both trait- and scale-based taxonomies, and methods
based on factor-analytic techniques. Implementing this methodology on rich longitudinal
data from Britain (the British Cohort Study, BCS70), they establish evidence on the
structure of child capabilities (operationalized in terms of the dimensions of cognition,
physical size and mental health). They find that 13 dimensions underlie the 131
measurements in the BCS study. Interestingly, while they uncover several dimensions
of child capabilities, they find that only few of them are significant predictors of adult
outcomes, with well-defined patterns. Cognition appears to be the most important
predictor of the choice of acquiring higher education and of the level of wages.
Childhood psychological well-being, in its various dimensions (ranging from conduct and
concentration problems to depression), is the most important predictor of unhealthy
behaviors in adulthood, and also affects significantly the probability of achieving a
higher educational qualification. The physical fitness of the child, measured by her body
size, is the main predictor of obesity. When comparing the aggregates obtained using
their procedure with those obtained using simpler averages, they test and reject the
assumption of equal weighting of the indicators used to construct each dimension that is
used in the construction of conventional indices. They find substantial evidence of
correlations across the different capabilities

The Production of Child Well-Being. We next provide evidence on the dynamic
evolution of capabilities, their interconnections, and on the existence of critical and
sensitive periods to develop each of them. This evidence gives us a more nuanced view
of public policy, and allows us to assess at which stages interventions to promote child
well-being are most effective.


                                             27
Among the very few papers in economics that have adopted a holistic perspective on
child development is Shakotko et al. [1980]. The authors postulate child well-being as a
bi-dimensional construct (health and cognition), and analyze the dynamic relationship
between these two components. They do not model investment ( I t ) but consider the

effect of parental environmental variables (  tP ). They find evidence of a continuing

interaction between health and cognitive development over the lifecycle, with feedback
from both health to cognitive development, and from cognitive development to health,
the latter relationship being the strongest. They report substantial effects of parental
environmental variables.

In a series of papers Cunha and Heckman [2008, 2009] and Cunha, Heckman, and
Schennach [2010] formulate and estimate models of parental investment, parental
environmental influence, and human capital development which are faithful to the recent
evidence from the biological sciences on the malleability of different abilities at different
ages. They analyze two dimensions of child well-being (cognitive and non-cognitive).
Cunha and Heckman [2008] estimate a linear version of the technology (2), where the
evolution of the capabilities of the child is a function of their lagged values and of
parental investments.

While linearity is a computationally convenient assumption, it implies that the inputs in
the production of child capabilities are perfect substitutes, i.e. that over the feasible
range it is always possible to remediate for earlier disadvantage. Thus linear models
cannot provide reliable guidance for assessing the effectiveness of remediation policies.
Their results show strong self-productivity effects for both capabilities, and strong cross-
productivity effects of noncognitive skills on cognitive skills (evidence that personality
factors promote learning), but not vice versa. A key finding of this research is that
parental investments affect cognitive skills more strongly at earlier rather than at later
ages, while they affect the noncognitive dimension more in middle childhood.

Cunha, Heckman and Schennach [2010] estimate a nonlinear version of the technology
of capability formation. This innovation is important as it allows them to estimate key
substitution parameters, necessary for the design of strategies for early vs. late

                                             28
interventions. They assume that childhood is made of two stages: stage I corresponds
to birth-age 4, and stage II to ages 5-14. The major findings from their analysis can be
summarized as follows: (1) skills become harder to budge with age; (2) it is more
difficult to compensate for the effects of adverse environments on cognition at later than
at earlier ages; (3) the malleability of noncognitive skills remains unchanged over the
childhood life cycle. The last point implies that if remediation for adolescents is to be
effective, it should focus on addressing noncognitive skills (see Heckman, Humphries
and Kautz [2012] for evidence on this point).

In order to examine the implications of their estimates, they consider the problem of
determining how to optimally allocate investments from a fixed budget in order to
maximize schooling for a cohort of children. The profile of optimal early (left panel) and
late (right panel) investment as a function of child endowments is plotted in Figure 7.
The important point to notice is that, for the children born in the most disadvantaged
conditions (i.e. with low values of both cognitive and noncognitive capabilities), the
optimal policy is to invest a lot in the early years (left panel), when there is also a
substantial decline in the optimal investment by level of initial advantage.26 On the other
hand, the optimal investment level profiles in the second period (right panel) are much
flatter and slightly favor the more advantaged children. It is socially optimal to invest
more in the second period in advantaged than in disadvantaged children. The authors
find a similar investment profile when considering optimal investments to reduce
aggregate crime. Standard models in criminology assign no role to investments.27

This important result is a manifestation of the dynamic complementarity which produces
an equity-efficiency tradeoff for adolescent but not for early investment. In the next
section we provide further evidence on the effectiveness of early vs. late intervention.




26
     Note lighter shades in the figure correspond to higher values of investment.
27
     See e.g. Nagin and Tremblay [2001].

                                                       29
Figure 7. Optimal early (left) and late (right) investments by child initial conditions of capabilities
                                 to maximize aggregate education.
                        Source: Cunha, Heckman and Schennach [2010].

V.     Policies to Promote Child Well-Being

While the field of the measurement of child well-being has moved away from simple
income/poverty-based indicators, to embrace a more holistic view of the child, policy
attention has mostly focused on improving the financial position of the families with
children (e.g. with cash benefits and tax breaks, child care, parental leave, etc.).
However, increases in family resources do not necessarily translate into increases in
investment in children. It is quality parenting that promotes successful, flourishing lives
of children. In this section, we provide recent evidence on the effectiveness of early and
late interventions to compensate in part for the risks arising from disadvantaged
environments.

Before doing so, we note that one important point which is not stressed enough in the
current literature is that the interventions implemented differ in terms of the populations
targeted, in the objectives and of the philosophies of the programs, in the measures
taken and the measurement instruments used, in the backgrounds of the children and

                                                  30
their families, and in the methods of evaluation. Programs differ in so many different
ways that it is often difficult to isolate the specific components leading to the success of
one and the failure of another. Additionally, the intervention studies need to be
integrated with the studies of family influence, in order to understand how public
investments affect the private investments of the parents. Finally, alternative
interventions need to be assessed in comparable metrics – in terms of rate of return or
cost-benefit analysis – in order to place the evaluation of specific policies to
compensate for disadvantage on a common footing. There is the need to move beyond
collections of “treatment effects”, which are hard to interpret or to use as the basis for
policy when a variety of competing proposals are on the table. Cost-effectiveness
matters for policy, since governments have limited resources to allocate between
competing programs. However, few evaluations include rigorous cost-benefit analyses,
which are primarily limited to the major early childhood interventions. Moreover, cost-
benefit ratios might be underestimated, because many outcomes cannot be easily
monetized (e.g. improvements in health and mental health), and siblings (or other family
members) can benefit from spillovers. Most studies only consider some outcome
domains, and labor market information is limited to early adulthood. Extrapolating
benefits based on early effects on test scores, educational attainment or earnings is a
dangerous business. Long-run follow-ups are essential when assessing cost
effectiveness, because many effects of interventions fade out over time. Finally,
interventions are also likely to yield social returns. For example, lower crime rates and
lower dependence ratios are both beneficial for the individual and the society. In order
to design, implement and evaluate effective policies to promote child well-being, it is
important to go beyond meta-analyses and understand the mechanisms that produce
the treatment effects and can be compared across interventions. This is true not only for
policies specifically targeted at promoting child well-being, but also for a comparison of
a variety of policies that compete with childhood policies for funding.

Early Interventions

The most reliable evidence on the effectiveness of early interventions comes from
experiments that substantially enrich the early environments of children born in


                                            31
disadvantaged families. Two of these investigations, the Perry Preschool Project and
the Abecedarian Project, are particularly revealing because they use a random
assignment design and continue to follow the children into their adult years. These
studies demonstrate substantial positive effects of early environmental enrichment on a
range of cognitive skills and behavioral traits, school achievement, job performance,
and social behaviors—effects that persist long after the interventions have ended. Other
studies—such as the Nurse-Family Partnership, which visits pregnant girls and teaches
them prenatal health practices and parenting—support these conclusions.

The Abecedarian Project. The ABC studied 111 disadvantaged children born between
1972 and 1977 whose families scored high on a risk index. The mean age at entry was
4.4 months. The program was a year-round, full-day intervention that continued through
age eight. It consisted of a two-stage treatment: a preschool intervention focusing on
early childhood education and a subsequent school-age intervention focusing on the
initial schooling age period. It used a systematic curriculum specially developed by
Sparling and Lewis [1979, 1984] that consisted of a series of "educational games",
which emphasized language, emotional development, and cognitive skills. The children
were followed through age 30, and a follow-up age 34 data collection has just been
completed. Abecedarian was more intensive than Perry. It was year-round and full-day.
The initial infant-to-teacher ratio was 3:1, though it grew to 6:1 as the kids progressed
through the program. Infants in the control group received an iron-fortified formula for 15
months and diapers as needed to create an incentive for participation (Campbell et al.
[2001,2002]). Many of the children in the control group were enrolled in preschool
and/or kindergarten. During the first three primary school years, a home-school teacher
would meet with the parents of children who were in the treatment group and help them
provide supplemental educational activities at home. The teacher provided an
individually tailored curriculum for each child. This home-school teacher also served as
a liaison between the ordinary teachers and the family, and she would interact with the
parents and the teachers about every two weeks. She would also help the parents find
employment, navigate the bureaucracy of social services agencies, and transport
children to appointments, all of which could improve parents’ ability to raise their
children (Campbell and Ramey [1994]).

                                            32
The Perry Preschool Study. Perry was an intensive preschool curriculum administered
to 58 low-income black children with initial IQs below 85 at age 3, in Ypsilanti, Michigan
between 1962 and 1967.28 It used the High/Scope curriculum, which can be classified
as an approach that promotes student involvement and is highly interactive. Activities
took place within a structured daily routine intended to help children to "develop a sense
of responsibility and to enjoy opportunities for independence" (Schweinhart et al.
[1993]). The treatment consisted of a daily 2.5-hour classroom session on weekday
mornings and a weekly 90-minute home visit by the teacher on weekday afternoons, to
promote parent-child interactions. The curriculum was geared to the children’s age and
capabilities, emphasizing child-initiated activities that focused on fostering non-cognitive
traits. Staff encouraged children to engage in play activities that had children plan, do,
and review tasks each day: students planned a task, executed it, and then reviewed it
with teachers and fellow students. The reviews were collective and taught the children
important social skills. The length of each preschool year was 30 weeks, and the
program ended after 2 years of enrollment. The control and treatment groups have been
followed through age 40.

Both Perry and Abecedarian have showed consistent patterns of successful outcomes
for treatment group members compared with control group members. Among Perry
participants, an initial increase in IQ disappeared gradually over four years following the
intervention. Such IQ fadeouts have been observed in other studies. But the main
effects of the Perry remained, and they involve non-cognitive traits (Heckman et al.
[2012]). Even though they were no brighter than the controls as measured by IQ tests,
the Perry treatment group did better than the control group on achievement tests at age
fourteen because the adolescent treatment group members were more engaged in
school and learned more. Positive effects were also documented for a wide range of
social behaviors. At the oldest ages studied (40 years for Perry; 30 for Abecedarian),
treated individuals scored higher on achievement tests, attained higher levels of
education, required less special education, earned higher wages, were more likely to
own a home, and were less likely to go on welfare or be incarcerated than controls.

28
     The control group includes 65 children.

                                               33
Heckman et al. [2012] show that the Perry Preschool Program worked primarily through
socioemotional channels; even if the program did not have a lasting effect on IQ scores,
the personalities of participants improved. Participants of both genders improved their
externalizing behavior. They also show that different dimensions of the well-being of the
child affect different outcomes. Cognition primarily affects achievement tests and also
certain labor market outcomes. Externalizing behavior affects crime outcomes, labor
market outcomes, and health behaviors. Academic motivation boosts educational
outcomes and reduces long-term unemployment. The importance of each of these three
dimensions of child well-being in explaining the treatment effects from the intervention is
reported in Figure 8. Each bar represents the total treatment effect of the intervention,
normalized to 100 percent, on the outcome listed on the left side; the total (non-
normalized) treatment effect is reported in parentheses. For example, we see that the
intervention increased the duration of marriage by almost 40 months: women in the
control group have experienced, on average, 48 months of marriage by the time they
reach age 40, whereas those in the treated group have been married on average 88
months. Each bar is further decomposed into various parts, which represent the
percentage of the treatment effect on that particular outcome attributable to that
particular component of child well-being: Cognition, Externalizing Behavior, and
Academic Motivation; the share of the treatment effect which is left unexplained is also
shown.29 It is evident that the effect of the intervention on life outcomes operates
primarily through the program’s enhancement of Externalizing Behavior: components
attributable to changes in this factor are generally statistically significant, and explain up
to 60 percent of the treatment effect on crime. The crime effects are particularly
important, since they are the main components of the benefit from Perry (Heckman et
al. [2010]). Moreover, experimentally-induced increases in Academic Motivation and
Cognition also play a non-negligible role in explaining the effects of the program: for
example, the latter component explains 20% of the effect of the treatment on the
duration of marriage. The estimated rate of return (the annual return per dollar of cost)
to the Perry Project is 6–10 percent (higher than the 5.8 percent returns on stock market


29
  The numbers reported above each component are one-sided p-values which show whether the
contribution of that particular component to the treatment effect is statistically significant.

                                              34
               Figure 8. Decomposition of Treatment Effects on Outcomes, Males.
                           Source: Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev [2012].
Note: The total treatment effects are shown in parentheses. Each bar represents the total
treatment effect normalized to 100 percent. One-sided p-values are shown above each
component of the decomposition. Asterisks denote statistical significance: * - 10 percent level; **
- 5 percent level; *** - 1 percent level.



equity received from the end of World War II through 2008, see Heckman et al. [2010]).
This estimate is conservative because it ignores economic returns to health and mental
health, which are currently being incorporated.

The Nurse-Family Partnership. The Nurse-Family Partnership targeted pregnant girls
with no previous live births, low-income, unmarried, and adolescents. Women with
these characteristics were recruited because the problems the program was designed
to address (e.g. poor birth outcomes, child abuse and neglect, and diminished economic
self-sufficiency of parents) are concentrated in those populations. The program has
been implemented in a series of randomized trials conducted in Elmira, New York
(n=400), Memphis, Tennessee (n=1,135) and Denver, Colorado (n=735). In each of

                                                35
these three sites, women were randomized to receive either home visitation services
during the pregnancy and the first two years of the lives of their children, or comparison
services. The program has been shown to be successful in improving the well-being of
the child (fewer injuries) and of the mother (fewer subsequent pregnancies, greater
work force participation, and reduced use of public assistance and of food stamps), see
Olds [2002] for a summary of the main results from the three sites. Additionally, in the
Denver trial, the program was administered either by nurses or paraprofessional; it has
been shown that, for most outcomes on which either visitor produced significant effects,
the paraprofessionals typically had effects that were about half the size of those
produced by the nurses (Olds et al. [2002]).

Among other early interventions, the Tools of the Mind curriculum is similar to
High/Scope. It is inspired by the work of Vygotsky, who emphasized the importance for
the learner to interact with the environment and to explore it independently with her own
senses. Vygotsky also promoted assisted discovery (or scaffolding): children are guided
in their learning by the teachers, and are also aided by their peers, as they work in
groups of mixed abilities. It was developed by the educational psychologists Elena
Bodrova and Deborah Leong [2007], and it targets the development of core Executive
Functions (EF) in preschoolers, such as inhibitory control, working memory, and
cognitive flexibility. In Tools, techniques for supporting, training and challenging EFs are
intertwined in almost all classroom activities throughout the day, coherently with
Vygotskian idea that EFs develop as children are engaged in specific interpersonal
interactions. The most convincing evidence on the effectiveness of the Tools of the
Mind curriculum comes from a randomized evaluation which was carried out in an urban
school district in Northeast, after opening of a new publicly-funded preschool program
for poor children. From the list of parents who signed up, children were randomly
assigned either to the Tools curriculum, or to a version of the Balanced Literacy
curriculum which had been developed by the school district (dBL). This was based on
the idea that literacy should be taught to young children in a balanced way, i.e. through
a combination of different activities; in practice it covered the same academic content as
the Tools curriculum, however without any activity intentionally designed to promote EF
development: children were not expected to regulate each other or themselves in the

                                            36
classroom. Diamond et al. [2007] compare the outcomes of 147 preschoolers randomly
assigned, and show that children who received the Tools curriculum showed improved
performance in EF measures, as compared to the children who received the dBL
curriculum. Contrary to these results, a recent large-scale study (Farran and Wilson
[2011]) does not find any significant effect of the program on literacy, language,
mathematics achievement or self-regulation, after one year of implementation.
However, Diamond et al. [2007] provide suggestive evidence that it takes two years
before positive effects can be identified, since the teachers need to adjust their
practices to the new curriculum.

Other preschool interventions have shown evidence of significant effects. However, a
proper comparison among them requires an understanding of the different components
of the various curricula, in order to identify the mechanisms through which the various
programs operate and produce improved outcomes. Recent reviews of early childhood
interventions (Nores and Barnett [2009], Baker-Henningham and Lopez Boo [2010])
conclude that mixed interventions (i.e. those involving an educational, care and
stimulation components), of greater intensity and of longer duration are the most
effective. Additionally, they conclude that interventions should target younger and more
disadvantaged children, and actively seek the involvement of the families and of the
caregivers. However, they recognize that more research is needed to determine the
optimal age and mode of delivery, and that careful cost-benefit analyses should be
incorporated in the evaluations of the interventions.

Finally, the evidence on late childhood interventions, instead, reveals that they have
been less successful in promoting child well-being (see the evidence in Cunha et al.
[2006] and Chapter 10 in Heckman, Humphries and Kautz [2012]). Durlak et al. [2011]
present a meta-study of 213 school-based social and emotional learning programs. This
shows that, while some programs have been successful, many of the evaluations they
include suffer from methodological problems. Only 47 percent of the programs studied
are randomized. Only 15 percent contain follow-ups that go beyond 6 months. When
long-term follow-ups are available, these programs usually show no persistent gains. A
typical example is provided by Quantum Opportunity Project (QOP), which provided


                                            37
both counseling services by means of a qualified mentor and financial incentives to
participants for a duration of four years. While showing positive short-term effects on
high school graduation, most of its positive effects faded out by the 10-year follow-up
(Rodriguez-Planas [2012]).

Education. There is a long ongoing debate on the usefulness of education to remediate
pre-existing disparities, and to promote well-being (see Lochner [2011] for a recent
survey of the evidence). However, the economics literature has addressed this question
mainly by using quasi-experimental designs. In a series of paper Conti et al.
[2010,2011] and Conti and Heckman [2010] break new ground in the education-health
debate (as noted in Mazumder [2012]) by using a developmental model, which
recognizes that education is itself determined by early life traits which constitute
dimensions of child capabilities, and is an outcome of child well-being itself.30 The
authors first address the question as to whether education has a causal impact on adult
outcomes, or it is just a proxy for dimensions of child capabilities, which affect both the
educational choice, and the outcomes themselves. The extent to which education
impacts well-being is shown in Figure 9, where the length of each bar shows the mean
differences at age 30 in a number of outcomes (health, health behaviors and labor
market outcomes) between individuals who have dropped out at the minimum
compulsory school leaving age (16 years in Britain at the time we consider), and those
who have stayed on beyond age 16 to achieve a post-compulsory educational
qualification. These raw differentials are then decomposed into a component
attributable to early life determinants, and another caused by schooling itself – what
economists call the “treatment effect” of education. This decomposition exercise shows
that, while education has huge effects across many outcomes (the dark portion of the
bar represents the share of the disparity which can be attributed to the causal effect of
education), early-life dimensions of child capabilities also play a key role: first, they
promote attendance in schooling; second, they have an independent effect in their own
right on several adult outcomes. Importantly, education has a stronger effect on health
behaviors than on health outcomes per se. This makes a strong case for prevention by

30
   Note that educational attainment is one of the indicators included in the UNICEF and OECD
taxonomies reviewed in the introductory section.

                                            38
investing in child well-being. The second question that the authors address is whether
the success of later interventions depends on the quality of earlier ones and on the
nature of the capability created. An example on how the effect of education on one
dimension of adult well-being – the unhealthy behavior of smoking – varies with different
dimensions of child capabilities is presented In Figure 10. Here it is shown that the
beneficial effect of education, in terms of the percentage points reduction in the
probability of being a daily smoker by age 30, is much bigger for adults who were at the
top of the cognitive ability distribution, but on the other hand at the bottom of the
noncognitive ability distribution at age 10.31 In other




     Figure 9. Educational Disparities in Labor Market and Health Outcomes in the BCS70.
                           Source: Conti, Heckman and Urzua [2010].


words, education has a reinforcing effect for cognitive capabilities, and a compensatory
effect for psychological dimensions of child well-being. This evidence on differential

31
   When estimating the effect of post-compulsory education on the probability of being a daily smoker
along the distribution of each capability, the other two capabilities are fixed at their mean values.

                                                 39
effects of education by level of cognition in childhood is consistent with the interpretation
that the information content on the dangers of smoking provided by post-compulsory
education needs to be combined with the capacity to process that information in order
for it to be effective. On the other hand, the evidence of a greater effect of education for
adults who had self-regulation problems in childhood is consistent with the evidence of
malleability of the prefrontal cortex – and so of skills related to discipline and self-control
– into the adolescent years. Hence, while it is more effective to start young, there are
still effective strategies for addressing the problems of disadvantaged adolescents.

A consolidated body of evidence suggests that cognitive skills are established early in
life and that boosting raw IQ and problem-solving ability in the teenage years is much
harder than doing so when children are young. But social and personality skills are
malleable into the early twenties, although early formation of these traits is still the best
policy because they boost learning. The timing of specific policies and interventions
should be designed on the basis of the malleability of the capability they target.
However, as currently implemented, public job training programs, adult literacy services,
prisoner rehabilitation programs, and education programs for disadvantaged adults
produce low economic returns (Cunha et al. [2006]). Moreover, studies in which later
interventions showed some benefits also found that the performance of disadvantaged
children was still behind the performance of children who also experienced interventions
in the preschool years. In sum, if the base is stronger, the return to later investment is
greater.

The essence of the argument of investing in child well-being can be summarized in
Figure 11, which shows the return to a unit dollar invested by stage of the lifecycle. This
graph captures the returns to a hypothetical investor who is deciding where to place
his/her money in the life of a newborn. From a purely economic standpoint, the highest
return to a unit dollar invested is at the beginning of the lifecycle since it builds the base
that makes later returns possible. One important point to clarify is that the argument to
invest in child well-being does not say that there is no return to schooling or later




                                              40
  Figure 10. Effect of Education on Smoking by Percentiles of the Distribution of Child Well-
                                            being.
                             Source: Conti and Heckman [2010].

investment. Indeed, for those with a good base, the economic benefits are substantial
(see Carneiro et al. [2003]). The high early returns arise in part because they promote
substantial benefits for later life investment. The logic suggested by this figure should be
to promote a policy of prevention, rather than remediation, since it is much more cost-
effective to help disadvantaged children earlier on than to remediate later on. Yet
despite the evidence, society underinvests in disadvantaged young children. Less-
educated women tend to be single parents. They work in low wage jobs and do not
invest much in their children. More educated women, even if single mothers, are not
only working more, but also investing more in their children – effectively increasing the
gap between the advantaged and the disadvantaged (McLanahan, [2004]). As a result,
inequality is being perpetuated -- and even increased -- across generations. The
solution to this problem is to invest in the promotion of child capabilities beginning at
conception.


                                              41
At the same time, we cannot abandon the children who have had no access to this
foundational opportunity and the adults, who did not have such opportunities as
children. However, the key to successful remediation is to invest in carefully designed
programs which address those capabilities amenable to change.




           Figure 11. Returns to a Unit Dollar Invested by Stage of the Life Cycle.




Evidence from Neuroscience and Genetics. From the current state of knowledge, it is
clear that adverse conditions in early life induce changes in brain structure and
functions, and that these environmental stressors can affect epigenetic programming of
long-term changes in neurodevelopment and behavior (Murgatroyd and Spengler
[2011]). Two key aspects have to be considered: first, the temporal nature of brain
development; second, the temporal and gene-specific manner of epigenetic
programming. With regard to the former, different brain regions pass through critical
windows of sensitivity in different periods, so that environmental exposures at different
ages will affect different areas of the brain. For example, environmental exposures in


                                             42
the late prenatal and early postnatal period are associated with changes in the
hippocampus (McCrory et al. [2010]), while cortical development continues into
adolescence (Wang and Gao [2009]). Additionally, while the reversibility of structural
and functional changes in the brain following alterations in social and emotional
conditions has not been systematically investigated, recent research in humans is
beginning to document the effects of specific interventions to reduce stress and promote
well-being on brain structure and function (see Davidson and McEwen [2012] for a
recent review). With regard to the second aspect, the way epigenetic marks translate
from a transient state to lasting cellular memory is still a black box; the best available
evidence comes from animal studies, and suggests that early adversity gets under the
skin and establishes stable marks very early (e.g. Murgatroyd et al. [2010]). However,
the question of whether critical windows for psychoterapeutic and pharmacological
interventions (the so-called "epigenetic drugs") might exist before the establishment of
stable epigenetic marks is still open. While environmental enrichment in puberty has
shown positive effects both in animals (Imanaka et al. [2008]) and in humans (Fisher et
al. [2007]), the optimal timing and duration and the most effective components of such
interventions might be quite specific and dependent upon the nature of the early-life
adversity. Above all, the quantitative importance of these epigenetic effects, and the
nature itself of these biological changes – whether they are on a causal pathway
between early life conditions and late outcomes – needs to be rigorously established.
What is known supports the framework of Section III and the evidence summarized in
Section IV. Knowledge is accumulating rapidly, and designing and implementing
biologically-based interventions is the key to promoting the well-being of the future
generation, while not abandoning the current one.




                                           43
VI.    Future Directions

Incorporating Lessons from Biology. In sum, while much remains to be learned,
there are important hints in the literature. The literature is actively addressing the
following questions. How important are investments and environments in the early years
as compared to later-stage investments and environments? How should investments be
staged over the lifecycle to promote human flourishing? How effective are later life
compensations for early life effects of adversity? In order to make progress, biological
and socioeconomic mechanisms need to be thoroughly investigated.
First, the literature on neurobiology of resilience and reversibility of risk shows mounting
evidence that the adverse effects of early life conditions might be coped with (Feder et
al. [2009]) or at least partially reversible; e.g. increasing evidence of plasticity in key
brain areas (Davidson and McEwen [2012]), of restoration in telomere function by diet,
exercise and stress reduction (Puterman and Epel [2012]), and even of reversing the
prenatal adaptations from fetal malnutrition following dietary changes (Burdge et al.
[2009]). The key aspects seem to be the windows of plasticity for specific organs.
Experience gets embodied in the biology of the organism. Recent evidence on gene-
environment interactions shows us how experience gets under and stays under the
skin, how early childhood environments, together with genetic variation, alter epigenetic
regulation and change developmental trajectories by altering human biological
processes (Hertzman and Boyce [2010]). Recent evidence from nonhuman primates
shows that early life experiences can trigger epigenetic changes which are manifest
very early and are not the results of cumulative exposures (Cole et al. [2012]), and can
have long-term consequences, without being reversed by a normal social environment
later in life (Conti et al. [2012]).
Second, the existence of gender differences in the effects of interventions (Bandy
[2012] and Bell et al. [2012]) needs to be more thoroughly investigated, to disentangle
biological and socioeconomic channels. An example of the complex interconnections
between biological and socioeconomic factors is suggested by the analysis reported in
Table 1. In this table, we report a multiple regression analysis of two measures of late
childhood capabilities: the IQ score and the percentage of fat, both measured at age 15.
Regressors are family background factors (family income and mother’s education) and

                                            44
child health conditions (both standard measures like birthweight and biomarkers for
inflammation32). We make several observations. First, mother’s education shows a
stronger association with child well-being than family income. The strength of the
association increases with the level of maternal education. Second, being born in poor
health conditions only affects cognitive outcomes, and with an effect which is gender-
specific. Being born with a low birthweight is associated with, on average, an IQ score
of 3 points lower at age 15 for males. However there is no such cognitive penalty for
females. No significant association is uncovered between low birthweight and the
proportion of fat at age 15. Third, the two biomarkers of child health which are available
in the data – the C-reactive protein and Interleukin-6 (both proxies for inflammation) –
show, instead, a strong and significant association with the percentage of fat mass at 15
years. In sum, the main message of this table is that, while family background measures
and traditional proxies for health are significant determinants of cognitive measures
routinely used in economics, the analysis of more refined measures of child well-being
such as the percentage of fat requires incorporation of more biological proxies, which
capture the extent to which the early-life environment has permeated within the body. In
this respect, both IL-6 and CRP are significant predictors of the physical well-being of
the child, with an effect which also varies by gender, and which is poorly captured by
other measures.
Finally, even bigger challenges for future research are to find out which approaches
best serve which sub-populations; which skills these programs improve, and, ideally,
which aspects of the program are responsible for this change in skill. Hence, our ability
to design effective policies will increase as evidence from the biological sciences on
windows of plasticity for specific dimensions will sharpen. Our ability to evaluate policies
will also improve as the availability of biomarkers in the data accessible to researchers
will increase, so to be better able to measure the functioning of specific parts of the
brain and of the body, all of which contribute to different aspects of human well-being.




32
   C-Reactive Protein (CRP) and the cytokine Interleukin-6 (IL-6) are markers of inflammation, see Slopen
et al. [2012].

                                                   45
                                            Percentage of fat at age 15                  IQ at 15
                                               Males           Females           Males          Females
Log of Interleukin-6 (IL-6) at age 10          -0.372          0.631***          0.239              0.375
                                               (0.236)          (0.236)         (0.425)             (0.426)
Log of C-Reactive Protein (CRP) at age        1.882***         1.883***         -0.0634             -0.436
10                                             (0.183)          (0.174)         (0.330)             (0.314)
Low Birthweight (<2500 grams)                  -0.917           0.821          -3.043**             -0.541
                                               (0.828)          (0.869)         (1.470)             (1.595)
Family income 200-300 pounds per                0.761           -0.960          -2.621              1.585
week                                           (0.936)          (0.837)         (1.687)             (1.502)
Family income 300-400 pounds per                0.144           -0.548          -0.501              2.468*
week                                           (0.897)          (0.802)         (1.624)             (1.438)
Family income more than 400 pounds              0.240           -1.213           2.054          3.774***
per week                                       (0.843)          (0.750)         (1.536)             (1.342)
Mother has O-level education                    0.634          -1.179**        4.485***         3.937***
                                               (0.559)          (0.524)         (0.998)             (0.949)
Mother has A-level education                   0.0616          -1.680***       9.456***         7.955***
                                               (0.584)          (0.554)         (1.040)             (1.007)
Mother has Degree-level education              -0.843          -2.208***       14.33***         14.10***
                                               (0.649)          (0.620)         (1.162)             (1.128)


Observations                                    1,498           1,537            1,400              1,437
R-squared                                       0.086           0.128            0.175              0.154
Note. Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Other controls not shown in the
table are race, binary indicators for missing family income and maternal education, age and medication
at blood collection. Family income is measured at age 8, mother’s education is measured at gestation.
The reference category for family income is less than 200 pounds per week; the reference category for
mother’s education is less than O-level. Source: own calculations based on the Avon Longitudinal Study
of Parents and Children (ALSPAC).
                 Table 1: Childhood biological and socioeconomic correlates of well-being at age 15.




                                                          46
Open Questions for Future Research and Policy. Several practical questions also
need to be addressed.

1.     Who should be targeted? The returns to early childhood programs are highest for
disadvantaged children who do not receive substantial amounts of parental investment
in the early years. The proper measure of disadvantage is not necessarily family poverty
or parental education: the available evidence suggests that the quality of parenting is
the important scarce resource. So we need better measures of risky family
environments in order to achieve more accurate targeting.
2.      With what programs? Programs that target the early years seem to have the
greatest promise. The Abecedarian and Perry programs show high returns. Equally
suggestive is the analysis of the Nurse-Family Partnership. Programs with home visits
affect the lives of the parents and create a permanent change in the home environment
that supports the child after center-based interventions end. Programs that build
character and motivation, and do not focus exclusively on cognition, appear to be the
most effective, especially in the adolescent years.
3.     Who should provide the programs? In designing any program that aims to
improve the well-being of children, it is important to respect the sanctity of early family
life and cultural diversity. The goal of early childhood programs is to create a base of
productive skills and traits for disadvantaged children from all social, ethnic, and
religious groups. Engaging the private sector, including privately constituted social
groups and philanthropists, augments public resources, creates community support,
and ensures that diverse points of view are represented.
4.     Who should pay for them? One could make the programs universal to avoid
stigmatization. Universal programs would be much more expensive and create the
possibility of deadweight losses whereby public programs displace private investments
by families. One solution to these problems is to make the programs universal but to
offer a sliding fee schedule based on family income.
5.     Will the programs achieve high levels of compliance? It is important to recognize
potential problems with program compliance. Many successful programs change the
values and motivations of the child. Some of these changes may run counter to the
values of certain parents. There may be serious tension between the needs of the child

                                            47
and the acceptance of interventions by the parents. Developing culturally diverse
programs will help avoid such tension. One cannot assume that there will be no conflict
between the values of society as it seeks to develop the potential of the child and the
values of the family, although the extent of such conflict is not yet known.

Conclusions

This paper presents an economic framework for conceptualizing child well-being in a
developmental perspective. It reviews recent evidence which shows that investing in the
capabilities of the children today is the most cost-effective policy to promote the
capabilities of the adults tomorrow. This argument makes sense both on equity and
efficiency grounds. Despite the logic and the evidence, most policies still overlook the
evidence on the efficacy of early interventions, leading to an underinvestment in the
skills of very disadvantaged children.
The evidence presented in this paper makes the case that re-thinking the current
American policy by investing more in the early years is an efficient and effective policy,
both for the individual and the communities (Conti and Heckman [2012]). The evidence
from the economics of child well-being calls for a move from a policy of redistribution to
one of pre-distribution of resources.




                                            48
                                        References

[1]     Almond, D. and J. Currie (2010). “Human Capital Development before Age Five.”
Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4b, 1315-1486.
[2]     Baker-Henningham, H. and F. Lopez Boo (2010). “Early Childhood Stimulation
Interventions in Developing Countries: A Comprehensive Literature Review.” IZA dp
5282.
[3]     Bandy, T. (2012). “What works for male children and adolescents: Lessons from
Experimental Evaluations of Programs and Interventions.” Child Trends #22.
[4]     Beaumont, J. (2011). “Measuring national well-being.” Discussion Paper on
Domains and Measures, London Office for National Statistics.
[5]     Becker, G.S. and N. Tomes (1986). “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of
Families.” Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3).
[6]     Bell, K., M.A. Terzian and K.A. Moore (2012). “What works for female children
and     adolescents:   Lessons   from   Experimental   Evaluations   of   Programs      and
Interventions.” Child Trends #23.
[7]     Ben-Arieh, A. (2008). “The Child Indicators Movement: Past, Present, and
Future.” Child Indicators Research, 1:3-16.
[8]     Ben-Arieh, A. and I. Frones (2011). “Taxonomy for child well-being indicators: A
framework for the analysis of the well-being of children.” Childhood, 18(4): 460-476.
[9]     Ben-Porath, Y. (1967). “The production of human capital and the life cycle of
earnings.” Journal of Political Economy. August 75(4): 352-365.
[10]    Bjorklund, A. and K. Salvanes (2011). “Education and family background:
Mechanisms and policies.” Handbook of the Economics of Education, Elsevier.
[11]    Bodrova, E. and D.J. Leong (2007). Tools of the Mind: The Vygotskian Approach
to Early Childhood Education. Pearson Publisher.
[12]    Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America. New York:
Basic Books.
[13]    Bowles, S., H. Gintis and M. Osborne (2001). “The determinants of earnings: A
behavioral approach.” Journal of Economic Literature 39(4): 1137-1176.
[14]    Bradshaw, J. and D. Richardson (2009). “An Index of Child Well-Being in
Europe.” Child Indicators Research, 2: 319-351.

                                              49
[15]    Burdge, G.C., K.A. Lillycrop, E.S. Phillips, J.L. Slater-Jefferies, A.A. Jackson and
M.A. Hanson (2009). “Folic Acid Supplementation during the Juvenile-Pubertal Period in
Rats Modified the Phenotype and Epigenotype Induced by Prenatal Nutrition.” The
Journal of Nutrition.
[16]    Campbell, F.A., E.P. Pungello and S. Miller-Johnson (2002). “The development
of perceived scholastic competence and global self-worth in african american
adolescents from low-income families.” Journal of Adolescent Research, 17(3): 277-
302.
[17]    Campbell, F.A., E.P. Pungello, S. Miller-Johnson, M. Burchinal and C.T. Ramey
(2011). “The development of cognitive and academic abilities: Growth curves from an
early childhood educational experiment.” Developmental Psychology, 37(2), 231-242.
[18]    Campbell, F.A., E.P. Pungello, M. Burchinal, K. Kainz, Y. Pan, B.H. Wasik, O.A.
Barbarin, J.J. Sparling and C.T. Ramey (2012). “Adult Outcomes as a Function of an
Early   Childhood       Educational   Program:    An   Abecedarian    Project   Follow-Up.”
Developmental Psychology, January.
[19]    Campbell, F.A. and C.T. Ramey (1994). “Effects of early intervention on
intellectual and academic achievement: A follow-up study of children from low-income
families.” Child Development, 65(2), 684-698.
[20]    Carneiro, P., C. Crawford and A. Goodman (2007). “The Impact of Early
Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills on Later Outcomes.” CEE dp92.
[21]    Carneiro, P., K. Hansen and J.J. Heckman (2003). “Estimating Distributions of
Treatment Effects with an Application to the Returns to Schooling and Measurement of
the Effects of Uncertainty on College Choice.” International Economic Review,
44(2):361-422.
[22]    Cole, S.W., G. Conti, J.M. Arevalo, A.M. Ruggiero, J.J. Heckman and S.J. Suomi
(2012). “Transcriptional modulation of the developing immune system by early life social
adversity.” PNAS, forthcoming.
[23]    Conti, G. and C. Hansman (2012). “Personality and the Education-Health
Gradient.” Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.
[24]    Conti, G., J.J. Heckman and S. Urzua (2010). “The Education-Health Gradient.”
American Economic Review P&P, May.

                                             50
[25]   Conti, G. and J.J. Heckman (2010). “Understanding the Early Origins of the
Education-Health Gradient: A Framework That Can Also Be Applied to Analyze Gene-
Environment Interactions.” Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5:585.
[26]   Conti, G., J.J. Heckman and S. Urzua (2011). “Early endowments, education,
and health.” Human Capital and Economic Opportunity wp01.
[27]   Conti, G., C. Hansman, J.J. Heckman, A. Ruggiero, M.X. Novak and S.J. Suomi
(2012). “Primate evidence on the late health effects of early life adversity.” PNAS, May.
[28]   Conti, G. and J.J. Heckman (2012). “Early Childhood Development: Creating
Healthy Communities with Greater Efficiency and Effectiveness.” In Investing in What
Works for America’s Communities, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and Low
Income Investment Fund.
[29]   Conti, G., J.J. Heckman, S. Fruhwirth-Schnatter and R. Piatek (2012). “Bayesian
Dedicated Factor Analysis: A Framework for Understanding the Social and Economic
Determinants of Adult Health and Wages.” Unpublished manuscript, Department of
Economics, University of Chicago.
[30]   Cunha, F., L. L. Lochner and D. Masterov (2006). “Interpreting the Evidence on
Life Cycle Skill Formation.” In E. Hanushek and F. Welch, eds., Handbook of the
Economics of Education, (North Holland: Amsterdam), pp. 697–812.
[31]   Cunha, F. and J.J. Heckman (2007). “The Technology of Skill Formation.”
American Economics Review P&P, 97(2), 31-47.
[32]   Cunha, F., and J.J. Heckman (2008). “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the
Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.” Journal of Human
Resources, XLIII, 4, 738-782.
[33]   Cunha, F., and J.J. Heckman (2009). “The Economics and Psychology of
Inequality and Human Development.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7,
320-364.
[34]   Cunha, F., J.J. Heckman and S. Schennach (2010). “Estimating the Technology
of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.” Econometrica, 78(3), 883-931.
[35]   Currie, J. (2009). “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor
Health in Childhood, and Human Capital Development.” Journal of the Economic
Literature, 47(1): 87-122.

                                            51
[36]   Daly, M. (2011). “Intelligence differences may explain the link between childhood
psychological problems and adult socioeconomic status.” PNAS, July.
[37]   Davidson, R.J. and B.S. McEwen (2012). "Social influences on neuroplasticity:
stress and interventions to promote well-being." Nature Neuroscience.
[38]   Del Boca, D., C.J. Flinn and M. Wiswall (2011), “Household Choices and Child
Development.” Manuscript, New York University.
[39]   Diamond, A., W.S. Barnett, J. Thomas and S. Munro (2007). "Preschool Program
Improves Cognitive Control." Science, 318.
[40]   Dolan, P., R. Layard and R. Metcalfe (2011). “Measuring Subjective Wellbeing
for Public Policy: Recommendations on Measures.” Center for Economic Performance,
Special Paper no. 23.
[41]   Durlak, J.A., R.P. Weissberg, A.B. Dymnicki, R.D. Taylor and K.B. Schellinger
(2011). “The impact of enhancing students’ social and emotional learning: a meta-
analysis of school-based universal interventions.” Child Development, 82(1), 405-32.
[42]   Evenhouse, E. and S. Reilly (2004). “A Sibling Study of Stepchild Well-Being.”
Journal of Human Resources.
[43]   Farran, D.C. and S.J. Wilson (2012). “Experimental evaluation of the Tools of the
Mind pre-k curriculum.” Technical report, Peabody Research Institute Report.
[44]   Feder, A., E.J. Nestler and D.S. Charney (2009). “Psychobiology and molecular
genetics of resilience.” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10, 446-457.
[45]   Fernandes, L., A. Mendes and A. Teixeira (2010). “A Review Essay on Child
Well-Being Measurement: Uncovering the Paths for Future Research.” Working Paper,
Universidade Catolica Portuguesa.
[46]   Fisher, P.A., M. Stoolmiller, M.R. Gunnar and B.O. Burraston (2007). "Effects of
a therapeutic intervention for foster preschoolers on diurnal cortisol activity."
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 32, 892-905.
[47]   Goodman, A., R. Joyce and J.P. Smith (2011). “The long shadow cast by
childhood physical and mental problems on adult life.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 108(15): 6032-7.




                                           52
[48]      Grogger, J. and L.A. Karoly (2007). “The Effects of Work-Conditioned Transfers
on Marriage and Child Well-being. A Review.” RAND Labor and Population Working
Paper 531.
[49]      Hamilton, J.D. (1994). “State-space models.” In Handbook of Econometrics,
vol.IV.
[50]      Heckman, J.J. (2007). “The economics, technology and neuroscience of human
capability formation.” PNAS, August.
[51]      Heckman, J.J. (2008). “Schools, skills, and synapses.” Economic Inquiry, 46(3):
289-324.
[52]      Heckman, J.J., J.E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (2012). The GED and the Role of
Character in American Life. Unpublished book manuscript, University of Chicago,
Department of Economics.
[53]      Heckman, J.J., R.J. Lalonde and J.A. Smith (1999). “The economics and
econometrics of active labor market programs.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol.3.
[54]      Heckman, J.J., S.H. Moon, R. Pinto, P.A. Savelyev, and A.Q. Yavitz (2010).
“Analyzing social experiments as implemented: A reexamination of the evidence from
the HighScope Perry Preschool Program.” Quantitative Economics 1, 1: 1–46.
[55]      Heckman, J.J., S.H. Moon, R. Pinto, P.A. Savelyev, and A.Q. Yavitz (2010,
February). “The rate of return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program.” Journal of
Public Economics, 94, 1-2: 114–128.
[56]      Heckman, J.J., R. Pinto, and P.A. Savelyev (2012). “Understanding the
mechanisms through which an influential early childhood program boosted adult
outcomes.” American Economic Review. Forthcoming.
[57]      Heckman, J.J., J. Stixrud and S. Urzua (2006). “The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of
Labor Economics, 24(3).
[58]      Hertzman, C. and T. Boyce (2010). “How Experience Gets Under the Skin to
Create Gradients in Developmental Health.” Annual Review of Public Health, 31:329-47.
[59]      Imanaka, A., S. Morinobu, S. Toki, S. Yamamoto, A. Matsuki, T. Kozuru, and S.
Yamawaki (2008). "Neonatal tactile stimulation reverses the effect of neonatal isolation



                                             53
on open-field and anxiety-like behavior, and pain sensitivity in male and female adult
Sprague-Dawley rats." Behavior and Brain Research, 186-91-97.
[60]   Jones, A.M., N. Rice and P. Rosa Dias (2011). “Long-Term Effects of School
Quality on Health and Lifestyle: Evidence from Comprehensive Schooling Reforms in
England.” Journal of Human Capital, 5(3), 342-376.
[61]   Jöreskog, K. (1977). “Structural equations models in the social sciences:
Specification, estimation, and testing.” In Applications of statistics, ed. P. Krishnaiah,
265-87. New York: North-Holland.
[62]   Kaestner, R. and K. Callison (2011). “Adolescent Cognitive and Noncognitive
Correlates of Adult Health.” Journal of Human Capital, 5(1), 29-69.
[63]   Kahneman, D., E. Diener and N. Schwarz (eds.) (1999). Well-Being: The
Foundations of Hedonic Psychology. New York: Russell Sage Found.
[64]   Kieling, C., H. Baker-Henningham, M. Belfer, G. Conti, I. Ertem, O. Omigbodun,
L. Augusto Rohde, S. Srinath, N. Ulkuer and A. Rahman (2011). “Child and adolescent
mental health worldwide: Evidence for action.” The Lancet, 378(9801): 1515-25.
[65]   Knudsen, E.I., J.J. Heckman, J.L. Cameron and J.P. Shonkoff (2006).
“Economic, neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future
workforce.” PNAS, 103(27): 10155-10162.
[66]   Land, K.C., V.L. Lamb, S.O. Meadows and A. Taylor (2007). “Measuring trends
in child well-being: an evidence-based approach.” Social Indicators Research, 80: 105-
132.
[67]   Leibowitz, A. (1974). “Home Investment in Children”. Journal of Political
Economy, 82(2), S111-S131.
[68]   Lochner, L. (2011). “Non-Production Benefits of Education: Crime, Health, and
Good Citizenship.” Handbook of the Economics of Education.
[69]   McCrory, E., S.A. Brito and E. Viding (2010). "Research review: the neurobiology
and genetics of maltreatment and adversity." Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 51, 1079-1095.
[70]   Mazumder, B. (2012). “The Effects of Education on Health and Mortality.” Nordic
Economic Policy Review.



                                           54
[71]   McLanahan, S. “Diverging Destinies: How Children Are Faring Under the Second
Demographic Transition.” Demography, 41(4), November 2004, 607–627.
[72]   Murasko, J.E. (2007). “A lifecourse study on education and health: The
relationship between childhood psychosocial resources and outcomes in adolescence
and young adulthood.” Social Science Research, 36, 1348-1370.
[73]   Murgatroyd, C., Y. Wu, Y. Bockmuhl and D. Spengler (2010). "Genes learn from
stress: How infantile trauma programs us for depression?" Epigenetics, 5, 194-99.
[74]   Murgatroyd, C. and D. Spengler (2011). “Epigenetics of early child development.”
Frontiers in Psychiatry, 2(16).
[75]   Nagin, D. S. and R. E. Tremblay (2001, April). “Parental and early childhood
predictors of persistent physical aggression in boys from kindergarten to high school.”
Archives of General Psychiatry, 58(4), 389-394.
[76]   Nores, M. and W.S. Barnett (2009). “Benefits of early childhood interventions
across the world: (Under) Investing in the very young.” Economics of Education Review.
[77]   O’Hare, W., M. Mather and G. Dupuis (2012). “Analyzing State Differences in
Child Well-Being.” Foundation for Child Development.
[78]   OECD (2009). “Comparative Child Well-Being across the OECD”, Chapter 2 in
Doing Better for Children.
[79]   Office for National Statistics (2011). “Measuring national well-being. Measuring
what matters. National Statistician’s Reflections on the National Debate on Measuring
National Well-being”. London: Stationery Office.
[80]   Office for National Statistics (2012). “Measuring National Well-being: Summary of
Proposed domains and Measures.” July.
[81]   Olds, D. (2002). “Prenatal and Infancy Home Visiting by Nurses: From
Randomized Trials to Community Replication.” Prevention Science, 3(3), 153-172.
[82]   Olds, D.L., J. Robinson, R. O’Brien, D.W. Luckey, L. M. Pettitt, C.R. Henderson,
R.K. Ng, K.L. Sheff, J. Korfmacher, S. Hiatt and A. Talmi (2002). “Home Visiting by
Paraprofessionals and by Nurses: A Randomized Controlled Trial”. Pediatrics, 110, 486-
496.




                                           55
[83]     Pickett, K. and R. Wilkinson (2007). “Child wellbeing and income inequality in rich
societies: ecological cross sectional study.” British Medical Journal, 225(7629): 1080-
87.
[84]     Puterman, E. and E. Epel (2012). “An Intricate Dance: Life Experience,
Multisystem Resiliency, and Rate of Telomere Decline Throughout the Lifespan.” Social
and Personality Psychology Compass, 1-19.
[85]     Rodriguez-Planas, N. (2012). “Longer-Term Impacts of Mentoring, Educational
Services, and Incentives to Learn: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
[86]     Ryan, R.M. and E.L. Deci (2001). “On Happiness and Human Potentials: A
Review of Research on Hedonic and Eudaimonic Well-Being.” Annual Review of
Psychology, 52, 141-66.
[87]     Ryff, C.D. and B. Singer (1998). “The contours of positive human health.”
Psychological Inquiry, 9: 1-28.
[88]     Rodriguez-Planas, N. (2012). “Longer-Term Impacts of Mentoring, Educational
Services, and Incentives to Learn: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
[89]     Ryan, R.M. and E.L. Deci (2001). “On happiness and human potentials: a review
of research on hedonic and eudemonic wellbeing.” Annual Review of Psychology, 52:
141-66.
[90]     Schweinhart, L. J., H. V. Barnes, and D. Weikart (1993). “Significant Benefits:
The High-Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 27.” Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope
Press.
[91]     Sen, A.K. (1999). Development as Freedom. New York: Random House.
[92]     Shakotko, R.A., L.N. Edwards and M. Grossman (1980). “An Exploration of the
Dynamic Relationship between Health and Cognitive Development in Adolescence.”
NBER working paper 454.
[93]     Slopen, N., L.D. Kubzansky, K.A. McLaughlin and K.C. Koenen (2012).
“Childhood adversity and inflammatory processes in youth: A prospective study.”
Psychoneuroendocrinology.



                                             56
[94]   Sparling, J. and I. Lewis (1979). “LearningGames for the First Three Years: A
Guide to Parent/Child Play.” New York, NY: Berkley Books.
[95]   Sparling, J. and I. Lewis (1984). “LearningGames for Threes and Fours.” New
York, NY: Walker and Company.
[96]   UNICEF (2007), An overview of child well-being in rich countries, Innocenti
Report Card 7.
[97]   Van Soest, A. and H. Vonkova (2012). “Testing Parametric Models Using
Anchoring Vignettes against Nonparametric Alternatives.” Netspar dp 12.
[98]   Wang, H.-X. and W.-J. Gao (2009). "Cell type-specific development of NMDA
receptors in the interneurons of rat prefrontal cortex." Neuropsychopharmacology, 34,
2028-2040.




                                         57
