                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE GENDER GAP IN MATHEMATICS:
              EVIDENCE FROM LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRIES

                                        Prashant Bharadwaj
                                        Giacomo De Giorgi
                                           David Hansen
                                        Christopher Neilson

                                       Working Paper 18464
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18464


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2012




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Prashant Bharadwaj, Giacomo De Giorgi, David Hansen, and Christopher Neilson. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Gender Gap in Mathematics: Evidence from Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Prashant Bharadwaj, Giacomo De Giorgi, David Hansen, and Christopher Neilson
NBER Working Paper No. 18464
October 2012
JEL No. I23,O15

                                            ABSTRACT

We establish the presence of a gender gap in mathematics across many low- and middle-income countries
using detailed, comparable test score data. Examining micro level data on school performance linked
to household demographics we note that first, the gender gap appears to increase with age. Indeed,
the gap nearly doubles when comparing 4th grade and 8th grade test scores. Second, we test whether
commonly proposed explanations such as parental background and investments, unobserved ability,
and classroom environment (including teacher gender) explain a substantial portion of the gap. While
none of these explanations help in substantially explaining the gender gap we observe, we show that
boys and girls differ significantly in perceptions about their own ability in math, conditional on math
test scores. Girls are much more likely to state that they dislike math, or find math difficult compared
to boys. We highlight differences in self-assessed ability as areas for future research that might lead
to a better understanding of the gender gap in math.


Prashant Bharadwaj                                 David Hansen
Department of Economics                            Brigham Young University
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                            130 Faculty Office Building
San Diego, CA 92093                                Provo, UT 84602
prbharadwaj@ucsd.edu                               davidhansen@byu.edu

Giacomo De Giorgi                                  Christopher Neilson
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
Stanford University                                Yale University
579 Serra Mall                                     christopher.neilson@yale.edu
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
degiorgi@stanford.edu
1        Introduction

Throughout much of the developing world, women tend to be disadvantaged in terms of job
opportunities and wages (Sen, 1999). This gap is at least partially due to a significant gender
gap in educational levels which remain large in many countries (World Development Report
2012), although it is reversed in the US for recent cohorts (Goldin, Katz, and Kuziemko (2006)
and Fortin, Oreopoulos, and Phipps (2012)). This gap is also potentially due to difference
in the types of human capital women and men have even conditional on the same level of
education. For example, there is substantial evidence of a strong correlation between math
test scores, math based curriculum, mathematical majors in college and future income earned,1
suggesting that observed differences in math skills across genders can explain part of the wage
gap. It is therefore important for research to address the differences in the development of
math skills and the determinants of math related specializations and the role played by myriad
factors starting from early childhood, such as parental investments, preferences, expectations
and innate ability. Understanding when and how differences between men and women begin to
develop in the process of human capital accumulation is crucial to understand the gender gap
in wages and job opportunities later in life.

        In this paper, we document the early emergence of a math gender gap (by fourth grade)
which grows over time across a large sample of low and middle income countries. We then
examine different hypothesis as to why math scores differ between boys and girls to try to
understand the roots of this gap in the spirit of Fryer and Levitt (2010), but add key insights to
their work using a unique administrative dataset from Chile.
        Our analysis begins by looking at a series of comparable data across low and middle income
countries that were part of the PISA-OECD test score data, administered to children around the
age 15. Like others before us, we first show that cross country variables do little to mitigate
this gap. Next, within countries, we examine the effect of individual-, family-, and school-level
characteristics on the gender gap. We show a substantial gap in mathematical test scores open-
    1
    See (Paglin and Rufolo, 1990; Murnane, Willett, and Levy, 1995; Grogger and Eide, 1995; Altonji and Blank,
1999; Weinberger, 1999, 2001; Murnane, Willett, Duhaldeborde, and Tyler, 2000) for evidence on math scores
and wages and see Altonji, Blom, and Meghir (2012) for a review on math curriculum and college major.

                                                      2
ing up as low as the median level and getting larger towards the top of the distribution in all
countries we consider that are included in the PISA - individual, family and school character-
istics do little to alter this gap. This means that the median boy and girl perform differently at
age 15, with boys doing better than girls by twenty percent of a standard deviation. The gender
gap is quite large at the top quantiles, so that the 90th and 95th percentile scores for a boy are
respectively about 0.31 and 0.32 of a standard deviation larger than for a girl. Another way to
look at this gap is that there are about 1.5 boys per girl in the top ten percent of the distribution.
For example, Figure 1 shows the size of the gender gap across different quantiles of the distri-
bution of math scores for ten developing countries, plus the US as a comparison. For seven of
the eight countries (the eighth being Thailand), the gender gap is already present at the median
and increases for higher quantiles. Thus, while the median boy may have a higher test score
than the median girl, this disparity becomes especially pronounced at higher quantiles.2
    We further explore dynamics of the gender gap, and more detailed explanations for the
gap using administrative data from Chile. A similar gap in math scores is also present in the
Chilean SIMCE data (the SIMCE is a national test which is administered to all 4th and 8th
graders in the country). In the SIMCE scores at age nine and ten (grade four) we see already
a sizable gap in the mean and median achievement. At the same time we note that these gaps
expand substantially, nearly doubling by ages 13 and 14 (grade eight). Further, for the top 5
percent the gap continuously increases across grades, i.e. the ratios of boys to girls is 1.9 and
2.2 for grade four and eight respectively. The detailed nature of the data from Chile allows us
to explore some more possibilities along the broad categories of individual, parental and school
characteristics that are not available in the PISA data, and also some that were not explored by
Fryer and Levitt (2010).3
    2
      The gender gap in this figure is the coefficient on a dummy variable for being male in a quantile regression
of standardized PISA math scores on “Male” and a set of control variables for the fiftieth, seventy-fifth, ninetieth,
and ninety-fifth percentiles. The PISA data will be described more in the data section.
    3
      This study is closely related to the recent paper by Fryer and Levitt (2010). Using data from the US, Fryer and
Levitt (2010) establish that while the gender gap does not appear to be present at the beginning of school going
age, boys perform better in math by the end of the first six years of school. A host of explanatory variables are
unable to account for the gap in their setting. Our paper expands on and complements the work of Fryer and Levitt
(2010). We examine the gender gap in different countries and at different grade ranges. We are able to control for
a rich set of individual and family characteristics (for example, by examining differences within twins) and at the
same time attempt to account for classroom composition, teacher gender and other related factors. Moreover, our


                                                         3
    In terms of individual level characteristics, we examine factors such as birth weight and
gestational age in the determination of test scores. Early childhood health has been shown to
be important determinant of a host of later life outcomes like income, school performance and
health (Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2007; Bharadwaj, Loken, and Neilson, 2011). If there
are differences in early childhood health across genders, then perhaps some of this gap is driven
by these ”health endowments”. We are also able to explore gender gaps within twin pairs, given
the richness of the data from Chile. A twins fixed effect in this setting attempts to control for a
large portion of genetic characteristics, as well as unobserved family background and parental
investment variables which twins share. Even within twins, we see a sizable gender gap in
math.
    We then examine the school and class environment. Given the population of school students
observed in Chile, we can examine how gender composition of the classroom and classroom
size affects performance in math. The motivation for examining this comes from an influential
literature suggesting that girls and boys perform differently in competitive environments. We
can also test the role that teacher gender plays in mitigating or exacerbating the gender gap in
math. Dee (2007) and Carrell, Page, and West (2010) find that gender of the teacher matters for
female performance on science and math. While we cannot account for selection via random
assignment of teachers, controlling for gender of the math teacher does little to close the gap.
We also examine the role played by schools in influencing the gender gap by using school fixed
effects in various countries.
    Finally we examine parental characteristics which is a critical part of the hypothesis related
to sibling competition and differential resources within the household. In addition, we study
the role of parental investments and student perceptions regarding their own math abilities.
Using survey data where parents report time spent on various activities, we note that parents
are more likely to devote time spent with math homework if the child is male. We find that
students also have differential perceptions by gender regarding their own math abilities. Even
conditional on math score, we find that boys tend to be more optimistic about their math ability.
data on math ability perception and parental investments is unique in this setting and allows us to further pursue
relevant hypothesis regarding the emergence of the gender gap in math skills.


                                                        4
For example, boys are much more likely to say that they are good at math than girls. However,
it is not the case that girls are pessimistic about everything - while answering questions about
general ability in school, the differences between boys and girls is much smaller. These gaps in
perceptions appear to arise specifically in the context of mathematics ability. While we do not
use data on perceived ability as an explanatory variable, the differences appear to suggest that
this would be an important area for future research in this area to focus on.
    Taken together with the results of Fryer and Levitt (2010), it is apparent that not only is
there a well established gender gap in math scores across many parts of the world, but that a
host of potential explanations do little to explain this gap. The evidence we present suggests a
combination of differential parental investments and also perceptions may play a role. Future
research should focus on these aspects to further shed light on this issue.



2     Data

2.1    PISA Data

This paper uses data from the 2006 and 2009 PISA (Programme for International Student As-
sessment) tests. The PISA is designed by the OECD to produce student outcomes that are
comparable across countries and to provide information about the characteristics of successful
students, families, schools, and national educational systems. It is administered to students
who are between the ages of fifteen years and three months and sixteen years and two months.
Four waves of the PISA have been carried out (2000, 2003, 2006, and 2009), but we use only
the two most recent because previous waves do not contain as many countries, especially the
developing countries we focus on in this paper.
    The PISA data includes four distinct components: student, parent and school question-
naires, and the results of three tests, for mathematics, science, and reading. We use primarily
the student questionnaire responses and test results. The parental questionnaire was not admin-
istered for many of the countries in our set of countries of interest, but much of the information
on parental education, occupation, wealth, and migrant status is available in the student ques-

                                                5
tionnaire as well.
   Students take a two hour test that includes both multiple choice and handwritten long-form
answers. Each student is tested on only a portion of the available test modules, so the raw
scores are scaled using the Rasch model of item response theory to reflect this fact. We further
standardize the scores by country so that they have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of
one. We focus on the results for mathematics, but also include some comparative analysis using
the reading test results. The reading questions test primarily reading comprehension, while the
math questions are in such areas as algebra, geometry, and interpretation of graphs, especially
as they relate to solving real-world problems.
   The PISA data also includes information on parents’ education, migration status, and clas-
sification of their occupation into lower or upper white- or blue-collar. Since parental education
(measured using the standard ISCED levels) and migration status are very closely correlated,
we use only the values for the mother in our regressions. Though the data does not contain
a direct measure of assets or income, it does include a wealth index generated using a Warm
estimate process as a combination of the presence of various goods, including a dishwasher,
an unshared room, educational software, and a link to the Internet, as well as the number of
cellular phones, television sets, computers, automobiles, and bathrooms in a household. We
also use the results of a question asking how many books a household has as a proxy for the
importance of education and information to a household.
   For the portions of this paper that use PISA data from multiple countries, we focus on a set
of 10 countries (plus the US) that fulfill all the following criteria:

   1. The country has a 2010 per capita purchasing power parity (PPP) adjusted GDP of
      $16,000 or less.

   2. The country is not in Europe.

   3. The country is not and is not a part of a former or current Communist country.

   4. Data exists for the country for both the 2006 and 2009 waves of PISA.



                                                  6
Criterion 1 is imposed so as to focus the analysis on middle- and low- income countries. Criteria
2 and 3 are used to exclude countries with a different historical and institutional context than we
are interested in. Criterion 4 is to ensure that the necessary data exists. The countries that fulfill
all these criteria are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Mexico, Thailand, Tunisia,
Turkey, and Uruguay. We also include the United States in the set of countries under analysis
to allow us to make comparisons with a more economically developed country.4 Notice that we
also run our analysis with the entire set of countries available as in Table A.7.
       Tables A.1, A.2, and A.3 contain descriptive statistics for the variables of interest in the
PISA dataset for these countries. Table A.4 includes data by sex from UNESCO (2010) on
survival rates to grade five (the percentage of students that eventually finish fifth grade) and
the secondary school net enrollment rate (the percentage of people who are in the age range
for secondary school that are actually enrolled in secondary school). It should be noted that
the secondary school enrollment rates given here would underestimate the relevant enrollment
rates for our analysis as we focus on grade 10 and below for most countries in the analysis,
which is below compulsory schooling age for a regular schooling path.


2.1.1     Cross-Country Data

To explain the variance in the gender gap across countries, we follow the lead of several previ-
ous studies, including Chen (2004), Guiso, Monte, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008), Machin and
Pekkarinen (2008) and Fryer and Levitt (2010), in carrying out regressions at the country level.
For these cross-country regressions, we use the PISA data just described for the entire set of
(about 65) countries involved in the 2009 survey to calculate the gender gap in normalized math
test scores at the mean by country. Following Guiso, Monte, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008),
we include among our regressors the 2011 Gender Gap Index, which is calculated by the World
Economic Forum and has several subindices in the areas of economic opportunity and partic-
ipation, educational attainment, political empowerment, and health and survival, which will
   4
     An exception to the selection rule above is the exclusion of Jordan that would satisfy all of the above criteria,
but we do not find the results on that country believable. In any case the inclusion of Jordan in the analysis changes
the results very little.



                                                          7
also be included separately in our regressions. Guiso, Monte, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008)
also include several variables from the World Values Survey (WVS) related to attitudes about
gender equality; we will include several of these variables from the 2008 WVS (World Values
Survey Association, 2009) for which there is sufficient coverage of the countries in the PISA
sample. We include the average country response (on a scale of one to four (or three, for the
first question) with one indicating the strongest level of agreement) to the following statements:
“When jobs are scarce, men should have more right to a job than women,” “Being a housewife
is just as fulfilling as working for pay,” “On the whole, men make better political leaders than
women do,” and “A university education is more important for a boy than for a girl.” Thus,
higher values of these variables indicate more egalitarian attitudes. From the World Bank, we
use data on 2009 per capita GDP, 2009 cellular subscriptions per person (as per the finding of
Chen (2004) that information and communication technologies can play an important role in
promoting gender equality), 2009 population, and male and female literacy (from the period
2007-2009, as available). Availability of all these variables for the PISA sample of countries
varies.5


2.2       Administrative Data from Chile

In addition to the picture that the PISA data provides us, we will also use detailed Chilean ad-
ministrative data, including the SIMCE. The SIMCE (loosely translated as System for Measur-
ing Educational Quality) is a national test administered annually in Chile for all fourth graders.
On alternate years, eighth and tenth grade students are also given this test. We have data on the
fourth grade SIMCE from 2002 and subsequently on a yearly basis from 2005 on. We use the
eighth grade SIMCE as administered in 2007 and 2009. While there were waves of the eighth
grade SIMCE administered prior to 2007, we do not use them, as the cohort that took those
tests were born prior to 1992 and hence were not available in the vital statistics database.
       The SIMCE test for fourth graders consists of reading, math, and a social science compo-
   5
       More information on the specific countries in the sample available from the authors upon request.




                                                          8
nent.6 These results are published at various levels to track performance of schools and (what
would be the equivalent of) school districts.
       The Chilean administrative data we use in this paper allows us, in several ways, to go
beyond what is possible with the PISA data. First, the SIMCE data covers almost all children
in the relevant grades over multiple years, which allows us to examine students who took the
SIMCE in both fourth and eighth grades to see how the gender gap in math scores changes as
students grow older while eliminating possible selection effects. At the same time, as we are
dealing with population data, we can analyze the very top performers, such as the top 1% or the
top 5%. According to UNESCO (2010), the survival rate to fifth grade in the 2007 school year
was 96 percent, indicating that selection of students out of school is unlikely to bias the analysis
for fourth grade. From the same source, the 2010 net enrollment rate for secondary school as
a whole was 84 percent among boys and 87 percent among girls, indicating that differential
dropout rates are similarly unlikely to bias the eighth grade results.
       Because we are interested in understanding outcomes at the top end of the distribution, we
should consider whether the SIMCE data does a better job than the PISA data of distinguishing
students at the very top end of the distribution from one another. For example, can these tests
tell us with some certainty that a student at the 99th percentile on a test is actually better at math
than a student at the 95th percentile? Test design is an important issue when considering this
question, as Ellison and Swanson (2010) show at length. Both the SIMCE and the PISA are
designed to be broad-based tests that can be used at a national level (and an international level in
the case of PISA) to compare regional performance and not to look at the performance of high
achievers specifically. Both tests, however, do provide enough difficulty that very few students
answer all the questions correctly, which increases our confidence that they can distinguish
students at the top. Though both tests should be able to do a decent job, the SIMCE seems
better able to address the gender gap at the top end of the distribution because of its structure
and scope. The sample size of the SIMCE is much larger, so that we simply have more high
achievers in the sample and can reduce the standard error of our estimates when dealing with
   6
       For detailed information on the SIMCE and sample questions one can visit http://www.simce.cl/.



                                                        9
them. In addition, the SIMCE is better able to help us understand individual performance
because it is longer and more uniform across individuals, while the PISA is shorter and uses
different modules with different students, which allows for comparability across countries but
does not give as much information about an individual student’s performance as we would like.
   Second, because we have the data for almost the entire relevant population of Chile for
children born over a period of several years, we have a large number of sets of twins and of
siblings, which allows us to control for family background, as well as unobserved school and
neighborhood characteristics that they share. We cannot entirely control for genetic ability
using this data - unlike studies that use genetically identical homozygotic twins - but the fact
that twins of opposite gender share more genetic information, on top of identical prenatal care,
than two randomly chosen students of opposite gender will help us understand the genetic
component of the gender gap.
   Third, this administrative data includes information on birth weight and gestational age
(the time from when a child is conceived to when he or she is born). This data allows us to
control for differential parental investment in boy children relative to girl children. It may also
relate to some components of ability, if ability is considered to be the initial potential skill or
genetic endowment a person has at birth. Electronic birth records were established in 1992 in
Chile; detailed information is collected about every birth, such as birth weight, birth length, and
gestational age, as well as basic parental characteristics, such as mother’s age, education, and
occupational status. The vital statistics used in this paper stem from the same data base as used
in Bharadwaj, Loken, and Neilson (2011). That paper shows that the vital statistics records
in the dataset match rather well to nationally published records on births and deaths by year.
Under the guidance of the Ministries of Health and Education, the vital statistics data were
matched with the educational records for each child. Again, Bharadwaj, Loken, and Neilson
(2011) show that a large fraction of the population is observed with valid schooling data.
   Fourth, some parental time investment variables are available in this data. These come from
questions asked to parents, such as whether they do homework with their child or read to their
child. This data will help us understand the role of differential postnatal parental investment in


                                                10
boys and girls on the gender gap.
    Fifth, the SIMCE data includes the school and classroom of each student in the sample,
so that we can include school and classroom fixed effects to control for the influence of these
environments on the student. We can also examine the effect of classroom size or the gender
composition of the classroom on the size of the gender gap, which will be important if boys
and girls perform differently in different classroom environments, perhaps because of different
attitudes toward competition or because of the need for different teaching styles.
    The descriptive statistics for the SIMCE and other Chilean administrative data used are in
Table A.5. Some characteristics to note in the data are that the modal level of education for
mothers that have children in the data set is high school, that most mothers do not work (and
the majority were unmarried), and that about a quarter of twin pairs are mixed sex.



3    Empirical Analysis

In the empirical analysis we will first establish the main facts about the math gender gap in
selected countries, as well as specifically for Chile. After we have done so, we will move into
the analysis of why such a gap exists. We will spell out our hypotheses and testing strategy as
we go.
    We begin our analysis by estimating simple quantile or mean models of test scores where
the gender gap is captured by a dummy for being male. We also run a parallel analysis on
probability models for falling in various top quantiles of the distribution of test scores. The
main specification is as follows:


                           yihst = α + βM alei + γXihst + ihst                               (1)


where y is the standardized (at the country level) test score in math, and the X variables are
controls for characteristics at the level of the individual, family, school, etc. Controls are in-
troduced to be consistent with the hypotheses we test. i indexes individuals, h households, s
schools, and t is for the year or, more precisely, the cohort. Our main parameter of interest,

                                               11
β, is meant to capture the gender gap. The quantile version of this specification would require
some extra notation but is essentially the same. In addition to this, we also estimate a linear
probability model for the probability of being in the top 25%, 10%, and so on of the distribution
of test scores.


3.1       PISA-OECD Evidence

3.1.1     Existence of the Gender Gap

We start off with the pooled countries quantile regression. As we move from left to right in
Table 1, we move across quantiles. For each quantile we have two columns, the first with the
simple gap and the second with additional controls for household and school characteristics.
The analysis in Table 1 always includes country and year fixed effects plus age and grade of
the student.7
       The median regression shows a substantial gap in mathematical test score: the median
male score is about 25% of a standard deviation higher than for females. Such gaps increase
monotonically along the distribution, and for the top ventile the gap is as high as 32% of a
standard deviation. As we shall see later these aggregate estimates mask some substantial
heterogeneity across countries.8
       Another way to look at the gender gap is to compute the ratio of males to females at various
quantiles of the distribution, while adding the same controls as in the quantile regressions. This
is exactly what we do in Table A.6, where at the bottom of the table we present the male-female
ratio for each regression. The main finding of this latter approach is that the gap between the
proportion of those above a given quantile that are males and those that are females increases
from 10% in the top half of the distribution to 74% in the top 5%.9 These results do not appear
to be sensitive to the selection of countries used, since Table A.7 performs the same analysis
   7
     In the PISA-OECD analysis we do not present the results for the top percentile (1%) as in this case we would
be dealing with a very small number of observations.
   8
     The median gap is larger in magnitude than the class-size effect and other educational resources found in
several studies.
   9
     Although we present a linear probability model in Table A.6 the results from a probit model are essentially
identical.



                                                       12
using all 65 countries available in the PISA-OECD sample and arrives at similar coefficient
estimates and ratios.


3.1.2     Cross-Country Analysis

The results of our cross-country regressions for the PISA math gender gap are shown in Table 2,
while results from comparable regressions for the reading gender gap are shown in Table A.8.
The first column of each table shows the unconditional gender gap, while subsequent columns
show specifications with different combinations of the explanatory variables described above.
Observations are weighted by national population.10
       In these regressions, the math gender gap is strongly correlated with the reading gender
gap: countries where boys do well relative to girls in math tend to exhibit the same pattern in
reading, and vice versa. Cellular subscriptions have a generally (though not invariably) negative
association with the gender gap, especially for reading. GDP per capita also has a generally
negative association with the gender gap, though with more variation across specifications.
Literacy has an opposite effect from what we might expect: adult male literacy is associated
with a reduction in the gap, while female literacy is associated with a larger gap. This reversal
may have to do with selection effects caused as more literate populations attend school at higher
rates, but with lower average performance. The WVS gender attitudes questions fail to display
a clear pattern of association: though we would predict negative coefficients on these variables,
which increase with stronger attitudes in favor of gender equality, several appear with positive
coefficients.
       An influential explanation for the existence of the gender gap is that of cultural norms,
where more unequal societies in terms of treatment and beliefs regarding gender and the role
of women in particular, should see large gaps in achievements that should close down as one
looks at more gender equal societies. This explanation has been put forth and substantiated
in Guiso, Monte, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008). However, the results from Table 2 does not
  10
    Several countries or territories from the 2009 PISA sample are excluded from all the regressions because they
could not be matched with the explanatory variables. Shanghai, China, is not included because accurate data does
not seem to be available for several of the variables used and because it would be inaccurate to match up this
metropolitan area’s information with data describing China as a whole.

                                                       13
support their results.
       We explore this connection further using more recent PISA-OECD data from 2006 and
2009 as well as including some of the countries excluded from the Guiso, Monte, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2008) analysis. We run regressions that are very similar to those in the original paper,
though our findings are somewhat discouraging as we do not find a robust relation between
the mathematical test score gender gap and the Gender Gap Index, which is one of the major
measures of gender equality used by Guiso, Monte, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008).11 As shown
in Table A.9, we get similar results to Guiso, Monte, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008) when
using the set of countries used in the original paper (column (1)), in that more gender equality
improves the relative performance of female students12 , but these results are very dependent on
the set of countries used.13 We find similar outcomes in the 2009 data in Table A.10. When
we pool both data waves as we do in Table A.11, controlling for the survey year and GDP,
we find little evidence that the gap closes for countries with more gender equality. In fact for
the overall sample (column (3)) the coefficient is not significant and with the wrong sign. As
before the results are also highly dependent on the sample chosen, as we can see if we compare
this result with columns (4) and (5), which produce coefficients with very different magnitudes
but still have the wrong sign. We therefore tend to dismiss the likelihood of “culture” being a
fundamental explanation for the existence of gender gaps.


3.1.3     Parental Background and School Characteristics

Two of our proposed explanations for the gender gap in math are (i) family background and
(ii) school characteristics. It is possible that boys or girls are more likely to be present in
  11
      This measure is produced by the World Economic Forum and includes several components of gender equality,
such as economic opportunity and participation, education, political participation, and health. The GGI is larger
for more equal societies. We choose this measure to focus on from Guiso, Monte, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008)
because it has updated data to use with the 2009 PISA-OECD data and includes a variety of components relating
gender equality.
   12
      Note that, for this analysis, we use measures of the outcome variable, i.e. the gender gap in math, that are
equivalent to the Guiso, Monte, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008) measures but differ from the normalized scores
we use in the rest of the paper, so that the coefficient in these regressions indicates the relative improvement in
non-normalized female test scores relative to male associated with going from zero to one on the GGI.
   13
      Column (2) in Tables A.9 and A.10 has the full sample of countries that we were able to find all the data for
and Columns (3) and (4) of these tables exclude the countries from the analysis that have the highest and lowest
test score gaps in 2006 and 2009, respectively.

                                                       14
specific households because of gender selective fertility and abortion (for a recent review of
the literature, see Pörtner, 2010). At the same time, it is also possible that boys and girls are
found in different schools. We therefore test for such hypotheses by adding additional controls
to the simple mean or quantile differences discussed so far. The results of this exercise are
presented in the even columns of Tables 1 and A.6. The previous findings remain unaltered as
we add parental background controls such as mother’s education, parental occupation category,
immigration status, wealth, number of books at home, and so on. To reiterate, the test score
gaps increase from 25% to about 32% of a standard deviation as we move from the middle to
the top 5% of the distribution.14
    Such statistics, however, mask some substantial heterogeneity across the countries consid-
ered; in fact, that heterogeneity emerges quite clearly in Figure 1, where one can see that the
male-female ratios range, for the highest ventile, from 1.2 to 3. As mentioned, all these results
also hold true when school fixed effects are included in individual country regressions, though
these are not included in the pooled regression for computational reasons.
    As we mentioned, proposed explanations include differential backgrounds between boys
and girls and self-selection into schools and classes. We provide evidence in this section against
family background and school selection as the main causes of such a gap. When we control for
school as well as family background characteristics (such as education of the parents, wealth,
occupation, and number of books in the household), as we do in each second column within
each quantile in Tables 1 and A.6, we find that the gap remains unaltered from the mere “un-
conditional” gap found in the odd columns of the same tables. The take-home message of this
analysis is that one should look beyond parental background and school selection in the attempt
to uncover the roots of such an achievement gap.15
   14
      In the reported tables we do not use father’s education, as that is not available for the Chilean administrative
data. Adding this control does not change the results.
   15
      Another point worth reporting is that the achievement gap is not closing between the two years we use for the
study, 2006 and 2009. If we run an interaction model between them, we cannot reject the equality of the gaps for
the two years, though this is admittedly a very limited time frame.




                                                         15
3.1.4   Family Composition

We can test the hypothesis that boys have higher math scores than girls because of competition
among siblings by examining family composition and how this affects test scores. If parents
have a preference toward their male children, we would expect that female students would re-
ceive less parental investment if they have one brother and no sisters than if they have one sister
and no brothers. If girls perform worse than boys do when placed in competition with male
siblings, we should observe lower test scores for girls with brothers than boys with brothers or
girls with no brothers. Unfortunately, we do not have random variation and full data on family
composition and we have no data on birth order within the family, but the 2009 PISA data set
does have questions in the student questionnaire asking whether the respondent has at least one
sister living at home and whether they have at least one brother living at home, which will allow
us to make some conclusions about the effects of family composition.
   Using this data, we perform a quantile regression of test scores on the “male” dummy
and the controls from the other quantile regressions, along with dummy variables that capture
the different sibling situations we can distinguish among (at least one brother and no sisters
at home, at least one sister and no brothers at home, at least one brother and one sister at
home, and no brothers or sisters at home, which will be the excluded category) along with
interactions of these with “male.” The results of this are in Table 3. The inclusion of these
sibling variables reduces the coefficient on “male,” indicating that these variables play some
role in the gender gap. The base “no brother, no sister” category produces the lowest test
scores, followed by “brother and sister,” “no brother, sister” and “brother, no sister,” categories,
in order; this means that girls do the best with a brother and no sister, which is not consistent
with either the parental investment or the inter-sibling competition hypothesis. The outcomes
for boys follow the same ranking, however, with all the effects being larger for them, so that
boys appear to be more sensitive to family composition than girls but to be affected similarly.
The size of these effects is also increasing for higher quantiles for girls, indicating a larger role
for family composition for higher-scoring students, but the stronger effects for boys do not carry
through to the ninetieth or ninety-fifth quantiles. The overall ranking of these outcomes does

                                                 16
not seem to follow a consistent story about why parental investment or inter-sibling competition
would work this way, so probably the most we can say from this data is that family composition
matters for test scores, though not in a simple way. In particular, the competition story would
predict that a girl with a brother should do worse than a girl with no brother (or just a sister),
but the findings do not support this prediction: a girl with a brother (and no sister) does better
than a girl with only sisters, no siblings or both a brother and a sister.
       We get similar results, which are shown in Table A.12, from including the sibling variables
in a linear regression for the probability of being in the top percentiles of the distribution.16


3.2       Analysis from Chilean Administrative Data

The addition of our Chilean administrative data allows us to go well beyond what is possible
using the PISA-OECD data alone. As mentioned in Section 2, the Chilean data are extremely
rich in many respects, including (i) population data (among other things we are now able to look
at the top 1% of achievement), (ii) family background variables, (iii) a large sample of twins
(iv) birth outcomes like birth weight and gestational age, (v) post birth parental investment
measures and (vi) self assessed math ability.


3.2.1      Existence of the Gender Gap

Table 4 has simple OLS regressions that use the standardized SIMCE math test scores as the
dependent variable, with fourth grade scores being used in the first through third columns and
eighth grade scores in the fourth through sixth columns. The first and fourth columns report
the results of the most basic, “unconditional” regression of test score on a dummy variable for
whether a student is male. We will discuss the remaining columns in the next sections.
       The most important result of this exercise is that the coefficient on “male”, which measures
the gender gap, remains substantially the same as these control variables are added, at around
0.08 of a standard deviation for fourth grade and around 0.2 of a standard deviation for eighth
grade, suggesting that the gender gap is not the result of boys’ and girls’ having systematically
  16
       Probit results are also similar.


                                                 17
different family, classroom, or school environments.17 It is also striking to observe that the
gender gap more than doubles between fourth and eighth grade. This doubling also occurs
when the sample of students is limited to those for whom we have both fourth grade and eighth
grade scores, so that selection is not a plausible cause of this phenomenon. Fryer and Levitt
(2010) find a similar pattern among US schoolchildren, noting that “[t]here are no mean dif-
ferences between boys and girls upon entry to school, but girls lose more than two-tenths of a
standard deviation relative to boys over the first six years of school” (p. 210). In the Chilean
data, for computational reasons, we do not run quantile regressions, but we still investigate the
distributional gap through the probability model (the linear probability model and the probit
model produce very similar results, so we omit the probit here). The main findings from the
probability model are that the unconditional male-female ratios increase from about 1.3 to 1.9
for 4th graders between the top 10% and the top 1% (Table 5). What is again striking is a large
jump in the gaps for older children: for 8th graders the male-female ratios jump to 1.4 and 2.6
for the top 10% and 1% respectively (Table 5).18
       This gender gap in test scores may influence later wage differentials by gender. At the very
least, the description of the math test score gender gap from the previous paragraph is consistent
with the form that the wage gender gap among adults takes on. Ñopo (2006), for example, finds
that the unexplained gender gap in wages in Chile is at around twenty-five percent of average
female wages with an increasing gap by wage percentile: “While for the lowest percentiles of
the wage distribution, males tend to earn an unexplained premium of 10 percent to 20 percent
over comparable females, at the top of the distribution this premium increases to 40 percent to
80 percent, depending on the set of matching characteristics” (p. 31).
       Despite the gender gap in test scores, women receive more years of school than men on
average in Chile, which one could hypothesize would compensate for some of the test score
difference. Ñopo (2006) shows that, over the period from 1992 to 2003, women had 1.6 more
  17
      One reassuring outcome is that the results of this regression with regard to the eighth grade gender gap are
very similar to what the regression using the PISA data for Chile produces for students who are only a year or so
older.
   18
      One would also have to consider the possibility that the 4th grade test is not able to capture the very top
performances as well as the 8th grade test.



                                                       18
years of schooling on average than men in rural areas and 0.5 years more in urban areas. Inter-
estingly, the gender gap in wages was nonexistent in rural areas and quite large in urban areas,
and the largest gender gap in wages by far was among college graduates. Education levels were
increasing throughout this period. Nevertheless, women had relatively low, though increasing,
rates of labor force participation during this period, around 35 percent.


3.2.2   Family Background, School and Class Characteristics

In order to test whether family background and school and class characteristics are crucial in
explaining the gap, we first add control variables able to capture such confounders, such as
birth weight and gestational age of the student and the education, employment, marital status,
and age of the student’s mother. The second and fifth columns also include school fixed effects,
while columns 3 and 6 have classroom fixed effects instead.
   Once again, columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 of Table 4 confirm the previous “unconditional” findings
reported in columns 1 and 4. The average gender gap can be explained neither on the basis of
the maternal characteristics included nor on classroom and school selection. Looking at the
control variables in Table 4, the children of more educated women had much better test scores,
while the children of older mothers and married mothers did somewhat better. The log of
birth weight also has a statistically significant impact of about 0.25 standard deviations on both
fourth grade and eighth grade test scores, indicating that a student who had a birth weight that
was ten percent higher could expect a math test score 0.025 standard deviations higher.
   We can look at the right tail of the distribution by using the probability analysis technique
used above on the PISA data, with the results shown in Table 5. We examine how the probabil-
ity of being in the top 1, 5 or 10% relates to the dummy variable for being male and the same
set of control variables used in Table 4. In order to have a consistent basis of comparison as
the base percentage changes, as for the PISA-OECD analysis, we also calculate the predicted
male-to-female ratio. We find that, as in the PISA data, the gender gap increases at higher
scores: for the fourth grade specification with class fixed effects, there are predicted to be 1.27
male students for every female in the top 10%, 1.35 males per female in the top 5%, and 1.86


                                                19
males per female in the top 1%, while–consistent with the increase in coefficient in the OLS
regression above–these ratios are 1.41, 1.50 and 2.33 among eighth graders. These results are
not sensitive to the use of fixed effects at the school instead of the class level.19
       We additionally performed exactly the same analysis for the twins sample both on the con-
tinuous (mean) test outcome as well as on the top end of the distribution. For a detailed discus-
sion on the twins sample and how it relates to the general population see Bharadwaj, Loken,
and Neilson (2011). The findings of this analysis are presented in Table 6. This specific cut
of the data is meant to address several of the proposed explanations for the gender gap. In this
section, however, the focus is on parental background, which twins typically share. As is clear
from the table, if anything the gap is larger across the board for twins.


3.2.3     Parental Investment

Prenatal Investment It has been hypothesized that parents have a preference for boys over
girls and therefore they invest more in boys. This type of investment can happen quite early,
such as in the womb or once the baby is born. We have a couple of ways to check whether the
gender gap we found comes from very early investment in nutrition, health, and so on.
       Studies have shown that boys typically tend to perform worse on early assessments of health
such as APGAR scores (Gissler, Järvelin, Louhiala, Rahkonen, and Hemminki, 1999), even
though they are typically born with higher birth weight. Moreover, in terms of early child-
hood cognitive achievement, females tend to perform better. Early studies such as Willerman,
Naylor, and Myrianthopoulos (1970), using data from the US, show that females perform sig-
nificantly better on tests such as the Bayley Motor Test (administered at an age of 8 months).
According to the same study, females also perform better at the Binet IQ test administered at
age 4. Simple correlations using data from the Children of the NLSY 1979 sample suggest that
females do indeed perform better on early motor and social development skills tests (adminis-
tered to children between the ages of 0 and 3). However, in tests such as the Peabody Picture
and Vocabulary Test (PPVT) which is administered to children ages 3 and up, gender gaps ap-
  19
     Once again because of standard concerns with predictions from a linear probability model like this (in the
tails), we also ran the probit version of it, finding that the results are not substantially different.

                                                      20
pear in later ages, with males performing slightly better than females. Hence it appears that
girls do better than boys along various health and cognitive measures in very early childhood.
       The most convincing evidence we provide relies on the twins sample, since twins are sub-
jected to the same investment or care in the womb. The richness of the data allows us to fully
difference out prenatal investment and family background characteristics through the use of
data on twins. This is not to say that twins are a representative sample of the population; in
fact, they are quite clearly at the bottom end of the distribution in many respects including test
scores.
       Table 6 contains the results of OLS and probability regressions similar to those above with
the sample restricted to twins. These results display the same trend of a gender gap that in-
creases with age and at higher percentiles of the score distribution seen in previous tables. In
fact, the twins results display an even larger gender gap than that in the overall sample. Twins
are, of course, not average individuals, but the persistence of the gender gap among them does
allow us to conclude that differential prenatal parental investment perhaps does not play a large
role in creating this gap. As we can see from Table 6, girls fare worse than boys in math test
scores even between twins.


Post-Natal Investment             It is still possible that parents invest more into boys than girls, be-
cause of son preference (although this is unlikely in the case of Chile) or because of higher
returns on the investment (wage differentials). We have some measures of parental investment
in the Chilean data which can be summarized as mathematical or reading investments. For
example, for the year 2002 data on 4th graders, the only year of data used in this part of the
analysis, parents were asked: “How often do you pose math problems to your child?” They
could reply in 5 categories from 1 (never) to 5 (very often). Similar questions were asked for
reading investment.20 We introduce such variables in our empirical model for the 4th grade
test as continuous controls, the intuition being that if post-natal parental investment is the fun-
damental cause of the gender gap in math, once one controls for that (and other correlated
  20
       The comparable reading related question is how often the parent reads to the child.




                                                         21
confounders) the gap should shrink or disappear.21 Clearly parental investment is not a ran-
dom event, so the analysis here is not able to make causal statements about the role of parental
investments in the education production function. For our purposes, however, what we need
to understand is whether parental investments are correlated with the gender of the child. We
find that parents invest more in math in boys and the reverse is true for reading, although the
magnitudes of these differences are very small (results not shown, available by request). As a
result, when we control for parental investments as shown in Table 7, the gender gap remains
relatively unchanged. As expected the direct effect of parental investments appears to have a
large and positive effect on test scores
       Even if our measures of parental investments do not capture the entire range of possible
investments, we can turn to the evidence from the twins analysis, under the assumption that
within twins the difference in investment is minimal. The twins evidence shows the existence
of a large gap in math score between boys and girls.
       The central message is that parental investment, measured as time spent challenging chil-
dren in math and reading, has a positive and significant impact on the overall performance of
boys and girls but does not explain the gender gap, while at the same time we do find some
indication for differential investment between boys and girls. Hence, we believe that further
research along this measure would be important. One drawback of our parental investment
measure is that it only measures investments as a flow at a certain point in time, rather than a
stock that has accumulated since birth. Perhaps differences in the stock of parental investments
are much more important for explaining the gender gap.


3.2.4     Ability

We mentioned that a proposed explanation for the gender gap could be an innate ability differ-
ence between boys and girls in mathematical subjects in particular at the top of the distribution.
Our analysis can indirectly speak to the ability explanation. First, we already mentioned that
on many measures of health and cognitive ability girls tend to do better than boys at early ages.
  21
    The large majority of the students, 93% of the 4th graders with valid SIMCE score, have valid parental
investment information.

                                                   22
Our own simple analysis of correlations using data from the Children of the NLSY 1979 sample
suggest that females do indeed perform better on early motor and social development skills
tests (administered to children between the ages of 0 and 3). While boys tend to do better in
the Peabody Picture and Vocabulary Test (PPVT), this is only apparent at later ages. Hence it
appears that girls do better than boys along various health and cognitive measures in very early
childhood.
   As mentioned in the Chilean data we have the ability to look into the mixed-gender twins
portion of the data. Following a very influential paper in the education literature (Ashenfelter
and Krueger, 1994), we consider twins as sharing a large component of the genetic map, in
addition to the same level of prenatal care and investment. We believe that the initial condi-
tions of mixed gender twins are quite similar so that if those initial conditions were to be the
fundamental reason for the gender gap we should see a negligible gap within mixed gender
pairs of twins. As can be seen from Table 6, that prediction is not borne out by the data, and,
in fact, the gap is larger for twins than for the rest of the population. As mentioned, we know
that twins are located in the lower part of the test score (as well as health) distribution so that
one cannot lightly draw implications from this sample. We also notice that in the lower part of
the distribution there is not much of a gap for the general population so this finding would be a
further reason for not finding any gap in the twins sample.


3.2.5   Class Room Environment

Tables 8 and 9 explore the role of the class environment in explaining the gender gap. In some
ways, this table explores various aspects of the classroom environment already captured by
the classroom fixed effects regressions seen earlier. Hence, while it is useful to understand
the extent to which individual classroom level variables matter for the gender gap, we do not
expect these variables to explain the gap since the the classroom fixed effects regressions did
not appear to matter much for changing the coefficient of interest.
   Table 8 shows that adding teacher gender as an explanatory variable does not change the
gender gap much. Approximately 20% of the fourth grade math teachers in Chile are male.


                                                23
Typically, a teacher who teaches math in this grade also teaches other subjects like language
and reading. While having a male teacher in general implies lower math scores, boys do slightly
better in the presence of a male teacher (Column 3). However, the main message from these
regressions is that selection issues aside, teacher gender does not appear to matter much in
terms of explaining the gender gap.
   A very influential experimental literature (Gneezy, Niederle, and Rustichini (2003), Niederle
and Vesterlund (2007) and for a summary Niederle and Vesterlund (2010)) finds that females
tend to shy away from competition and that such behavior can explain a substantial part of the
gender gap in performance in many realms that involve a significant competitive element, such
as taking tests in school. It would be very hard, however, to square these results in particular
experiments with experiments that involve verbal competition tasks, where it appears that girls
do better than boys. In order to investigate such an issue, we introduce amongst the control
variables the classroom composition in terms of share of male students. The thought experi-
ment is the following: as the fraction of males in the classroom increases, females would feel a
higher competitive pressure, which might hamper their performance. If this is a principal cause
of the gender gap, female students should perform the same as males in predominantly female
classrooms.
   To investigate the influence of the competitive environment in the classroom on boys and
girls, we regressed fourth and eighth grade test scores on different combinations of the male
dummy, the proportion of males in the student’s fourth grade class, the number of students in
the student’s fourth grade class, and interactions of “male” with proportion male and class size.
Table 9 reports the results of these regressions. We find that test scores go down for both boys
and girls in fourth grade as the proportion of the class that is male increases, and that the effect
is not significantly different by sex. For the eighth grade, we find that both sexes again do
worse in the presence of more boys and that, in this case, boys experience this effect even more
strongly than girls. Class size has a small negative effect on girls and a small positive effect on
boys in fourth grade and a small positive effect on both sexes in eighth grade even controlling
for school fixed effects. We might be concerned that a few outliers, classes which had almost


                                                24
all boys or almost all girls, are inordinately driving these results, so we also include the results
of the regression excluding schools in which all students are of the same gender. This does not
materially change the results. Thus, because we do not see a strong positive coefficient on the
interaction of “male” and “fraction male,” we learn from these class composition regressions
that competition between boys and girls does not seem to be the main fact explaining the gender
gap in math test scores either.22
       The household composition regression using the PISA data is also relevant in this discus-
sion, since siblings may compete within the household for resources as well as for grades and
performances. As stated earlier, we found evidence that both sexes did better with certain
combinations of siblings than others, but we did not find that the ordering of these outcomes
supported the hypothesis of competition for household and parental resources or grades, espe-
cially because the ordering of outcomes was the same for both sexes.


3.2.6     Self assessed ability

A unique feature of the data from Chile is the ability to measure self assessed ability in math
in boys and girls in 4th grade. In Table 10 we examine whether boys and girls differ in various
aspects of how difficult they perceive math to be conditional on their math score. What is
perhaps surprising is that even conditional on math scores, across the wide range of questions,
girls are much more likely to be pessimistic about their math abilities. For example, boys are
10% more likely to say that they are “good at math”, and 8% more likely to say that they get
good grades in math without studying much. Conditioning on math score matters significantly
for the coefficient on gender, suggesting that self assessed perceptions might go a long way
towards explaining some of the gender gap in math.
       The main empirical problem here is that it is unclear whether perceptions affect math scores
or vice-versa, and hence, our analysis here is largely suggestive. However, we are able to
provide some evidence that boys are not always more confident of their abilities than girls.
In Table A.13 we examine whether boys and girls differ in other attitudes towards school not
  22
     On a related note it would hard to explain why the competition explanation would hold for mathematical
testing but not for reading, unless some further explanations are added on top of that.

                                                    25
related to math. While boys are still more likely to say that it is “important for me to get
good grades”, relative to the mean response for this variable, the magnitude is quite small.
Boys are less likely to agree that they “understand very little of what happens in class” but the
magnitudes are small.



4    Concluding Remarks

A substantial gender gap in mathematical performance is found in several countries both in
the middle and, more pronounced, at the top end of the distribution. It is also clear that while
such gaps exist for a large number of countries, there are differences in the magnitudes of the
gap and these differences are not explained away by country level variables. We also notice,
from our Chilean data, that the gap increases over time so that smaller differences by grade 4
translate into larger differences by grade 8.
    We attempt to explain where this gap is coming from. We examined detailed data at the
cross country level, and then at the individual level, exploring the roles played by parents,
classroom environments and individual characteristics of the students. None of those seems
to be able to account for a substantial portion of such a gap. We conjecture that the evidence
we provide points towards an explanation (or multiple ones) that is behavioral in nature and
that appear to intervene (at least initially) between birth and the first reliable test we have, i.e.
4th grade. This could be, for example, stereotyping forces in society that lead girls to be less
confident in their own math ability (even conditional on math score) as suggested by our data.
This evidence is in line with the notion that parents spend more time on math investments
with their sons, rather than with their daughters. While the magnitudes of these investment
differences are very small, it is entirely likely that with a richer set of investment variables
these will begin to play a role in explaining self assessed ability and eventually the gender gap.
We therefore think that this is an important area for future research to explore.




                                                 26
References

A LTONJI , J., E. B LOM ,   AND   C. M EGHIR (2012): “Heterogeneity in Human Capital Invest-
  ments: High School Curriculum, College Major, and Careers,” Discussion paper, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

A LTONJI , J. G.,   AND   R. B LANK (1999): Handbook of Labor Economicsvol. 3c, chap. Race
  and Gender in the Labor Market, p. 31443259. Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam, The
  Netherlands.

A SHENFELTER , O.,      AND   A. B. K RUEGER (1994): “Estimates of the Economic Returns to
  Schooling from a New Sample of Twins,” American Economic Review, 84(5), 1157–1173.

B HARADWAJ , P., K. L OKEN ,      AND   C. N EILSON (2011): “Early Life Health Interventions and
  Academic Achievement,” Working paper.

B LACK , S., P. D EVEREUX , AND K. S ALVANES (2007): “From the cradle to the labor market?
  The effect of birth weight on adult outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

C ARRELL , S., M. PAGE ,      AND   J. W EST (2010): “Sex and science: How professor gender
  perpetuates the gender gap,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3), 1101–1144.

C HEN , D. H. C. (2004): “Gender Equality and Economic Development: The Role for Infor-
  mation and Communication Technologies,” Discussion Paper (World Bank Policy Research
  Working Paper 3285).

D EE , T. (2007): “Teachers and the gender gaps in student achievement,” Journal of Human
  Resources, 42(3), 528–554.

E LLISON , G.,   AND   A. S WANSON (2010): “The Gender Gap in Secondary School Mathemat-
  ics at High Achievement Levels: Evidence from the American Mathematics Competitions,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 109–128.




                                                 27
F ORTIN , N., P. O REOPOULOS ,     AND   S. P HIPPS (2012): “Leaving Boys Behind: Gender Dis-
  parities in High Academic Achievement,” Working paper.

F RYER , R. G.,   AND    S. D. L EVITT (2010): “An Empirical Analysis of the Gender Gap in
  Mathematics,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 210–240.

G ISSLER , M., M.-R. J ÄRVELIN , P. L OUHIALA , O. R AHKONEN ,           AND   E. H EMMINKI
  (1999): “Can Children’s Health Be Predicted by Perinatal Health?,” International Journal
  of Epidemiology, 28, 276–280.

G NEEZY, U., M. N IEDERLE ,      AND   A. RUSTICHINI (2003): “Performance in Competitive En-
  vironments: Gender Differences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1049–1074.

G OLDIN , C., L. F. K ATZ , AND I. K UZIEMKO (2006): “The Homecoming of American College
  Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(4),
  133–156.

G ROGGER , J.,    AND   E. E IDE (1995): “Changes in College Skills and the Rise in the College
  Wage Premium,” Journal of Human Resources, 30(2), 280–310.

G UISO , L., F. M ONTE , P. S APIENZA ,      AND   L. Z INGALES (2008): “Culture, Gender, and
  Math,” Science, 320(5880), 1164–1165.

M ACHIN , S., AND T. P EKKARINEN (2008): “Global Sex Differences in Test Score Variability,”
  Science, 322(5906), 1331–1332.

M URNANE , R. J., J. B. W ILLETT, Y. D UHALDEBORDE , AND J. H. T YLER (2000): “How Im-
  portant Are the Cognitive Skills of Teenagers in Predicting Subsequent Earnings?,” Journal
  of Policy Analysis and Management, 19(4), 547–568.

M URNANE , R. J., J. B. W ILLETT,      AND   F. L EVY (1995): “The Growing Importance of Cog-
  nitive Skills in Wage Determination,” Discussion Paper w5076, NBER working paper.

N IEDERLE , M., AND L. V ESTERLUND (2007): “Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do
  Men Compete Too Much?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1067–1101.

                                                 28
        (2010): “Explaining the Gender Gap in Math Test Scores: The Role of Competition,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 129–144.

Ñ OPO , H. (2006): “The Gender Wage Gap in Chile 1992-2003 from a Matching Comparisons
  Perspective,” Discussion paper, Inter-American Development Bank.

PAGLIN , M.,   AND   A. RUFOLO (1990): “Heterogeneous human capital, occupational choice,
  and male-female earnings differences,” Journal of Labor Economics, 8, 123–144.

P ÖRTNER , C. C. (2010): “Sex Selective Abortions, Fertility and Birth Spacing,” mimeo.

S EN , A. (1999): Development as Freedom.

UNESCO (2010): “Global Education Digest 2010: Comparing Education Statistics Across
  the World,” Discussion paper, UNESCO Institute for Statistics.

W EINBERGER , C. J. (1999): “Mathematical College Majors and the Gender Gap in Wages,”
  Industrial Relations, 38, 407–413.

        (2001): Squaring Up: Policy Strategies to Raise Women’s Incomes in the U.S.chap. Is
  Teaching More Girls More Math the Key to Higher Wages? University of Michigan Press.

W ILLERMAN , L., A. NAYLOR ,     AND   N. M YRIANTHOPOULOS (1970): “Intellectual Develop-
  ment of Children from Interracial Matings,” Science, 170(964), 1329–1331.

W ORLD VALUES S URVEY A SSOCIATION (2009): “World Values Survey 1981-2008 Official
  Aggregate v.20090901,” Aggregate File Producer: ASEP/JDS, Madrid.




                                              29
Figures and Tables




                Figure 1: Gender Gap Size By Quantile




                                 30
               Table 1: Quantile Regressions of Math Scores Using Pooled PISA Data
                                                (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)

                                 Quantile       50           50             75             75          90           90           95           95

                                     Male     0.292***      0.256***     0.320***        0.290***    0.343***      0.313***    0.349***      0.324***
                                              (0.00500)    (0.00457)     (0.00579)      (0.00512)    (0.00793)    (0.00665)    (0.00997)    (0.00823)
                                      Age     -0.157***   -0.0923***     -0.149***     -0.0543***    -0.133***   -0.0509***    -0.122***    -0.0370**
                                              (0.00910)    (0.00831)      (0.0105)      (0.00929)     (0.0144)     (0.0121)     (0.0182)     (0.0149)
                                Year 2009    -0.0216***   -0.0599***    -0.0265***     -0.0636***   -0.0382***   -0.0781***   -0.0294***   -0.0650***
                                              (0.00508)    (0.00565)     (0.00588)      (0.00633)    (0.00806)    (0.00822)     (0.0101)     (0.0102)
                         Grade 8 or Below     -0.592***    -0.500***     -0.651***      -0.521***    -0.775***    -0.561***    -0.860***    -0.578***
                                              (0.00916)    (0.00839)      (0.0106)      (0.00939)     (0.0145)     (0.0122)     (0.0183)     (0.0151)
                                 Grade 10      0.708***     0.561***      0.759***       0.552***    0.747***      0.531***    0.697***      0.503***
                                              (0.00624)    (0.00577)     (0.00723)      (0.00646)    (0.00990)    (0.00839)     (0.0125)     (0.0104)
                        Grade 11 or Above      0.892***     0.689***     0.953***        0.702***    0.953***      0.690***    0.899***      0.657***
                                               (0.0118)     (0.0108)      (0.0137)       (0.0121)     (0.0187)     (0.0158)     (0.0236)     (0.0195)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 1                    -0.00235                     -0.00380                 -0.0269**                -0.0442***
                                                           (0.00723)                    (0.00809)                  (0.0105)                  (0.0130)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 2                  0.0507***                    0.0646***                 0.0518***                 0.0605***
                                                           (0.00725)                    (0.00811)                  (0.0105)                  (0.0130)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 3                    0.150***                     0.173***                  0.187***                  0.185***
                                                           (0.00791)                    (0.00885)                  (0.0115)                  (0.0142)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 4                  0.0987***                      0.123***                  0.131***                  0.150***
                                                           (0.00936)                     (0.0105)                  (0.0136)                  (0.0168)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 5                  0.0216***                    0.0483***                 0.0383***                 0.0439***
                                                           (0.00738)                    (0.00826)                  (0.0107)                  (0.0133)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 6                  0.0981***                      0.145***                  0.156***                  0.168***
                                                           (0.00882)                    (0.00987)                  (0.0128)                  (0.0159)
         Mother Has Upper Blue Collar Job                 0.0891***                      0.101***                  0.133***                  0.133***
                                                           (0.00967)                     (0.0108)                  (0.0141)                  (0.0174)
        Mother Has Upper White Collar Job                   0.275***                     0.270***                  0.285***                  0.283***
                                                           (0.00699)                    (0.00782)                  (0.0102)                  (0.0126)
       Mother Has Lower White Collar Job                    0.139***                     0.146***                  0.137***                  0.130***
                                                           (0.00657)                    (0.00735)                 (0.00956)                  (0.0118)
          Father Has Upper Blue Collar Job                0.0156***                      -0.00192                  0.00415                   0.00460
                                                           (0.00600)                    (0.00672)                 (0.00873)                  (0.0108)
        Father Has Upper White Collar Job                  0.246***                     0.254***                  0.265***                  0.263***
                                                           (0.00654)                    (0.00732)                 (0.00951)                  (0.0118)
        Father Has Lower White Collar Job                 0.0966***                    0.0926***                 0.0864***                 0.0804***
                                                           (0.00753)                    (0.00843)                  (0.0110)                  (0.0135)
                      Mother Is Immigrant                  -0.255***                    -0.205***                 -0.149***                 -0.101***
                                                            (0.0141)                     (0.0158)                  (0.0205)                  (0.0254)
                             Wealth Index                  0.110***                     0.111***                  0.111***                  0.112***
                                                           (0.00254)                    (0.00284)                 (0.00369)                 (0.00457)
      Childs Household Has 11 to 25 Books                 0.0589***                    0.0632***                 0.0634***                 0.0796***
                                                           (0.00587)                    (0.00657)                 (0.00854)                  (0.0106)
     Childs Household Has 26 to 100 Books                  0.243***                     0.271***                  0.300***                  0.312***
                                                           (0.00644)                    (0.00721)                 (0.00937)                  (0.0116)
    Childs Household Has 101 to 200 Books                  0.337***                     0.406***                  0.463***                  0.510***
                                                           (0.00958)                     (0.0107)                  (0.0139)                  (0.0172)
    Childs Household Has 201 to 500 Books                  0.518***                     0.594***                  0.648***                  0.655***
                                                            (0.0130)                     (0.0145)                  (0.0189)                  (0.0233)
Childs Household Has More Than 500 Books                   0.400***                     0.501***                  0.595***                  0.631***
                                                            (0.0169)                     (0.0189)                  (0.0245)                  (0.0303)
                                 Constant    1.938***       0.802***     2.356***        0.670***   2.668***       1.069***   2.858***       1.107***
                                              (0.142)        (0.130)      (0.165)         (0.146)    (0.226)        (0.189)    (0.284)        (0.234)
                        Country Dummies         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes

                             Observations     199,268      199,268       199,268         199,268     199,268      199,268      199,268      199,268
                                                               Standard errors in parentheses
                                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                           31
                     Table 2: Cross-Country Regression of PISA Math Gender Gap
                                               Dependent Variable: Gender Gap at Mean in PISA Math Scores
                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)

Constant             0.0708***     0.0944***       0.0799      -2.482***       -0.240**       0.888***       0.120***        0.152
                      (0.0076)       (0.032)       (0.093)       (0.84)          (0.12)         (0.24)        (0.032)        (0.16)

                                   -0.000216      -0.000255    -0.000364     -0.00224***      0.00102**     -0.000642      -0.000034
GDP Per Capita
                                   (0.00037)      (0.00049)    (0.00051)       (0.00042)      (0.00048)     (0.00039)      (0.00061)

Cellular                            -0.0184        -0.0193     -0.0341**       0.00127        -0.00930        0.0437       0.0422**
Subscriptions                       (0.021)        (0.024)       (0.016)       (0.014)         (0.023)        (0.028)       (0.015)

Reading Gender                                                                                               0.573***      0.512***
Gap                                                                                                            (0.14)        (0.12)

Male Literacy                                                                                -0.0118***                   -0.00321**
Rate                                                                                           (0.0032)                     (0.0012)

Female Literacy                                                                               0.00346**                    0.00241
Rate                                                                                           (0.0014)                    (0.0018)

WVS: University                                                                 0.0405                                     0.0546**
more important                                                                  (0.040)                                     (0.021)
for a boy

WVS: Men have                                                                 0.112***                                    0.0981***
more right to                                                                  (0.038)                                      (0.023)
scarce jobs

WVS: Men make                                                                  0.0633*                                     -0.000349
better political                                                               (0.035)                                       (0.024)
leaders

WVS: Being                                                                    -0.0662**                                     0.00315
housewife as                                                                    (0.032)                                     (0.018)
fulfilling as paid
work

Gender Gap                                          0.0236                                                                 -0.449**
Index                                               (0.15)                                                                   (0.17)

GGI: Economic                                                   -0.183*
Participation and                                               (0.095)
Opportunity

GGI: Educational                                               1.328***
Attainment                                                       (0.45)

GGI: Health and                                                  1.432*
Survival                                                         (0.75)

GGI: Political                                                  0.0347
Empowerment                                                     (0.059)

Observations             62            62             56           56             42              33            62            27
R-squared               0.00          0.03           0.03         0.28           0.62            0.54          0.40          0.94
Robust standard errors in parentheses (weighted by population)
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Cellular subscriptions are in per person terms for 2009 (World Bank data);
GDP per capita is for 2009 in thousands of US dollars (World Bank data);
WVS questions are on three- or four-point scale, with higher answers indicating stronger disagreement with the statement given;
GGI and subindices are higher for more gender equality.




                                                                 32
Table 3: Quantile Regressions Including Sibling Data Using Pooled PISA Data
                                                                    (1)             (2)        (3)          (4)
                                                   Quantile         50              75         90           95

                                                       Male      0.237***      0.246***      0.305***     0.329***
                                                                 (0.0118)       (0.0133)      (0.0178)     (0.0219)
               (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters > 0)      0.209***       0.183***     0.169***     0.167***
                                                                 (0.0113)       (0.0127)      (0.0170)     (0.0209)
                (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters = 0)     0.228***      0.208***      0.218***     0.219***
                                                                 (0.0119)       (0.0133)      (0.0179)     (0.0220)
                (Number brothers = 0) X (Number sisters > 0)     0.296***       0.267***     0.248***     0.248***
                                                                 (0.0128)       (0.0144)      (0.0193)     (0.0238)
        Male X (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters > 0)      0.0367**      0.0491***       0.0177       0.0213
                                                                 (0.0160)       (0.0180)      (0.0242)     (0.0297)
        Male X (Number brothers = 0) X (Number sisters > 0)     0.0639***      0.0784***       0.0339      -0.00777
                                                                 (0.0186)       (0.0210)      (0.0281)     (0.0346)
        Male X (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters = 0)     0.0706***      0.100***        0.0165      -0.00662
                                                                 (0.0170)       (0.0191)      (0.0256)     (0.0316)
                                                        Age     -0.106***     -0.0814***    -0.0829***   -0.0984***
                                                                 (0.0113)       (0.0127)      (0.0170)     (0.0209)
                                           Grade 8 or Below     -0.445***      -0.445***     -0.480***    -0.499***
                                                                 (0.0113)       (0.0127)      (0.0170)     (0.0209)
                                                   Grade 10      0.561***      0.567***      0.549***     0.514***
                                                                (0.00767)      (0.00864)      (0.0116)     (0.0143)
                                          Grade 11 or Above      0.845***      0.855***      0.836***     0.790***
                                                                 (0.0164)       (0.0185)      (0.0247)     (0.0305)
                          Mother Educated at ISCED Level 1      0.0331***       0.0286**       0.00989      0.00496
                                                                 (0.0103)       (0.0116)      (0.0156)     (0.0192)
                          Mother Educated at ISCED Level 2      0.0994***       0.108***      0.108***     0.114***
                                                                 (0.0105)       (0.0118)      (0.0158)     (0.0195)
                          Mother Educated at ISCED Level 3       0.203***       0.226***      0.249***     0.259***
                                                                 (0.0109)       (0.0123)      (0.0165)     (0.0203)
                          Mother Educated at ISCED Level 4        -0.0283        -0.0192       -0.0414      -0.0270
                                                                 (0.0218)       (0.0246)      (0.0329)     (0.0405)
                          Mother Educated at ISCED Level 5      0.0472***      0.0627***     0.0399***     0.0374**
                                                                (0.00917)       (0.0103)      (0.0138)     (0.0170)
                          Mother Educated at ISCED Level 6      -0.105***     -0.0718***       -0.0328     -0.00969
                                                                 (0.0145)       (0.0163)      (0.0218)     (0.0269)
                           Mother Has Upper Blue Collar Job      0.102***       0.106***      0.127***     0.136***
                                                                 (0.0129)       (0.0146)      (0.0195)     (0.0240)
                          Mother Has Upper White Collar Job      0.256***       0.260***      0.281***     0.282***
                                                                (0.00982)       (0.0111)      (0.0148)     (0.0182)
                         Mother Has Lower White Collar Job       0.125***       0.133***      0.118***     0.110***
                                                                (0.00891)       (0.0100)      (0.0135)     (0.0166)
                            Father Has Upper Blue Collar Job    0.0249***       8.58e-05     -0.000199     -0.00615
                                                                (0.00797)      (0.00897)      (0.0120)     (0.0148)
                           Father Has Upper White Collar Job     0.248***       0.256***     0.277***     0.280***
                                                                (0.00873)      (0.00983)      (0.0132)     (0.0162)
                          Father Has Lower White Collar Job     0.0782***      0.0618***     0.0675***    0.0578***
                                                                 (0.0101)       (0.0114)      (0.0152)     (0.0188)
                                        Mother Is Immigrant     -0.263***      -0.226***     -0.142***    -0.0827**
                                                                 (0.0197)       (0.0222)      (0.0298)     (0.0366)
                                               Wealth Index      0.106***      0.109***      0.118***     0.117***
                                                                (0.00348)      (0.00392)     (0.00526)    (0.00648)
                        Childs Household Has 11 to 25 Books     0.0545***      0.0576***     0.0645***    0.0804***
                                                                (0.00781)      (0.00880)      (0.0118)     (0.0145)
                       Childs Household Has 26 to 100 Books      0.214***       0.236***      0.249***     0.277***
                                                                (0.00863)      (0.00972)      (0.0130)     (0.0160)
                      Childs Household Has 101 to 200 Books      0.304***       0.372***      0.419***     0.454***
                                                                 (0.0129)       (0.0146)      (0.0195)     (0.0240)
                      Childs Household Has 201 to 500 Books      0.473***       0.551***      0.609***     0.626***
                                                                 (0.0176)       (0.0199)      (0.0266)     (0.0328)
                 Childs Household Has More Than 500 Books        0.329***       0.457***      0.559***     0.550***
                                                                 (0.0228)       (0.0256)      (0.0344)     (0.0423)
                                                   Constant      0.732***      0.830***      1.317***     1.849***
                                                                  (0.177)        (0.200)       (0.267)      (0.329)
                                          Country Dummies           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes

                                               Observations      108,542          108,542    108,542      108,542
                                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                               33
                        Table 4: Main Regression Specification Using SIMCE Results
                                               Standardized 4th grade SIMCE                   Standardized 8th grade SIMCE


      Dummy for Male                     0.0826***       0.0874***      0.0927***        0.196***         0.205***      0.211***
                                         (0.00164)       (0.00162)      (0.00162)        (0.00305)       (0.00267)      (0.00267)
      Log Birth Weight                                    0.243***       0.238***                         0.245***       0.244***
                                                         (0.00488)      (0.00482)                        (0.00801)      (0.00795)
      Full term Birth                                      0.00185      -0.000208                        -0.000399       -0.00222
                                                         (0.00205)      (0.00203)                        (0.00329)      (0.00326)
      Mother’s Age at Birth                             0.00218***     0.00193***                       0.00138***     0.00121***
                                                        (0.000132)     (0.000131)                       (0.000218)     (0.000217)
      Unmarried Mother                                  -0.0405***     -0.0360***                       -0.0218***     -0.0175***
                                                         (0.00170)      (0.00168)                        (0.00277)      (0.00275)
      Mother attended High School                         0.228***       0.209***                         0.161***       0.144***
                                                         (0.00208)      (0.00206)                        (0.00330)      (0.00328)
      Mother attended Colege                              0.422***       0.397***                         0.346***       0.322***
                                                         (0.00332)      (0.00330)                        (0.00562)      (0.00559)
      Mother Employed                                    0.0797***      0.0736***                        0.0601***      0.0556***
                                                         (0.00200)      (0.00199)                        (0.00337)      (0.00335)


      Additional controls                               School FE         Class FE                      School FE       Class FE
      Observations                       1,444,735      1,225,761         1,225,761       422,319        418,017        418,017
      R-squared                            0.003          0.255             0.345          0.010          0.353          0.400
      * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
      Robust standard errors in brackets
      All specifications have year of test fixed effects




                         Table 5: Linear Regression of Top Scores from SIMCE Data
                                                                          Standardized 4th grade SIMCE
                         Probability of being in the top 10%          Probability of being in the top 5%               Probability of being in the top 1%

Dummy for Male       0.0251***       0.0246***       0.0253***     0.0156***      0.0150***         0.0155***    0.00591***        0.00567***    0.00588***
                     (0.000520)      (0.000548)      (0.000563)    (0.000394)     (0.000422)        (0.000433)   (0.000226)        (0.000246)    (0.000253)

Controls                             School FE       Class FE                     School FE          Class FE                      School FE       Class FE

Male/Female               1.27          1.26            1.27          1.35             1.33            1.35           1.86            1.67           1.86

Observations            1,444,735    1,225,761       1,225,761      1,444,735     1,225,761          1,225,761      1,444,735      1,225,761      1,225,761
R-squared                 0.002        0.119           0.173          0.001         0.082              0.133          0.001          0.038          0.085

                                                                          Standardized 8th grade SIMCE
                         Probability of being in the top 10%          Probability of being in the top 5%               Probability of being in the top 1%

Dummy for Male       0.0353***       0.0337***       0.0339***     0.0221***      0.0208***         0.0209***    0.00896***        0.00812***    0.00786***
                     (0.000961)      (0.000879)      (0.000887)    (0.000730)     (0.000680)        (0.000684)   (0.000430)        (0.000414)    (0.000414)

Controls                             School FE       Class FE                     School FE          Class FE

Male/Female               1.42          1.40            1.41          1.56             1.50            1.50           2.64            2.33           2.33

Observations            422,319       418,017         418,017        422,319          418,017        418,017         422,319        418,017        418,017
R-squared                0.003         0.230           0.265          0.002            0.175          0.210           0.001          0.089          0.122
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Robust standard errors in brackets
All specifications have year of test fixed effects and controls for log birth weight, gestational age, mother’s education, age, marital and employment status.




                                                                     34
                            Table 6: Regressions on Twins Sample
                                                      Standardized 4th grade SIMCE
                                       Mean               Probability of being in the top percentile
                                                       25             10              5              1
        Dummy for Male               0.148***      0.0643*** 0.0485*** 0.0305*** 0.00774**
                                     (0.0167)      (0.00893)      (0.00698)      (0.00568)      (0.00349)
        Constant                    -0.137***      0.202***      0.0741*** 0.0388*** 0.0129***
                                    (0.00870)      (0.00466)      (0.00364)      (0.00296)      (0.00182)


        Male to female ratio                          1.26           1.67          1.99          2.08


        Observations                  22,074         22,074        22,074        22,074         22,074
        Number of Twin Groups         12,461         12,461        12,461        12,461         12,461

                                                      Standardized 8th grade SIMCE
                                       Mean               Probability of being in the top percentile
                                                       25             10              5              1
        Dummy for Male               0.269***      0.115***      0.0728*** 0.0405***             0.0113*
                                     (0.0327)       (0.0173)       (0.0136)       (0.0110)      (0.00674)
        Constant                    -0.187***      0.187***      0.0668*** 0.0379*** 0.0120***
                                     (0.0166)      (0.00881)      (0.00693)      (0.00561)      (0.00342)


        Male to female ratio                          1.57           1.90          1.94          3.44


        Observations                   6,293         6,293          6,293         6,293         6,293
        Number of Twin Groups          3,834         3,834          3,834         3,834         3,834
        Robust standard errors in brackets
        * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




           Table 7: Parental Investments and SIMCE Scores from 2002
                                                                     OLS: Standardized 4th grade SIMCE Score
Male                                                                0.0912***     0.0952***        0.0977***
                                                                    (0.00449)     (0.00417)         (0.00415)
Investments in Math                                                  0.177***      0.116***         0.110***
                                                                    (0.00494)     (0.00434)         (0.00430)
Investments in Reading                                               0.101***     0.0139***        0.0135***
                                                                    (0.00511)     (0.00452)         (0.00449)
Controls                                                                          School FE       Classroom FE
Observations                                                         184,144       182,189           182,189
R-squared                                                             0.015          0.301            0.339
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Robust standard errors in brackets
All specifications control for log birth weight, gestational age, mother’s age, education, marital and employment
status. Investments in each subject are derived from parent surveys where parents respond a question of ”How
often do you pose Math problems to your child” or ”How often do you read to your child”. 1 indicates frequent
investment and 0 indicates infrequent investment.




                                                       35
                          Table 8: Teacher Gender and Math Scores
                                                                       OLS: Standardized 4th grade SIMCE Score
Dummy for Male                                                        0.0914***      0.0914***            0.0896***
                                                                      (0.00209)       (0.00209)           (0.00226)
Math teacher Male                                                                    -0.0635***          -0.0703***
                                                                                      (0.00571)           (0.00648)
Male X Math teacher Male                                                                                   0.0127**
                                                                                                          (0.00602)

Observations                                                            797,102        797,102            797,102
R-squared                                                                0.256          0.257              0.257
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Standard errors clustered at the classroom level in brackets.
Other controls include class size, fraction male in class, school fixed effects. All regressions also include log birth
weight, gestational age, mother’s age, education, marital and employment status. Teacher gender information not
available for 2009 and 2010.




       Table 9: SIMCE Scores Regressed on Class Size and Composition
                                                             4th grade SIMCE scores


                                                 ——Full Sample—–                            Excluding single-
                                                                                            sex schools

Male X Class Size              0.00109***                             0.000930***           0.000989***
                               (0.000121)                             (0.000122)            (0.000121)
Male                           0.0514***              0.0869***       0.0545***             0.0622***
                               (0.00427)              (0.00891)       (0.00998)             (0.0101)
Class Size                     -0.000729***                           -0.000676***          -0.000717***
                               (0.000180)                             (0.000180)            (0.000188)
Male X Fraction Male                                    0.0103        0.0133                -0.00549
                                                       (0.0168)       (0.0168)              (0.0172)
Fraction Male                                         -0.109***       -0.103***             -0.127***
                                                       (0.0137)       (0.0138)              (0.0167)

Observations                   1,225,761              1,225,761       1,225,761             1,125,046
R-squared                      0.255                    0.255         0.255                 0.245

                                                             8th grade SIMCE scores


                                                 —–Full Sample—–                            Excluding single-
                                                                                            sex schools

Male X Class Size              0.000983***                            0.000561              0.000495
                               (0.000335)                             (0.000519)            (0.000524)
Male                           0.175***                0.246***       0.213***              0.203***
                               (0.0105)                (0.0119)       (0.0247)              (0.0257)
Class Size                     0.00728***                             0.0108***             0.0109***
                               (0.000570)                             (0.00102)             (0.00108)
Male X Fraction Male                                  -0.0641***      -0.0394               -0.0153
                                                        (0.0222)      (0.0328)              (0.0357)
Fraction Male                                         -0.0821***      -0.0428***            -0.0391**
                                                       (0.00905)      (0.0149)              (0.0177)

Observations                   418,017                 418,017        181,029               162,548
R-squared                      0.354                    0.354         0.393                 0.366
Standard errors clustered at the classroom level in brackets.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Controls include Birth Weight, Gestational Age, Mother’s Age and Education, Mother Employment status, and
School FE




                                                         36
                             Table 10: Gender and Perceptions about Math Ability
Responses are in agreement with        In general I am quite     I like math classes in    Math is harder for me
the statements                         good at Math              my school                 than for the rest of my
                                                                                           peers

Dummy for Male                         0.104***                  0.0272***                 -0.0168***
                                       (0.00164)                 (0.00163)                 (0.00136)
Simce math score                       0.164***                  0.0184***                 -0.132***
                                       (0.000907)                (0.000940)                (0.000766)

Observations                           364,337                   389,653                   387,355
R-squared                              0.152                     0.086                     0.114
Mean of dependent variable             0.477                     0.443                     0.223

Responses are in agreement with        I learn math quickly      I am not good at Math     I like to study Math      I get good grades in
the statements                         and easily                                                                    Math without study-
                                                                                                                     ing

Dummy for Male                         0.116***                  -0.0139***                0.0454***                 0.0885***
                                       (0.00163)                 (0.00124)                 (0.00169)                 (0.00154)
Simce math score                       0.134***                  -0.0951***                0.0619***                 0.119***
                                       (0.000916)                (0.000715)                (0.000960)                (0.000901)

Observations                           386,128                   383,740                   372,307                   368,427
R-squared                              0.106                     0.086                     0.079                     0.104
Mean of dependent variable             0.448                     0.168                     0.459                     0.301
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the classroom level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: controls are year of SIMCE test, full term birth, mother’s education, marital status and age. School fixed
effects in all regressions.




                                                                  37
A   Appendix

    Table A.1: PISA Descriptive Statistics by Year and Country: Argentina-Colombia
                                                         Argentina                Brazil                 Chile               Colombia

                                                      2006       2009        2006         2009      2006        2009      2006        2009
     Male                                            0.4566     0.4573      0.4581      0.4522     0.5408      0.5063    0.4562     0.4685
                                                    (0.4982)   (0.4982)    (0.4983)    (0.4977)   (0.4984)      (0.5)   (0.4981)    (0.499)
     (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters > 0)               0.3871                  0.2676                0.2815                0.2434
                                                               (0.4871)                (0.4427)              (0.4498)              (0.4292)
     (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters = 0)                0.248                  0.2842                0.2784                0.2594
                                                               (0.4319)                 (0.451)              (0.4482)              (0.4384)
     (Number brothers = 0) X (Number sisters > 0)               0.1891                  0.1544                0.2104                0.1896
                                                               (0.3917)                (0.3613)              (0.4077)               (0.392)
     (Number brothers = 0) X (Number sisters = 0)               0.1757                  0.2938                0.2297                0.3075
                                                               (0.3806)                (0.4555)              (0.4207)              (0.4615)
     Age                                              15.69       15.7       15.78        15.87     15.82       15.79     15.85       15.84
                                                    (0.2789)   (0.2829)    (0.2876)     (0.281)   (0.2812)   (0.2821)   (0.2862)   (0.2798)
     Grade 8 or Below                                0.1224     0.1558      0.4058      0.2435     0.0285      0.0333    0.1679     0.1396
                                                    (0.3278)   (0.3627)    (0.4911)    (0.4292)   (0.1663)   (0.1795)   (0.3738)   (0.3466)
     Grade 9                                         0.1574     0.1975      0.4087      0.3981     0.1898      0.1963     0.222     0.2086
                                                    (0.3642)   (0.3982)    (0.4916)    (0.4895)   (0.3921)   (0.3973)   (0.4156)   (0.4063)
     Grade 10                                        0.6681     0.5905      0.1775        0.328    0.7193      0.7171    0.4015     0.4474
                                                    (0.4709)   (0.4918)    (0.3821)    (0.4695)   (0.4494)   (0.4505)   (0.4903)   (0.4973)
     Grade 11 or Above                               0.0408     0.0448       0.008      0.0304     0.0625      0.0533    0.2086     0.2044
                                                    (0.1978)   (0.2069)    (0.0889)    (0.1716)   (0.2421)   (0.2246)   (0.4063)   (0.4033)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 0                0.1189     0.0788      0.1732      0.1052     0.0833      0.0529    0.1516     0.1367
                                                    (0.3237)   (0.2694)    (0.3785)    (0.3068)   (0.2764)   (0.2239)   (0.3587)   (0.3436)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 1                0.2086     0.1768       0.175      0.2216     0.0476      0.0504    0.1829     0.1692
                                                    (0.4063)   (0.3815)      (0.38)    (0.4153)   (0.2129)   (0.2189)   (0.3866)   (0.3749)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 2                0.1106     0.1052      0.2003      0.1951     0.2028      0.2071     0.136     0.1774
                                                    (0.3137)   (0.3068)    (0.4003)    (0.3963)   (0.4021)   (0.4053)   (0.3428)    (0.382)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 3                   0           0           0       0.0277     0.0976         0         0           0
                                                       (0)         (0)         (0)      (0.164)   (0.2969)       (0)       (0)         (0)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 4                0.1883      0.173       0.131      0.2055     0.2591      0.4034    0.1251     0.1565
                                                     (0.391)   (0.3783)    (0.3375)    (0.4041)   (0.4382)   (0.4906)   (0.3308)   (0.3634)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 5                0.1327      0.164      0.0543        0.043    0.0787      0.1055    0.1536       0.185
                                                    (0.3393)   (0.3703)    (0.2267)    (0.2029)   (0.2693)   (0.3072)   (0.3606)   (0.3883)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 6                0.1798     0.2321      0.2205      0.1771     0.1546      0.1316    0.1811     0.1602
                                                     (0.384)   (0.4222)    (0.4146)    (0.3817)   (0.3616)   (0.3381)   (0.3852)   (0.3668)
     Mother Has Lower Blue Collar Job                0.0922     0.1422      0.2484      0.2508     0.3742       0.188     0.182     0.2193
                                                    (0.2893)   (0.3493)    (0.4321)    (0.4335)    (0.484)   (0.3908)   (0.3859)   (0.4138)
     Mother Has Upper Blue Collar Job                 0.032     0.0184        0.04      0.0832     0.0361      0.0411    0.0601       0.061
                                                    (0.1761)   (0.1345)     (0.196)    (0.2761)   (0.1866)   (0.1985)   (0.2376)   (0.2393)
     Mother Has Upper White Collar Job               0.2459     0.2715      0.2882      0.2361     0.1657      0.1877    0.2146     0.2173
                                                    (0.4307)   (0.4448)     (0.453)    (0.4247)   (0.3718)   (0.3905)   (0.4106)   (0.4124)
     Mother Has Lower White Collar Job               0.1839     0.1546        0.16      0.1597      0.198      0.2805    0.1536     0.1434
                                                    (0.3875)   (0.3615)    (0.3666)    (0.3664)   (0.3985)   (0.4493)   (0.3606)   (0.3505)
     Father Has Lower Blue Collar Job                0.1399     0.2302      0.3827      0.1668      0.254      0.2433    0.2508     0.2449
                                                    (0.3469)    (0.421)    (0.4861)    (0.3728)   (0.4353)   (0.4291)   (0.4335)   (0.4301)
     Father Has Upper Blue Collar Job                0.2616      0.203      0.1015      0.3332     0.2366      0.2321    0.2416     0.2564
                                                    (0.4395)   (0.4023)    (0.3019)    (0.4714)    (0.425)   (0.4222)   (0.4281)   (0.4367)
     Father Has Upper White Collar Job               0.2593     0.2748      0.3029      0.2393     0.2285      0.2464    0.2872     0.2543
                                                    (0.4383)   (0.4465)    (0.4595)    (0.4267)   (0.4199)    (0.431)   (0.4525)   (0.4355)
     Father Has Lower White Collar Job               0.2159      0.159      0.0633      0.1202      0.159      0.1545    0.0907     0.0764
                                                    (0.4115)   (0.3657)    (0.2434)    (0.3252)   (0.3657)   (0.3615)   (0.2872)   (0.2656)
     Mother Is Immigrant                             0.0523      0.058      0.0432      0.0115     0.0111      0.0115    0.0074     0.0077
                                                    (0.2227)   (0.2338)    (0.2034)    (0.1065)   (0.1047)   (0.1065)   (0.0855)   (0.0874)
     Wealth Index                                    -1.309    -0.9536      -1.523       -1.344   -0.9987     -0.6254     -1.67      -1.284
                                                    (0.8972)   (0.8919)    (0.9489)    (0.8679)    (0.952)   (0.9768)    (1.054)    (1.078)
     Child’s Household Has 0 to 10 Books             0.2936     0.2652      0.3521        0.362    0.2102      0.1942     0.312     0.2977
                                                    (0.4555)   (0.4415)    (0.4777)    (0.4806)   (0.4075)   (0.3956)   (0.4633)   (0.4573)
     Child’s Household Has 11 to 25 Books            0.2768      0.256      0.3045      0.3128     0.2828      0.2653    0.2845     0.3046
                                                    (0.4475)   (0.4365)    (0.4602)    (0.4636)   (0.4504)   (0.4415)   (0.4512)   (0.4603)
     Child’s Household Has 26 to 100 Books           0.2512     0.2591      0.2132      0.2151     0.3088      0.3235    0.2582     0.2707
                                                    (0.4338)   (0.4382)    (0.4096)    (0.4109)    (0.462)   (0.4679)   (0.4377)   (0.4443)
     Child’s Household Has 101 to 200 Books          0.0885     0.0987      0.0598      0.0553     0.0996      0.1152    0.0717       0.074
                                                    (0.2841)   (0.2982)    (0.2372)    (0.2286)   (0.2994)   (0.3193)    (0.258)   (0.2618)
     Child’s Household Has 201 to 500 Books           0.044     0.0507      0.0263      0.0206     0.0466      0.0529    0.0326     0.0234
                                                    (0.2052)   (0.2194)    (0.1599)    (0.1419)   (0.2109)   (0.2239)   (0.1776)    (0.151)
     Child’s Household Has More Than 500 Books        0.023     0.0287      0.0144      0.0143     0.0214      0.0252    0.0109     0.0077
                                                    (0.1501)    (0.167)    (0.1192)    (0.1186)   (0.1447)   (0.1568)    (0.104)   (0.0874)




                                                                          38
Table A.2: PISA Descriptive Statistics by Year and Country: Indonesia-Tunisia
                                                    Indonesia               Mexico                Thailand              Tunisia

                                                2006         2009       2006        2009      2006        2009      2006       2009
Male                                           0.4969      0.4934      0.4581     0.4761     0.4212     0.4307      0.472     0.4761
                                                (0.5)        (0.5)    (0.4982)   (0.4994)   (0.4938)   (0.4952)   (0.4993)   (0.4995)
(Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters > 0)               0.2897                 0.3568                0.1605                0.5134
                                                          (0.4537)               (0.4791)              (0.3671)              (0.4999)
(Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters = 0)               0.1752                 0.2256                 0.217                0.1935
                                                          (0.3802)                (0.418)              (0.4123)              (0.3951)
(Number brothers = 0) X (Number sisters > 0)                0.147                 0.1705                0.2032                0.0977
                                                          (0.3541)               (0.3761)              (0.4024)              (0.2969)
(Number brothers = 0) X (Number sisters = 0)                0.388                 0.2471                0.4193                0.1954
                                                          (0.4874)               (0.4313)              (0.4935)              (0.3965)
Age                                              15.76      15.76       15.72       15.72     15.68       15.7      15.88      15.88
                                               (0.2867)   (0.2862)    (0.2783)   (0.2784)   (0.2875)   (0.2906)   (0.2823)   (0.2776)
Grade 8 or Below                                0.1136      0.072      0.0567     0.0561     0.0118     0.0071     0.2858     0.2129
                                               (0.3173)   (0.2586)    (0.2312)   (0.2302)   (0.1079)   (0.0838)   (0.4518)   (0.4094)
Grade 9                                          0.474     0.4509      0.1488     0.2175     0.3169     0.2448     0.2235     0.2662
                                               (0.4993)   (0.4976)    (0.3558)   (0.4126)   (0.4653)     (0.43)   (0.4166)    (0.442)
Grade 10                                        0.3657     0.4278      0.6712     0.7188     0.6386     0.7173     0.4455     0.4696
                                               (0.4817)   (0.4948)    (0.4698)   (0.4496)   (0.4805)   (0.4504)   (0.4971)   (0.4991)
Grade 11 or Above                               0.0467     0.0493      0.1066     0.0066     0.0328     0.0308     0.0453     0.0513
                                                (0.211)   (0.2164)    (0.3087)   (0.0807)   (0.1781)   (0.1729)   (0.2079)   (0.2206)
Mother Educated at ISCED Level 0                0.1035      0.116      0.1195       0.125    0.0754     0.0694     0.1037     0.2737
                                               (0.3046)   (0.3203)    (0.3243)   (0.3307)   (0.2641)   (0.2541)   (0.3049)   (0.4459)
Mother Educated at ISCED Level 1                0.2606     0.3144      0.1922     0.2018     0.4144      0.457     0.2543     0.2226
                                                (0.439)   (0.4643)     (0.394)   (0.4014)   (0.4927)   (0.4982)   (0.4355)    (0.416)
Mother Educated at ISCED Level 2                0.1822     0.1939      0.2238     0.2668     0.1378     0.1099     0.1569     0.1447
                                                (0.386)   (0.3954)    (0.4168)   (0.4423)   (0.3447)   (0.3128)   (0.3637)   (0.3518)
Mother Educated at ISCED Level 3                0.0508     0.0327      0.0198     0.0205     0.0363     0.0275     0.0175     0.0327
                                               (0.2196)   (0.1779)    (0.1394)   (0.1417)   (0.1871)   (0.1635)    (0.131)   (0.1779)
Mother Educated at ISCED Level 4                 0.239       0.22      0.0872     0.1055     0.1743     0.1648     0.2476     0.1717
                                               (0.4265)   (0.4143)    (0.2821)   (0.3073)   (0.3794)    (0.371)   (0.4317)   (0.3772)
Mother Educated at ISCED Level 5                0.0482     0.0448      0.1109     0.1015         0          0      0.0599     0.0486
                                               (0.2142)   (0.2068)     (0.314)    (0.302)       (0)        (0)    (0.2374)   (0.2151)
Mother Educated at ISCED Level 6                0.1047     0.0664      0.2091     0.1591     0.1408     0.1578     0.1474     0.0486
                                               (0.3062)    (0.249)    (0.4067)   (0.3658)   (0.3479)   (0.3645)   (0.3546)   (0.2151)
Mother Has Lower Blue Collar Job                0.0922     0.1258      0.1398     0.1579     0.1508     0.1687     0.0899     0.1041
                                               (0.2894)   (0.3316)    (0.3468)   (0.3647)   (0.3579)   (0.3745)    (0.286)   (0.3055)
Mother Has Upper Blue Collar Job                 0.124     0.1421      0.0416     0.0383     0.2917     0.2667      0.042      0.046
                                               (0.3296)   (0.3492)    (0.1996)   (0.1919)   (0.4546)   (0.4423)   (0.2007)   (0.2095)
Mother Has Upper White Collar Job               0.1078     0.1131       0.187     0.1857     0.2285     0.2071     0.1114     0.1007
                                               (0.3102)   (0.3168)    (0.3899)   (0.3889)   (0.4199)   (0.4052)   (0.3147)    (0.301)
Mother Has Lower White Collar Job               0.1097     0.0898      0.2031     0.1881     0.1672     0.1274     0.0407     0.0444
                                               (0.3125)   (0.2859)    (0.4023)   (0.3908)   (0.3731)   (0.3334)   (0.1977)    (0.206)
Father Has Lower Blue Collar Job                0.2546     0.2662      0.2702     0.2987       0.23     0.2199     0.3888     0.3891
                                               (0.4357)    (0.442)     (0.444)   (0.4577)   (0.4208)   (0.4142)   (0.4875)   (0.4876)
Father Has Upper Blue Collar Job                0.2935     0.3248       0.235     0.2184     0.3004     0.2736     0.1711     0.1845
                                               (0.4554)   (0.4683)     (0.424)   (0.4131)   (0.4585)   (0.4458)   (0.3767)   (0.3879)
Father Has Upper White Collar Job               0.1797     0.1579      0.2725     0.2644     0.2566     0.2469     0.2707     0.2303
                                               (0.3839)   (0.3647)    (0.4452)    (0.441)   (0.4368)   (0.4312)   (0.4444)    (0.421)
Father Has Lower White Collar Job               0.1512     0.1369      0.1414     0.1289     0.1056     0.0831     0.1067     0.1417
                                               (0.3583)   (0.3438)    (0.3484)   (0.3351)   (0.3074)    (0.276)   (0.3087)   (0.3488)
Mother Is Immigrant                             0.0039     0.0031      0.0225     0.0209     0.0061    1.60E-04    0.0192     0.0133
                                               (0.0619)   (0.0557)    (0.1484)   (0.1432)   (0.0781)   (0.0127)   (0.1372)   (0.1147)
Wealth Index                                    -2.614     -1.775      -1.373      -1.561    -1.418     -1.172     -1.882     -1.669
                                                (1.257)    (1.242)     (1.076)    (1.139)     (1.08)   (0.9934)    (1.163)    (1.105)
Child’s Household Has 0 to 10 Books              0.203     0.2305      0.3535     0.3692      0.235     0.1979     0.3631     0.3758
                                               (0.4022)   (0.4212)    (0.4781)   (0.4826)    (0.424)   (0.3985)    (0.481)   (0.4844)
Child’s Household Has 11 to 25 Books            0.3861     0.3701       0.289     0.2911     0.3191     0.3052     0.2959     0.3391
                                               (0.4869)   (0.4829)    (0.4533)   (0.4543)   (0.4662)   (0.4605)   (0.4565)   (0.4734)
Child’s Household Has 26 to 100 Books           0.2718     0.2625      0.2248     0.2107     0.2842     0.3046      0.203     0.1804
                                               (0.4449)     (0.44)    (0.4175)   (0.4078)   (0.4511)   (0.4603)   (0.4023)   (0.3846)
Child’s Household Has 101 to 200 Books          0.0641     0.0592      0.0664       0.061    0.0888     0.0988     0.0468     0.0357
                                                (0.245)    (0.236)     (0.249)   (0.2393)   (0.2845)   (0.2984)   (0.2112)   (0.1856)
Child’s Household Has 201 to 500 Books          0.0201     0.0259      0.0302     0.0281      0.042     0.0535     0.0181     0.0174
                                               (0.1403)   (0.1588)    (0.1711)   (0.1651)   (0.2006)    (0.225)   (0.1333)   (0.1306)
Child’s Household Has More Than 500 Books       0.0167     0.0218      0.0138     0.0139     0.0182     0.0288     0.0149     0.0149
                                               (0.1282)   (0.1461)    (0.1165)   (0.1169)   (0.1339)   (0.1671)    (0.121)   (0.1213)




                                                                     39
Table A.3: PISA Descriptive Statistics by Year and Country: Turkey-Uruguay
                                                           Turkey              United States            Uruguay

                                                      2006        2009      2006         2009       2006        2009
     Male                                            0.5366      0.5106    0.5061       0.5135     0.4695      0.4717
                                                    (0.4987)    (0.4999)    (0.5)      (0.4999)   (0.4991)   (0.4992)
     (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters > 0)                 0.297                 0.2649                 0.2647
                                                                 (0.457)               (0.4413)              (0.4412)
     (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters = 0)                0.2456                 0.2717                 0.2706
                                                                (0.4305)               (0.4449)              (0.4443)
     (Number brothers = 0) X (Number sisters > 0)                 0.211                  0.236                  0.214
                                                                 (0.408)               (0.4247)              (0.4102)
     (Number brothers = 0) X (Number sisters = 0)                0.2464                 0.2274                0.2506
                                                                 (0.431)               (0.4192)              (0.4334)
     Age                                               15.9       15.82      15.82       15.79      15.87       15.86
                                                    (0.2875)    (0.2806)   (0.2952)    (0.2964)   (0.2853)   (0.2774)
     Grade 8 or Below                                0.0235      0.0274     0.0057     7.60E-04    0.1414      0.1731
                                                    (0.1514)    (0.1633)   (0.0753)    (0.0276)   (0.3484)   (0.3783)
     Grade 9                                         0.4061      0.2518     0.1098       0.108     0.1575      0.2182
                                                    (0.4912)    (0.4341)   (0.3126)    (0.3104)   (0.3643)   (0.4131)
     Grade 10                                        0.5405      0.6791     0.7161      0.6916     0.6222      0.5625
                                                    (0.4984)    (0.4669)   (0.4509)    (0.4619)   (0.4849)   (0.4961)
     Grade 11 or Above                               0.0299      0.0416     0.1681      0.1997     0.0789      0.0462
                                                    (0.1705)    (0.1998)    (0.374)    (0.3998)   (0.2697)   (0.2099)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 0                0.0552      0.1311     0.0248      0.0174     0.0773      0.0522
                                                    (0.2285)    (0.3375)   (0.1554)    (0.1307)   (0.2671)   (0.2225)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 1                 0.346      0.4742     0.0214      0.0266     0.1819      0.2646
                                                    (0.4757)    (0.4994)   (0.1447)    (0.1608)   (0.3858)   (0.4411)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 2                0.2036      0.1667     0.0736      0.0663     0.1769      0.2704
                                                    (0.4027)    (0.3728)   (0.2612)    (0.2488)   (0.3816)   (0.4442)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 3                0.0089       0.006         0          0       0.0134     0.0151
                                                    (0.0939)    (0.0773)       (0)        (0)     (0.1151)    (0.122)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 4                0.2293      0.1147     0.4058      0.4097     0.0899      0.1427
                                                    (0.4204)    (0.3187)   (0.4911)    (0.4918)   (0.2861)   (0.3498)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 5                 0.048       0.016     0.1285      0.1525     0.2565      0.0995
                                                    (0.2137)    (0.1255)   (0.3347)    (0.3595)   (0.4367)   (0.2994)
     Mother Educated at ISCED Level 6                0.0979      0.0512     0.2816      0.3046     0.1383      0.1131
                                                    (0.2973)    (0.2205)   (0.4498)    (0.4603)   (0.3452)   (0.3168)
     Mother Has Lower Blue Collar Job                 0.018      0.0268     0.0611      0.0688     0.1965      0.2056
                                                     (0.133)    (0.1616)   (0.2396)    (0.2531)   (0.3974)   (0.4042)
     Mother Has Upper Blue Collar Job                0.0374      0.0254     0.0219      0.0302      0.049      0.0571
                                                    (0.1898)    (0.1574)   (0.1464)    (0.1711)   (0.2158)    (0.232)
     Mother Has Upper White Collar Job               0.0645      0.0689     0.4507      0.4714     0.2668      0.2473
                                                    (0.2458)    (0.2532)   (0.4976)    (0.4992)   (0.4423)   (0.4315)
     Mother Has Lower White Collar Job               0.0362      0.0476     0.2834       0.279      0.255      0.2357
                                                    (0.1869)     (0.213)   (0.4507)    (0.4485)   (0.4359)   (0.4245)
     Father Has Lower Blue Collar Job                0.1297      0.1753     0.1704      0.1599     0.2186      0.2364
                                                     (0.336)    (0.3803)    (0.376)    (0.3666)   (0.4134)   (0.4249)
     Father Has Upper Blue Collar Job                0.3191      0.2548     0.1673      0.2024     0.2271      0.2434
                                                    (0.4662)    (0.4358)   (0.3733)    (0.4018)    (0.419)   (0.4292)
     Father Has Upper White Collar Job               0.3112      0.3088     0.3782      0.3732     0.2852      0.2303
                                                     (0.463)    (0.4621)    (0.485)    (0.4837)   (0.4515)   (0.4211)
     Father Has Lower White Collar Job               0.1453      0.1313     0.0781      0.0948     0.1442      0.1675
                                                    (0.3524)    (0.3378)   (0.2683)    (0.2929)   (0.3514)   (0.3735)
     Mother Is Immigrant                              0.015      0.0142     0.1864      0.2253     0.0223       0.021
                                                    (0.1215)    (0.1184)   (0.3895)    (0.4178)   (0.1477)   (0.1433)
     Wealth Index                                    -1.497       -1.02      0.151      0.4138     -1.084     -0.6823
                                                     (1.005)     (1.247)   (0.7984)    (0.8911)   (0.9591)   (0.9141)
     Child’s Household Has 0 to 10 Books             0.2252      0.2342     0.1586      0.1989     0.2191      0.2928
                                                    (0.4178)    (0.4235)   (0.3654)    (0.3992)   (0.4136)   (0.4551)
     Child’s Household Has 11 to 25 Books            0.2709      0.2496      0.154      0.1752     0.2439      0.2431
                                                    (0.4445)    (0.4328)    (0.361)    (0.3802)   (0.4294)    (0.429)
     Child’s Household Has 26 to 100 Books           0.3029      0.2972      0.286      0.2777     0.2817      0.2481
                                                    (0.4596)    (0.4571)    (0.452)    (0.4479)   (0.4499)    (0.432)
     Child’s Household Has 101 to 200 Books           0.101      0.1151       0.18      0.1628     0.1269      0.0977
                                                    (0.3013)    (0.3192)   (0.3842)    (0.3692)   (0.3329)   (0.2969)
     Child’s Household Has 201 to 500 Books          0.0587      0.0588     0.1301      0.1116      0.063       0.053
                                                     (0.235)    (0.2354)   (0.3364)    (0.3149)    (0.243)   (0.2241)
     Child’s Household Has More Than 500 Books       0.0304      0.0312     0.0761      0.0592     0.0327      0.0302
                                                    (0.1716)    (0.1739)   (0.2652)    (0.2361)   (0.1777)   (0.1712)




                                                               40
     Table A.4: Survival Rates to Grade 5 and Secondary Enrollment Rates by Sex
                     Survival Rate to Grade 5 Net Secondary Enrollment Rate
      Country         Female         Male     Female          Male
      Argentina          98           95          84               75
      Brazil            NA           NA           85               78
      Chile              97           96          87               84
      Colombia       88 (Avg.)    88 (Avg.)       75               68
      Indonesia          89           83          68               69




41
      Mexico             95           93          74               71
      Thailand          NA           NA           77               68
      Tunisia            96           96          76               67
      Turkey             94           94          70               77
      United States 94 (Avg.)     94 (Avg.)       89               88
      Uruguay            96           93          71               64
      NA: Data not available
      Avg: Average across both sexes. Data not available by sex.
      Data: UNESCO (2010)
          Table A.5: Descriptive Statistics for Chilean Administrative Data
                                                    Observations    Mean     Standard Deviation
Birth Weight (in Grams)                               1687269      3357.58        512.08
Fraction Fullterm Births (38-40 Weeks Gestation)      1687269       0.804         0.396
Fraction of Mothers Married                           1481512        0.41
Mother’s Education: Primary School                    1679693       0.27
Mother’s Education: High School                       1679693       0.58
Mother’s Education: College                           1679693       0.14
Fraction of Mothers Employed                          1686582       0.25
Fraction Twins Both Male                                25619        0.34
Fraction Twins of Mixed Sex                             25619        0.24
Fraction Twins Both Female                              25619        0.42
Fraction of Students Male in Sample                   1687269       0.502           0.50
Class size in 4th grade                               1675350       31.82          13.88
Fraction Male in 4th Grade                            1675350        0.51           0.18
Class size in 8th grade                                784973       34.33           16.3
Fraction Male in 8th Grade                             784973        0.50           0.18




                                               42
                      Table A.6: Linear Regression of Top Scores for Pooled PISA Data
                                                 (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)

                           Above Quantile        50           50             75              75          90            90           95            95

                                     Male      0.115***      0.104***     0.0969***       0.0863***   0.0576***      0.0509***   0.0358***      0.0318***
                                               (0.00210)    (0.00202)      (0.00187)      (0.00177)    (0.00133)     (0.00127)   (0.000973)    (0.000944)
                                      Age     -0.0644***   -0.0397***     -0.0336***     -0.0100***   -0.0110***      0.00344      -0.00175    0.00692***
                                               (0.00383)    (0.00366)      (0.00341)      (0.00322)    (0.00242)     (0.00231)    (0.00177)     (0.00171)
                                Year 2009    -0.00926***   -0.0247***    -0.00543***     -0.0154***    -0.00222*   -0.00751***    -0.000904   -0.00314***
                                               (0.00214)    (0.00249)      (0.00190)      (0.00219)    (0.00135)     (0.00157)   (0.000989)     (0.00117)
                         Grade 8 or Below      -0.242***    -0.198***      -0.138***     -0.0985***   -0.0567***    -0.0338***   -0.0275***    -0.0142***
                                               (0.00386)    (0.00370)      (0.00343)      (0.00325)    (0.00243)     (0.00233)    (0.00178)     (0.00173)
                                 Grade 10      0.298***      0.241***      0.208***        0.154***   0.0981***      0.0650***   0.0513***      0.0313***
                                               (0.00263)    (0.00254)      (0.00234)      (0.00224)    (0.00166)     (0.00160)    (0.00122)     (0.00119)
                        Grade 11 or Above      0.364***      0.288***      0.275***        0.201***    0.137***      0.0910***   0.0784***      0.0505***
                                               (0.00497)    (0.00478)      (0.00442)      (0.00420)    (0.00313)     (0.00301)    (0.00230)     (0.00224)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 1                    -0.00566*                    -0.0152***                -0.00874***                -0.00542***
                                                            (0.00319)                     (0.00280)                  (0.00201)                  (0.00149)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 2                    0.0196***                      0.00231                  -0.00418**                -0.00407***
                                                            (0.00320)                     (0.00281)                  (0.00201)                  (0.00150)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 3                    0.0614***                     0.0519***                 0.0276***                  0.0138***
                                                            (0.00349)                     (0.00307)                  (0.00220)                  (0.00163)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 4                    0.0524***                     0.0319***                 0.0112***                     0.00315
                                                            (0.00413)                     (0.00363)                  (0.00260)                  (0.00193)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 5                    0.00746**                     0.0156***                 0.0188***                  0.0137***
                                                            (0.00325)                     (0.00286)                  (0.00205)                  (0.00152)
        Mother Educated at ISCED Level 6                   0.0297***                     0.0575***                  0.0442***                  0.0302***
                                                            (0.00389)                     (0.00342)                  (0.00245)                  (0.00182)
         Mother Has Upper Blue Collar Job                  0.0492***                     0.0334***                  0.0151***                    0.00365*
                                                            (0.00426)                     (0.00375)                  (0.00268)                  (0.00200)
        Mother Has Upper White Collar Job                   0.108***                      0.103***                  0.0648***                  0.0414***
                                                            (0.00308)                     (0.00271)                  (0.00194)                  (0.00144)
       Mother Has Lower White Collar Job                    0.0615***                     0.0481***                 0.0231***                 0.00917***
                                                            (0.00290)                     (0.00255)                  (0.00183)                  (0.00136)
          Father Has Upper Blue Collar Job                   0.00261                       0.00118                    0.00117                    0.00110
                                                            (0.00265)                     (0.00233)                  (0.00167)                  (0.00124)
        Father Has Upper White Collar Job                  0.0951***                     0.0962***                  0.0586***                  0.0354***
                                                            (0.00288)                     (0.00254)                  (0.00182)                  (0.00135)
        Father Has Lower White Collar Job                  0.0429***                     0.0298***                  0.0102***                 0.00468***
                                                            (0.00332)                     (0.00292)                  (0.00209)                  (0.00155)
                      Mother Is Immigrant                  -0.0755***                    -0.0220***                   0.00313                 0.00789***
                                                            (0.00623)                     (0.00548)                  (0.00392)                  (0.00292)
                             Wealth Index                   0.0428***                    0.0372***                  0.0223***                  0.0128***
                                                            (0.00112)                    (0.000984)                 (0.000705)                 (0.000524)
      Childs Household Has 11 to 25 Books                  0.0280***                     0.0143***                    0.00228                   -0.000523
                                                            (0.00259)                     (0.00228)                  (0.00163)                  (0.00121)
     Childs Household Has 26 to 100 Books                   0.108***                     0.0850***                  0.0416***                  0.0216***
                                                            (0.00284)                     (0.00250)                  (0.00179)                  (0.00133)
    Childs Household Has 101 to 200 Books                   0.134***                      0.129***                  0.0840***                  0.0514***
                                                            (0.00422)                     (0.00371)                  (0.00266)                  (0.00198)
    Childs Household Has 201 to 500 Books                   0.183***                      0.199***                   0.139***                  0.0966***
                                                            (0.00571)                     (0.00503)                  (0.00360)                  (0.00268)
Childs Household Has More Than 500 Books                    0.123***                      0.153***                   0.125***                  0.0828***
                                                            (0.00743)                     (0.00653)                  (0.00468)                  (0.00348)
                                 Constant     1.293***      0.841***      0.612***         0.181***   0.187***       -0.0743**     0.0297       -0.128***
                                              (0.0600)       (0.0574)     (0.0534)         (0.0505)   (0.0378)        (0.0362)    (0.0277)       (0.0269)
                        Country Dummies          Yes            Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes             Yes         Yes            Yes

                            Observations      199,268       199,268        199,268         199,268     199,268      199,268       199,268      199,268
                               R-squared       0.131         0.209          0.082           0.184       0.040        0.127         0.023        0.087
                     Ratio Male to Female      1.127         1.101          1.327           1.267       1.625        1.508         1.912        1.739
                                                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                                                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                             43
Table A.7: Linear Regression of Top Scores for Pooled PISA Data, Full Sample of PISA Coun-
tries
                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)

                            Above Quantile       50            50             75              75            90            90            95            95

                                      Male     0.0713***    0.0765***     0.0741***         0.0768***    0.0491***      0.0500***    0.0316***      0.0320***
                                               (0.00104)    (0.000984)    (0.000912)       (0.000868)    (0.000639)    (0.000620)    (0.000467)    (0.000459)
                                       Age    -0.0585***    -0.0354***    -0.0283***      -0.00952***   -0.00906***       0.00113   -0.00244***    0.00334***
                                               (0.00189)     (0.00178)     (0.00166)        (0.00157)     (0.00116)     (0.00112)    (0.000850)    (0.000832)
                                 Year 2009     -0.000448    -0.0307***     0.000182        -0.0172***     0.000399    -0.00644***     0.000352    -0.00277***
                                               (0.00107)     (0.00136)    (0.000941)        (0.00120)    (0.000660)    (0.000857)    (0.000482)    (0.000634)
                          Grade 8 or Below     -0.270***     -0.208***     -0.149***        -0.101***    -0.0601***    -0.0348***    -0.0284***    -0.0143***
                                               (0.00229)     (0.00218)     (0.00202)        (0.00192)     (0.00141)     (0.00137)     (0.00103)     (0.00101)
                                  Grade 10     0.270***      0.214***      0.192***          0.146***    0.0948***      0.0698***    0.0526***      0.0384***
                                               (0.00144)     (0.00137)     (0.00127)        (0.00121)    (0.000888)    (0.000866)    (0.000649)    (0.000640)
                        Grade 11 or Above      0.383***       0.298***     0.305***          0.234***     0.171***       0.132***     0.104***      0.0816***
                                               (0.00324)     (0.00307)     (0.00284)        (0.00271)     (0.00199)     (0.00193)     (0.00146)     (0.00143)
         Mother Educated at ISCED Level 1                  -0.00582***                     -0.0165***                  -0.0119***                 -0.00709***
                                                             (0.00218)                      (0.00192)                   (0.00137)                   (0.00102)
         Mother Educated at ISCED Level 2                   0.0147***                      0.00338**                    0.000182                    -8.54e-05
                                                             (0.00176)                      (0.00156)                   (0.00111)                  (0.000822)
         Mother Educated at ISCED Level 3                   0.0640***                      0.0435***                   0.0202***                   0.0104***
                                                             (0.00160)                      (0.00141)                   (0.00101)                  (0.000747)
         Mother Educated at ISCED Level 4                   0.0172***                     0.00688***                    -0.000979                   -0.00117*
                                                             (0.00142)                      (0.00126)                  (0.000897)                  (0.000664)
         Mother Educated at ISCED Level 5                   0.0190***                      0.0242***                   0.0161***                   0.0108***
                                                             (0.00137)                      (0.00120)                  (0.000861)                  (0.000637)
         Mother Educated at ISCED Level 6                   0.0336***                       0.0580***                   0.0434***                   0.0283***
                                                             (0.00181)                      (0.00160)                   (0.00114)                  (0.000845)
          Mother Has Upper Blue Collar Job                  0.0436***                       0.0263***                   0.0110***                  0.00371***
                                                             (0.00226)                      (0.00199)                   (0.00143)                   (0.00105)
         Mother Has Upper White Collar Job                   0.131***                        0.103***                   0.0555***                   0.0315***
                                                             (0.00139)                      (0.00122)                  (0.000874)                  (0.000647)
        Mother Has Lower White Collar Job                    0.0708***                      0.0434***                   0.0190***                  0.00924***
                                                             (0.00135)                      (0.00119)                  (0.000847)                  (0.000627)
           Father Has Upper Blue Collar Job                 0.0211***                       0.0108***                 0.00400***                   0.00194***
                                                             (0.00136)                      (0.00120)                  (0.000858)                  (0.000634)
         Father Has Upper White Collar Job                   0.126***                        0.103***                   0.0553***                   0.0316***
                                                             (0.00136)                      (0.00120)                  (0.000855)                  (0.000633)
         Father Has Lower White Collar Job                   0.0534***                      0.0345***                   0.0130***                  0.00561***
                                                             (0.00171)                      (0.00151)                   (0.00108)                  (0.000799)
                       Mother Is Immigrant                  0.00585***                      0.0174***                   0.0157***                   0.0111***
                                                             (0.00160)                      (0.00141)                   (0.00101)                  (0.000747)
                              Wealth Index                  0.00243***                    0.00151***                  0.00141***                   0.000566**
                                                            (0.000591)                     (0.000521)                  (0.000372)                  (0.000275)
       Childs Household Has 11 to 25 Books                   0.0556***                      0.0283***                 0.00988***                   0.00431***
                                                             (0.00162)                      (0.00143)                   (0.00102)                  (0.000754)
      Childs Household Has 26 to 100 Books                    0.162***                       0.100***                   0.0432***                   0.0214***
                                                             (0.00156)                      (0.00138)                  (0.000986)                  (0.000729)
     Childs Household Has 101 to 200 Books                    0.239***                       0.168***                   0.0804***                   0.0422***
                                                             (0.00185)                      (0.00163)                   (0.00117)                  (0.000863)
     Childs Household Has 201 to 500 Books                    0.321***                       0.259***                    0.139***                   0.0794***
                                                             (0.00206)                      (0.00182)                   (0.00130)                  (0.000960)
 Childs Household Has More Than 500 Books                     0.293***                       0.258***                    0.158***                   0.0957***
                                                             (0.00241)                      (0.00213)                   (0.00152)                   (0.00112)
                                  Constant    1.254***        0.736***     0.562***          0.159***    0.170***       -0.0408**   0.0453***      -0.0736***
                                              (0.0305)        (0.0289)     (0.0268)          (0.0255)    (0.0188)        (0.0182)    (0.0137)        (0.0135)
                         Country Dummies         Yes             Yes          Yes               Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes             Yes

                              Observations     862,283      862,283        862,283           862,283     862,283       862,283       862,283       862,283
                                R-squared       0.078        0.180           0.052            0.149       0.028         0.096         0.018         0.062
                            Above Quantile        50          50               75               75         90            90            95            95
                      Ratio Male to Female      1.125        1.137           1.315            1.330       1.610         1.625         1.878         1.893
                                                                   Standard errors in parentheses
                                                                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                              44
                     Table A.8: Cross-Country Regression of PISA Reading Gender Gap
                                            Dependent Variable: Gender Gap at Mean in PISA Reading Scores
                              (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)               (8)

Constant               -0.138***    -0.0442**     -0.197**        -0.801         0.0529          0.236      -0.107***        -0.0456
                          (0.011)      (0.022)      (0.093)        (0.97)         (0.14)         (0.24)        (0.027)         (0.28)

                                    0.000743*    0.000364      0.000364       -0.000667      -0.000180     0.000887**     0.0000199
GDP Per Capita
                                     (0.00044)   (0.00042)     (0.00045)       (0.00053)      (0.00058)      (0.00041)     (0.00092)

Cellular                            -0.108***    -0.123***     -0.130***      -0.104***    -0.0997***      -0.0962***     -0.101***
Subscriptions                          (0.021)      (0.023)       (0.025)        (0.019)       (0.027)         (0.026)       (0.027)

Math Gender                                                                                                  0.668***      1.198***
Gap                                                                                                             (0.11)        (0.22)

Male Literacy                                                                              -0.00587**                       0.00227
Rate                                                                                          (0.0028)                      (0.0021)

Female Literacy                                                                               0.00307*                      -0.00259
Rate                                                                                           (0.0016)                      (0.0029)

WVS: University                                                                 -0.0504                                     -0.107**
more important                                                                   (0.044)                                      (0.045)
for a boy

WVS: Men have                                                                    0.0393                                     -0.0974*
more right to                                                                    (0.052)                                      (0.049)
scarce jobs

WVS: Men make                                                                 0.0822**                                       0.0184
better political                                                                (0.040)                                      (0.049)
leaders

WVS: Being                                                                  -0.0947***                                       -0.0304
housewife as                                                                    (0.024)                                       (0.031)
fulfilling as paid
work

Gender Gap                                           0.253                                                                  0.666**
Index                                                (0.15)                                                                   (0.28)

GGI: Economic                                                    -0.0157
Participation and                                                  (0.11)
Opportunity

GGI: Educational                                                 0.977**
Attainment                                                         (0.45)


GGI: Health and                                                   -0.176
Survival                                                           (1.08)


GGI: Political                                                    0.0243
Empowerment                                                       (0.052)


Observations                  62           62            56           56             42             33              62            27
R-squared                   0.00         0.37          0.40         0.44           0.65           0.48            0.61          0.90
                                  Robust standard errors in parentheses (weighted by population)
                                  * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                            Cellular subscriptions are in per person terms for 2009 (World Bank data);
                            GDP per capita is for 2009 in thousands of US dollars (World Bank data);
   WVS questions are on three- or four-point scale, with higher answers indicating stronger disagreement with the statement given;
                                      GGI and subindices are higher for more gender equality.



                                                                 45
Table A.9: Guiso Replication Using 2006 Data; Dependent Variable: Average Female Minus
Male Gap in PISA Math Score
                                                         (1)              (2)                (3)                  (4)


                          Gender Gap Index              334.0            -103.9          -194.5*                -104.5
                                                       (287.2)          (282.9)          (111.6)               (288.5)
                          Log per capita GDP         -58.96***          -29.60*          16.00**               -29.77*
                                                       (14.88)          (14.85)          (7.116)               (15.16)
                          Constant                     370.1**          377.0**           -12.93               378.8**
                                                       (153.3)          (167.6)          (72.19)               (170.9)
                          Excluded Countries     Limited to Guiso set     None      Indonesia, Romania     Israel, Slovenia

                          Observations                   35               48                 46                   46
                          R-squared                     0.367            0.131              0.114                0.133
                          Standard errors in parentheses
                          *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1




Table A.10: Guiso Replication Using 2009 Data; Dependent Variable: Average Female Minus
Male Gap in PISA Math Score
                                                (1)                               (2)                            (3)                              (4)

 Gender Gap Index                    144.9*            104.0                                               80.47                                101.1
                                     (85.38)          (72.23)                                             (69.07)                              (70.96)
 Log per capita GDP                -20.44***        -16.77***                                            -10.42**                            -16.61***
                                     (4.414)          (3.721)                                             (4.432)                              (3.658)
 Constant                            77.21*           68.13*                                               19.98                               68.69*
                                     (42.96)          (39.59)                                             (42.53)                              (38.87)
 Excluded Countries            Limited to Guiso set    None                                         Indonesia, Romania                    Israel, Slovenia

 Observations                    35                                               59                            57                                 57
 R-squared                     0.448                                            0.295                         0.094                              0.307
 Standard errors in parentheses
 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1


Table A.11: Guiso Replication Using 2006 and 2009 Data; Dependent Variable: Average Fe-
male Minus Male Gap in PISA Math Score
                                         (1)                     (2)                 (3)                   (4)                      (5)


       Gender Gap Index             14.26                 691.8                      -31.40              -469.1**                   -60.05
                                   (138.0)               (520.5)                    (406.5)               (199.6)                  (408.7)
       Log per capita GDP        -22.18***              139.4***                  159.6***               -62.49**                159.4***
                                   (7.171)               (40.37)                    (40.13)               (26.85)                  (40.28)
       Year 2009                 -43.65***             -97.75***                  -81.54***                -13.27                -80.72***
                                   (9.690)               (13.62)                    (12.47)               (8.801)                  (12.55)
       Constant                  226.6***              -1,764***                  -1,461***              932.6***                -1,440***
                                   (77.46)               (453.0)                    (442.0)               (305.1)                  (443.8)
       Country Fixed Effects         No                    Yes                        Yes                   Yes                      Yes
       Excluded Countries           None           Limited to Guiso set               None          Indonesia, Romania        Israel, Slovenia

       Observations                   107                       70                   107                   103                      103
       R-squared                     0.278                     0.855                0.813                 0.838                    0.818
       Standard errors in parentheses
       *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1



                                                                        46
Table A.12: Linear Regressions Including Sibling Data Using Pooled PISA Data
                                                                    (1)              (2)        (3)          (4)

                                             Above Quantile         50               75         90           95

                                                       Male     0.0893***       0.0619***     0.0326***    0.0207***
                                                                (0.00518)       (0.00457)     (0.00329)    (0.00245)
               (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters > 0)    0.0815***       0.0339***     0.00832***    0.00470**
                                                                (0.00495)       (0.00437)     (0.00314)    (0.00234)
                (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters = 0)    0.0996***       0.0462***     0.0106***      0.00300
                                                                (0.00521)       (0.00460)     (0.00330)    (0.00246)
                (Number brothers = 0) X (Number sisters > 0)    0.127***       0.0674***      0.0219***    0.00637**
                                                                (0.00564)       (0.00497)     (0.00357)    (0.00266)
        Male X (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters > 0)    0.0273***       0.0299***      0.0187***   0.00881***
                                                                (0.00704)       (0.00621)     (0.00446)    (0.00332)
         Male X (Number brothers = 0) X (Number sisters > 0)   0.0238***       0.0472***      0.0346***    0.0289***
                                                                (0.00819)       (0.00722)     (0.00519)    (0.00387)
         Male X (Number brothers > 0) X (Number sisters = 0)    0.0235***       0.0518***     0.0390***    0.0212***
                                                                (0.00747)       (0.00659)     (0.00474)    (0.00353)
                                                        Age    -0.0522***      -0.0251***      -0.00465      0.00211
                                                                (0.00495)       (0.00437)     (0.00314)    (0.00234)
                                           Grade 8 or Below     -0.168***      -0.0744***    -0.0234***   -0.0101***
                                                                (0.00495)       (0.00437)     (0.00314)    (0.00234)
                                                   Grade 10     0.248***        0.161***      0.0675***    0.0311***
                                                                (0.00337)       (0.00298)     (0.00214)    (0.00159)
                                          Grade 11 or Above     0.366***        0.276***       0.125***    0.0702***
                                                                (0.00721)       (0.00636)     (0.00457)    (0.00340)
                           Mother Educated at ISCED Level 1     0.0138***        -0.00440    -0.00738**   -0.00507**
                                                                (0.00453)       (0.00400)     (0.00287)    (0.00214)
                           Mother Educated at ISCED Level 2     0.0436***       0.0139***      -0.00415   -0.00532**
                                                                (0.00460)       (0.00406)     (0.00292)    (0.00217)
                           Mother Educated at ISCED Level 3     0.0915***       0.0666***     0.0278***    0.0112***
                                                                (0.00480)       (0.00423)     (0.00304)    (0.00226)
                           Mother Educated at ISCED Level 4      4.57e-05       -0.0206**    -0.0178***    -0.0111**
                                                                (0.00959)       (0.00846)     (0.00608)    (0.00453)
                           Mother Educated at ISCED Level 5     0.00803**       0.0274***     0.0307***    0.0215***
                                                                (0.00403)       (0.00356)     (0.00256)    (0.00190)
                           Mother Educated at ISCED Level 6    -0.0534***      -0.0154***     0.00961**    0.0143***
                                                                (0.00636)       (0.00561)     (0.00403)    (0.00300)
                           Mother Has Upper Blue Collar Job     0.0529***       0.0388***     0.0154***      0.00203
                                                                (0.00568)       (0.00501)     (0.00360)    (0.00268)
                          Mother Has Upper White Collar Job      0.101***       0.0953***     0.0592***    0.0367***
                                                                (0.00432)       (0.00381)     (0.00274)    (0.00204)
                          Mother Has Lower White Collar Job     0.0570***       0.0380***     0.0173***    0.00455**
                                                                (0.00392)       (0.00346)     (0.00248)    (0.00185)
                            Father Has Upper Blue Collar Job      0.00174        0.000787      0.000336    -0.000297
                                                                (0.00350)       (0.00309)     (0.00222)    (0.00165)
                           Father Has Upper White Collar Job    0.0913***       0.0995***     0.0646***    0.0420***
                                                                (0.00384)       (0.00339)     (0.00243)    (0.00181)
                           Father Has Lower White Collar Job    0.0342***       0.0238***     0.00634**      0.00231
                                                                (0.00444)       (0.00391)     (0.00281)    (0.00209)
                                        Mother Is Immigrant    -0.0744***      -0.0198***       0.00108      0.00634
                                                                (0.00867)       (0.00765)     (0.00550)    (0.00409)
                                               Wealth Index    0.0410***       0.0368***      0.0231***    0.0139***
                                                                (0.00153)       (0.00135)    (0.000971)   (0.000723)
                        Childs Household Has 11 to 25 Books     0.0237***       0.0115***       0.00231    -0.000518
                                                                (0.00343)       (0.00303)     (0.00218)    (0.00162)
                       Childs Household Has 26 to 100 Books     0.0940***       0.0727***     0.0367***    0.0196***
                                                                (0.00379)       (0.00335)     (0.00241)    (0.00179)
                      Childs Household Has 101 to 200 Books      0.115***        0.122***     0.0851***    0.0530***
                                                                (0.00569)       (0.00502)     (0.00361)    (0.00269)
                      Childs Household Has 201 to 500 Books      0.162***        0.182***      0.134***    0.0992***
                                                                (0.00776)       (0.00684)     (0.00492)    (0.00366)
                 Childs Household Has More Than 500 Books       0.0935***        0.134***      0.115***    0.0766***
                                                                 (0.0100)       (0.00883)     (0.00635)    (0.00473)
                                                   Constant     0.921***        0.350***        0.0269      -0.0634*
                                                                 (0.0779)        (0.0687)      (0.0494)     (0.0368)
                                          Country Dummies           Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes

                                               Observations      108,542           108,542    108,542      108,542
                                                  R-squared       0.231             0.201      0.140        0.098
                                        Ratio Male to Female      1.069             1.146      1.241        1.361
                                                  Standard errors in parentheses
                                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                               47
                                                               Table A.13: General Attitudes toward Classes and Gender
     Responses are in agree-        I am as capable       Generally under-       Have trouble con-     I do certain tasks    My    notebooks         I like to study for   It is important for   I take good notes
     ment with the statements       of learning as the    stand very little of   centrating in class   even though I find    are       usually       tests                 me to get good        in class
                                    rest of my peers      what happens in                              them difficult        incomplete                                    grades
                                                          class

     Male                           -0.0191***            -0.0168***             0.000815              0.116***              -0.0139***              0.0454***             0.0885***             0.0610***
                                    (0.00108)             (0.00136)              (0.00129)             (0.00163)             (0.00124)               (0.00169)             (0.00154)             (0.00160)
     Simce math score               0.0398***             -0.132***              -0.0887***            0.134***              -0.0951***              0.0619***             0.119***              0.0582***
                                    (0.000609)            (0.000766)             (0.000740)            (0.000916)            (0.000715)              (0.000960)            (0.000901)            (0.000931)
     Log Birth Weight               -0.00315              -0.0233***             -0.00641              0.0506***             -0.0236***              0.0241***             0.0385***             0.0321***




48
                                    (0.00334)             (0.00420)              (0.00397)             (0.00487)             (0.00386)               (0.00507)             (0.00456)             (0.00480)
     Constant                       0.977***              0.470***               0.260***              -0.0471               0.449***                0.0826**              -0.0121               0.0355
                                    (0.0273)              (0.0349)               (0.0330)              (0.0401)              (0.0322)                (0.0415)              (0.0376)              (0.0395)

     Observations                   391,258               387,355                385,156               386,128               383,740                 372,307               368,427               371,059
     R-squared                      0.067                 0.114                  0.111                 0.106                 0.086                   0.079                 0.104                 0.081
     Mean of dependent vari-        0.878                 0.200                  0.303                 0.700                 0.150                   0.433                 0.951                 0.467
     able
     Robust standard errors in parentheses
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Notes: controls are year of SIMCE test, full term birth, mother’s education, marital status and age. School fixed effects in all regressions.
