NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE "BIG C": IDENTIFYING CONTAGION
Kristin Forbes
Working Paper 18465
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18465
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012

A longer version of this paper (“The Big C: Identifying and Mitigating Contagion”) was prepared
for the 2012 Jackson Hole Symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City on 08/31/12
to 09/01/12. This longer version, which includes a detailed discussion of policy options, is available
at: http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2012/kf.pdf. Thanks to symposium participants—and
especially Franklin Allen—for insightful comments. Further thanks to Michael Klein for helpful suggestions,
and to Gautham Iyer and Neil Zimmerman for providing research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Kristin Forbes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The "Big C": Identifying Contagion
Kristin Forbes
NBER Working Paper No. 18465
October 2012
JEL No. F0,F1,F15,F2,F3,F6,G01,G15,G2
ABSTRACT
This paper surveys and assesses the academic literature on defining, measuring, and identifying financial
contagion and the various channels by which it can occur. It also includes new empirical analysis of
recent trends and causes of contagion, highlighting contagion risks in the euro area. The paper defines
“interdependence” as high correlations across markets during all states of the world and “contagion”
as the spillovers from extreme negative events. Interdependence has increased dramatically over time,
especially within the euro area, even after controlling for global shocks and changes in volatility. Not
surprisingly, negative events in one country also quickly affect others. Regression analysis shows that
a country is more vulnerable to contagion if it has a more levered banking system, greater trade exposure,
weaker macroeconomic fundamentals, and larger international portfolio investment liabilities. Countries
are less vulnerable, however, if they have larger international portfolio investment assets (which can
provide a buffer against shocks) and are less reliant on debt (versus equity) for international financing.
These results have important implications for understanding contagion and for analyzing policies designed
to mitigate contagion, especially for the current crisis in the euro area.
Kristin Forbes
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-416
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
kjforbes@mit.edu

I.

Introduction
In the Showtime TV series “The Big C”, the main character is diagnosed with a deadly cancer—

the “Big C”. In response, this suburban housewife suddenly takes out-of-character, impulsive actions—
from buying a bright red sports car to putting a large pool in her tiny backyard to having an affair with a
painter. She denies the severity of her disease and undergoes alternative treatment (such as being stung by
bees) rather than follow the standard protocol. All of these actions can provide a temporary distraction,
but they often have unintended consequences and in the end do nothing to stop the “Big C”. Eventually
the main character comes to grips with the inevitability of her disease and undergoes treatment—an
extremely difficult decision that may not succeed, but is her best chance for long-term survival.
Similarly, the “Big C” that is the focus of this paper—Contagion—can be deadly. Contagion can
cause a negative shock in one country to quickly spread to others through numerous real and financial
channels—precipitating turmoil in global financial markets and sharp declines in output and standards of
living. This legitimate fear of contagion can cause policymakers to take actions that they would not
normally consider. This paper will argue, however, that countries have become so interdependent in both
good and bad times that contagion is extremely difficult to stop. Many measures aimed at minimizing
contagion provide only a temporary reprieve and can aggravate contagion risks through other channels.
Just as the main character in the “Big C” eventually admits the inevitability of her disease and undertakes
painful treatment, policymakers concerned about contagion must fully address the underlying
vulnerabilities and adopt difficult measures. On a more positive note, just as lifestyle changes can reduce
the risks of many diseases in the future, policymakers concerned about contagion in the future can adopt
structural reforms to reduce (although not completely remove) contagion risks in the long term.
This paper is divided into six sections. The remainder of this section summarizes the key points
and results of the paper. Section II then discusses various definitions of contagion and how use of the
term has evolved over time. It also provides an overview of the different empirical strategies for
measuring contagion. The discussion shows that debate on these fundamentally important issues of how
to define and measure contagion is complicated and unresolved. The rest of the paper focuses on the
definition of contagion preferred by many policymakers (although not many in the academic community)
— when an extreme negative event in one country affects others. This type of “contagion” is distinct from
“interdependence”—when events in one country affect others in all states of the world and not just after
negative events. This section on the definitions and measurement of contagion can be skipped for readers
who would like to move directly to the new analysis.
Section III uses these definitions to evaluate whether interdependence and contagion have
increased over time based on two methodologies. First, it analyzes bilateral correlations in stock market
returns around the world since 1980. It shows that markets have become significantly more correlated and
1

this does not result from global shocks or increased volatility. Moreover, this comovement has increased
substantially more between countries in the euro area than in other countries. Markets around the world,
and especially in the euro area, are now more interdependent through good times as well as bad. The
second part of the analysis measures only the transmission of negative shocks across countries. It uses
extreme value analysis to document that countries today are more likely to experience extreme negative
stock market returns than in the past, especially in the euro area, and these extreme negative returns are
more likely when other countries are also experiencing negative returns. There continues to be robust
evidence of this contagion even after controlling for global shocks.
Section IV then moves to the critically important issue of why countries’ markets are so closely
linked and how contagion occurs. It summarizes the theoretical and empirical literature and divides this
extensive literature into four main channels of contagion: trade, banks, portfolio investors, and wake-up
calls/fundamentals reassessment. There are other ways to categorize the channels for contagion, but this
framework is useful later in the paper when assessing how contagion occurs. A graphical analysis shows a
striking increase in integration through trade, banking and portfolio investment across countries over
time—especially in the euro area. Given this increase in integration, it is not surprising that
interdependence and contagion have increased over time—especially in the euro area.
These trends are confirmed in a more formal regression analysis of how extreme negative returns
are transmitted across countries. There is evidence that all four channels of contagion (trade, banks,
portfolio investment and fundamentals reassessment) are significant determinants of a country’s
vulnerability to extreme returns in other countries. Contagion in the euro area does not exhibit any
different patterns than for the full sample. The empirical results, however, also suggest that the simplistic
interpretation that “more integration = more contagion” misses important subtleties. Although greater
international exposure through portfolio investment liabilities can increase vulnerability to contagion,
greater exposure through portfolio assets can reduce vulnerability. This may result from better risk
diversification or the ability of countries with large international investment positions to “retrench” by
selling foreign assets after negative shocks to provide stability at home. The results also suggest that
greater reliance on debt (versus equity) tends to increase country vulnerability, undoubtedly due to the
natural risk sharing properties of equity. A final important result is the role of leverage in the domestic
banking system. Leverage is a significant determinant of a country’s vulnerability to contagion—and even
more consistently important than the country’s overall international banking exposure.
The results of this empirical analysis have important implications for evaluating various policies
to mitigate contagion. This paper, however, does not discuss the pros and cons of various policies that can
mitigate contagion. Instead, a full discussion of the policy implications is available in a longer version of
this paper available at: http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2012/kf.pdf. This longer version of
2

the paper discusses measures that could be taken a priori to reduce contagion over the long term as well
as situations when contagion risks are imminent and policies are aimed at providing immediate relief.
While this paper focuses on contagion around the world, Section V ends by discussing special
considerations in the euro area.1 It is not surprising that the area’s high levels of integration through trade,
banking and portfolio investment—integration that was a key goal of union—correspond to high levels of
interdependence and contagion within the region today. The unique structure of the euro area, however,
creates additional considerations. For example, the lack of an independent currency and central bank
complicates countries’ adjustment to negative shocks that originate elsewhere and highlights the
importance of having flexible economies. The lack of a traditional lender-of-last resort to back large
international bank exposures increases vulnerability to contagion through bank runs and highlights the
importance of this channel of contagion. The institutional and macroeconomic similarities between many
euro area countries increase contagion risks through “wake-up calls.” This highlights the importance of
considering externalities to other countries when designing policies. For example, policies which impose
additional fiscal liabilities on other countries (even through joint institutions such as the ECB, ESM or
EFSF) can create additional risks by increasing their vulnerability to contagion through negative
reassessments of their debt sustainability.
The discussion in this paper highlights why it is so difficult—if not impossible—to stop
contagion. Contagion can take many forms and most of the channels of contagion result from a healthy
interdependence between countries in good times, as well as bad. Although there are steps that can be
taken to reduce vulnerabilities to contagion in the future, once a negative shock occurs in one country,
there are no easy fixes for ending contagion in an integrated world. But this does not mean that the risks
should be ignored. Just as the other “Big C” can be deadly, contagion can be devastating. Just as there are
legitimate protocols that can successfully fend off certain types of cancer, there are policies that can
effectively fend off certain forms of contagion. A careful evaluation of options to address both “Big C’s”
needs to thoroughly consider not only what the action can realistically accomplish, but also if there will
be any side effects that increase contagion risks in the future.

II. Defining and Measuring Contagion
A.

What Do We Mean by Contagion?
Although “contagion” is currently part of the standard lexicon of economists and investors, use of

the term to describe the international transmission of financial turmoil is fairly recent. Figure 1 shows
1

There is, however, minimal discussion of contagion to low income countries. This does not imply that contagion to
these countries is unimportant, especially given their more limited ability to respond to negative shocks. Data for
these countries is more limited so they drop from the empirical analysis. Most contagion to lower income economies
is also generally more predictable, more easily addressed through standard policies, and generates fewer spillovers
to the rest of the world. IMF (2011) discusses contagion from the euro area to low income countries.

3

results from a Factiva search of monthly use of the term “contagion” in articles in the economics or
financial/commodities press since 1990.2 The term contagion was rarely used before 1995, after which it
occasionally appeared in articles discussing the impact of the Mexican Peso crisis on other countries in
Latin America. Use of the term was extremely limited, however, and barely visible on the figure without a
magnifying glass. It was not until Thailand’s 1997 devaluation affected other countries in Asia, and then
Russia’s 1998 devaluation affected global financial markets, that contagion became standard economics
terminology and fears of contagion became a regular concern of policymakers. These events prompted a
series of academic papers in the early 2000’s attempting to measure, understand, predict, and prevent
international financial contagion.
Despite the numerous papers on this topic and widespread use of the term “contagion” to describe
the international spread of financial crises, there is extensive disagreement on exactly what the term
means.3 Table 1 shows the diversity in definitions adopted in academic papers on the subject. Most papers
agree that if a shock to one country is transmitted to another country to which it is not traditionally linked
through channels such as trade, bank loans or other investment flows, then this qualifies as contagion. A
common example of this obvious case of contagion is when the 1998 Russian crisis affected stock
markets as diverse as Brazil, Thailand, and the United States. Some economists have proposed using the
more specific terms “shift-contagion” or “pure contagion” to describe this scenario when there is a
significant increase or “shift” in cross-market linkages after a shock to an individual country. Most
economists also agree that a major global shock—such as a sharp increase in commodity prices—does not
qualify as contagion, even if it causes increased comovement in markets around the world.
The disagreements on how to define contagion are more numerous. When a shock to one country
spreads to others that are economically similar or that are closely linked through trade or financial
flows—is this contagion? For example, if U.S. growth falters and equity markets decline and this affects
Canada, would this necessarily constitute contagion? Another set of disagreements is on whether only
certain types of cross-market linkages constitute contagion. More specifically, some economists argue
that only the transmission of the most extreme negative events should qualify as contagion. Others argue
that only any residual transmission of shocks after controlling for “fundamentals” is contagion. Still
others argue that “rational” investor behavior that transmits shocks through financial markets is not
contagion, but “irrational” behavior is. Even if there was agreement on what constituted “fundamental
linkages” or “rational behavior”, these stricter definitions of contagion are extremely difficult to
implement and measure in practice. For example, if mutual funds respond to a fall in Brazil’s market by

2

There are several earlier examples of use of the term financial contagion in the academic literature, such as King
and Wadhwani (1990), Allen and Gale (2000), and the literature on domestic banking collapses.
3
For more information on different definitions of contagion, see Claessens and Forbes (2001), Claessens,
Dornbusch, and Park (2001), Forbes and Rigobon (2002), Karolyi (2003), and Dungey et al. (2010).

4

selling investments in Bulgaria in order to satisfy investor withdrawals, does this qualify as a
“fundamental” linkage between the countries (that share little other than their names starting with a “B”)?
Finally, one issue which has received little attention in the debate on how to define contagion is
what constitutes a “global shock”. In earlier work on contagion, changes in U.S. growth or U.S. interest
rates were considered “global” shocks and were not classified as contagion. But would a shock to the
United States (such as the subprime crisis in 2007) that spreads to other countries qualify as contagion?
Taking this one step further, what if a shock to a smaller country triggers a global or systemic shock? 4 In
earlier work on contagion, changes in global liquidity, global risk, or global interest rates were not
considered contagion. Many of the recent academic papers analyzing the spread of the GFC avoid the
term “contagion”—undoubtedly due to this difficulty in classifying these global shocks that were a key
transmission mechanism for the crisis and inherently different than the bilateral linkages that were
previously the focus of academic work.5 Most policymakers today, however, would consider global
shocks which originate in the world’s largest economies or result from shocks to smaller economies as
examples of contagion. This suggests that even aspects of the definition of contagion on which there was
initial agreement have evolved over time.
This debate on exactly how to define contagion is not just academic; it has important implications
for measuring contagion and evaluating policy responses. Many economists argue a more restrictive
definition of contagion is useful in order to better understand how crises are transmitted and what should
be done. They highlight the importance of differentiating between cross-country linkages that exist at all
times—what is often called interdependence—versus linkages that only exist briefly after shocks. For
example, if a crisis in one country spreads to others through fundamental trade linkages that exist in all
states of the world, policies that provide liquidity or financial assistance will be less effective in reducing
contagion and just delay a necessary adjustment. But if the crisis spreads through transmission channels
that only exist briefly after shocks—such as panicked selling by investors or a temporary withdrawal of
liquidity by banks—then policies to provide liquidity or financial assistance until economic relationships
stabilize could potentially avoid an unnecessary and painful adjustment.
On the other hand, most citizens and government officials prefer a broader definition of
contagion. For example, ECB (2005) writes: “When a crisis in the stock market of one country causes a
crisis in the stock market of another country this can be thought of as financial market contagion.” If a
country’s economic outlook suddenly deteriorates after a crisis in a neighboring country, citizens do not
generally care how the shock has been transmitted to them. They simply know that they are being affected
4

In a paper ahead of its time, de Bandt and Hartmann (2000) discuss how a shock to one country can cause
contagion and systemic risks through bank failures, financial markets, and payment and settlement risks.
5
Different papers focus on different global shocks, such as to international banking, liquidity, risk aversion,
demand, and counterparty risk. For examples, see Eichengreen et al. (2009), Chudik and Fratzscher (2011), Forbes
and Warnock (2012), Fratzscher (2012), and Calomiris et al. (2010).

5

by problems that originated in another country and classify any spillover effects as contagion. Blaming
contagion—even if it occurred through fundamental linkages that exist at all times—can be a powerful
justification for policy action to support an economy. Moreover, even if policymakers wished to use a
stricter definition, identifying the various forms of contagion can be extremely difficult in real time.
This paper will adopt what has evolved into the most common usage of the term contagion—the
transmission of an extreme negative shock in one country to another country (or group of countries). This
definition is broader than the terminology used in much of the academic literature and includes the spread
of crises through trade, banks, and other fundamental linkages between countries that exist in stable as
well as crisis periods. It also includes examples in which a shock to one country evolves into a global
shock—such as a contraction in global liquidity or increase in risk aversion. This broad definition of
contagion is closest to the use by governments, citizens and policymakers—the fear that negative events
in another country, outside of their control, could spread and have deleterious effects at home. While this
definition of contagion only focuses on spillovers from extreme negative events, the paper will also use
the term “interdependence” to capture cross-country spillovers in all states of the world.

B.

Measuring Contagion
Table 1 shows not only the different definitions of contagion in the academic literature, but also

the range of approaches for measuring it. Much of the earlier literature focused on the fundamental
question of whether contagion actually occurred during major crises—an apparently straightforward
question complicated by several statistical issues. This section briefly summarizes the advantages,
disadvantages and key insights of the five general strategies for measuring contagion: probability
analysis, cross-market correlations, VAR models, latent factor/GARCH models, and extreme value
analysis.6 Most of these papers focus on contagion across equity markets because data is available at a
high frequency for a large sample of countries over long periods of time. Equity valuations are also useful
if they reflect expectations about future economic activity. A few papers also consider contagion in bond
markets, interest rates, and exchange rates. This section only summarizes the literature measuring
contagion in general and leaves a discussion of the specific channels of contagion (such as through trade,
banks, etc.) to Section IV.

1. Probability analysis: One of the earliest approaches for evaluating the existence and importance of
contagion used probability models to assess whether a crisis occurring in a “ground zero” country
affected the likelihood that another country would have a crisis.7 These papers generally find evidence
6

More detailed reviews of the literature measuring contagion include: Claessens et al. (2001), Forbes and Rigobon
(2001), and Dungey et al. (2010).
7
See Eichengreen, Rose and Wyplosz (1996), De Gregorio and Valdés (2001) and Forbes (2002).

6

that the probability of a country having a crisis increases if there is a crisis elsewhere—their definition of
contagion—especially for countries in the same region. This general approach has been extended more
recently to test for a role of contagion in explaining sharp movements in capital flows (i.e., Forbes and
Warnock, 2012) and default probabilities derived from credit default swaps (i.e., Constancio, 2012).
These papers generally find evidence of contagion, although they have limited success in controlling for
endogeneity (feedback effects) and omitted variables that could simultaneously cause events to occur in
multiple countries.

2. Cross-market correlations: In the late 1990’s, the most popular framework for analyzing contagion was
to test if correlations in equity returns (or interest rates, exchange rates, or sovereign spreads) across
different economies increased significantly after a crisis.8 These studies generally found evidence that
market comovement increased significantly during most crises—which was interpreted as evidence of
contagion. Forbes and Rigobon (2002), however, show that the increased volatility during crises
automatically generated an upward bias in correlation coefficients. They show that markets are highly
“interdependent” in all states of the world, and we are simply more aware of this usual interdependence
during periods of high volatility. Corrections for this heteroskedasticity in asset price movements lead to
much less evidence of contagion—although different corrections require fairly restrictive assumptions
that are often not satisfied in practice.9 Moreover, even if this challenge of adjusting for heteroscedasticity
in returns is resolved, tests for contagion based on correlation coefficients also have challenges
controlling for any feedback effects (endogeneity) and common shocks (omitted variables) when
estimating the effect of a crisis in one country on another. These econometric challenges in using
correlation coefficients to measure contagion caused most academics to stop using cross-market
correlations to analyze the transmission of crises.

3. VAR models: Closely related to using correlation coefficients to analyze contagion is to use a vector
autoregression (VAR) framework.10 These models generally predict stock market returns or yield spreads
while controlling for global factors and country-specific factors, as well as for the persistence of these
factors through error-correction techniques. Contagion is then measured with an impulse-response
function predicting the impact of an unanticipated shock to one country on others. These tests are less
conservative than those based on correlation coefficients as they generally do not adjust for the

8

For early examples of this approach, see King and Wadhwani (1990) and Bordo and Murshid (2001).
For different approaches to resolving these issues, see Forbes and Rigobon (2002), Boyer, Gibson, and Loretan
(1997), and Boyer, Kumagai, and Yuan (2006).
10
Examples of this approach are: Favero and Giavazzi (2002), and Constancio (2012).
9

7

heteroskedasticity in returns (and attempts to make this adjustment generate fragile results). Not
surprisingly, papers using VARs generally find more evidence of contagion.

4. Latent factor/GARCH models: The challenges of using correlation coefficients and VARs to analyze
contagion prompted a series of papers using latent factor and GARCH models that allow return variances
to change across regimes.11 Many of these papers focus on estimating spillovers in volatility, i.e., crossmarket movements in the second moments of asset prices, instead of spillovers in prices. Studies using
this approach generally find evidence of contagion from one country to others in certain circumstances,
but not in all crises. Most of these studies also attempt to control for fundamental factors in their analysis
and define contagion more strictly as the “excess correlation” after controlling for fundamentals. Since
this measure of contagion is based on the correlation in the model residuals, this raises some questions
about what is actually being captured in the residuals and whether any contagion could be caused by
global shocks or any other omitted variables not captured in the model.

5. Extreme Values/Co-exceedance/Jump approach: A final approach to measuring contagion builds on
the initial probability approach by using multivariate extreme value theory to test whether tail
observations in returns are correlated across countries.12 The extreme moments analyzed in these papers
are periods when realizations of certain variables exceed a large threshold value (either in absolute value
or relative to the distribution of returns)—with different approaches used to define these “exceedances”.
A closely related literature focuses on periods when there is a significant “jump” (i.e., large movement) in
prices. These approaches have a number of advantages. They do not assume the transmission of shocks is
linear or focus on daily relationships between markets. Instead they only focus on the impact of large
(usually negative) shocks—which is closer to the broader definition of contagion of concern to
policymakers. These approaches are also robust to different distributional assumptions about returns and
therefore can avoid many of the econometric problems with other approaches (such as VAR and
correlation analyses). Papers using this approach generally find evidence of contagion during some crises
(such as the Russian crisis), but not all. This approach has two disadvantages: the sample of extreme
moments is often small and it is difficult to control for any global shocks that could cause an extreme
value in multiple markets at once and therefore be interpreted as contagion.

11

For examples of this literature, see Hamao et al. (1990), Bekaert et al. (2005), Dungey et al. (2010), and Bekaert et
al. (2011).
12
Morgenstern (1959) appears to be the first example of this approach—although he does not use the term
contagion. More recent examples of papers using extreme value theory are: Bae et al. (2003), Longin and Solnik
(2001), Hartman et al. (2004) Boyer et al. (2006), and Boyson et al. (2010). Papers analyzing jumps include: AitSahalia, Cacho-Diaz, and Laeven (2010) and Pukthuanthong and Roll (2012).

8

Each of these approaches for measuring contagion has its advantages and disadvantages. The
preferred strategy depends largely on the operational definition of contagion being tested. For example,
correlation analysis is useful for measuring the interdependence between markets in all states of the world
and factor models are useful for measuring spillovers in volatility across markets after controlling for
measurable fundamentals. Extreme-value analysis is emerging as potentially the cleanest approach to
measuring the most common definition of contagion—any transmission of extreme negative shocks. Each
approach has the imposing challenge, however, of controlling for global shocks that simultaneously cause
a crisis in one country while increasing comovement between many countries. More important, even
when these approaches are successfully used to identify whether contagion does or does not occur, they
still do not answer the fundamental question of why a negative shock is transmitted internationally and
through what channels contagion occurs.

III. Contagion over Time
Figure 1 shows that use of the term “contagion” in the business press has increased sharply since
1997—and especially since 2007. But has contagion actually increased over time? Even though the term
is relatively new to the lexicon of international economists, examples of contagion have existed for 200
years (if not longer). Kindleberger (1989) and Bordo and Murshid (2001) document historic examples of
financial panics in one country spreading globally. For example, in 1825 a banking crisis started in Britain
and quickly spread to continental Europe and then to Latin America. In 1857 the direction of transmission
reversed, when a banking panic in the United States spread to the United Kingdom and continental
Europe, and then affected regions as far away as South America, South Africa and the Far East. Crises
which start in one country and spread internationally, especially through banking and other financial
channels, are not a new phenomenon.
Ironically given this long history of crises being transmitted globally, much of the discussion
about contagion in the mid-2000’s argued that contagion risks had permanently declined.13 This
discussion was prompted by the fact that recent crises had much weaker international repercussions. For
example, although the 1997 and 1998 crises in Thailand and Russia both spread internationally, the 2001
crises in Argentina and Turkey had minimal spillover effects. One reason cited for reduced contagion was
that investors had improved their risk analysis and country assessment tools. Another reason was that
emerging markets had improved their macroeconomic policies in ways that would reduce their
vulnerability to external events (such as greater exchange rate flexibility). Didier et al. (2008) discuss

13

For example, JP Morgan (2004) writes: “there has been a structural decline of contagion across emerging market
credits as evidenced by the lack of volatility following Argentina’s 2001 default.”

9

these arguments and show that when contagion is measured as bilateral correlations in bond spreads, there
was less contagion in emerging markets in 2000-2007 relative to 1994-1999.
The last few years, however, have unfortunately shown that these forecasts of diminished
contagion were optimistic. A crisis that began in the U.S. subprime market in 2007 had global
ramifications. Events in the euro area have been a key driver of global markets throughout 2010-2012.
The remainder of this section tests whether interdependence and contagion across global markets have
increased over time and whether these relationships have evolved differently in the euro area. Section A
uses a framework popular in the academic and investor literature—examining patterns in cross-market
correlations—to test for changes in interdependence between countries in all states of the world. Section
B then builds on the recently-popular approach of focusing on the coincidence of extreme returns to
measure contagion from extreme negative events. Although a number of papers in the 2000s examined
the evolution of contagion over time, many reached conflicting results and did not address the
econometric issues discussed in Section II.14 This is the first analysis (to my knowledge) that: (1) uses
extreme value analysis to study the evolution of contagion over time; and (2) examines whether
interdependence and contagion within the euro area has evolved differently than in other countries.

A.

Correlation Analysis
This section analyzes the bilateral correlations in equity returns from 1980 through June 2012 in a

sample of 48 countries around the world. Equity returns are a useful basis for this analysis as they should
incorporate all available information on the expected future profitability of companies in a country—and
therefore capture expected changes in real indicators. Equity returns are also available at a high
frequency; this ability to better identify the effect of various shocks is critically important during crises
when events have rapid effects. Finally, although other high frequency measures are useful (such as CDS
or bond spreads), many of these are not available for as long a time series or for as broad a set of
countries as equity returns.
To calculate the comovement in stock returns across the 48 countries in the sample (listed in
Appendix A), I begin by calculating the moving 52-week correlations between each pair of countries for
each week possible.15 This generates a large matrix of bilateral correlations—of up to 1,128 country-pairs

14

Noteworthy papers analyzing whether contagion has changed over time include: Bekaert and Harvey (1995),
Karolyi (2003), Bordo and Murshid (2001), Goetzmann et al. (2005), Quinn and Voth (2008), and Bekaert et al.
(2011). There is some disagreement across papers on whether contagion has increased over time.
15
Weekly stock returns are calculated based on the Friday closing price for each index as retrieved from Global
Financial Data, Inc., accessed 06/12. The broadest index available is used for each country. Each country must have
return data for the previous 52 weeks to calculate a correlation. Country groups are based on their classification by
the International Monetary Fund as of April 2012. Countries remain in their group for the full period.

10

by 1,638 weeks. I calculate this matrix using stock returns in local currency and then in U.S. dollars.16
Then I calculate the average 52-week correlation each week for: (1) the full sample of countries; (2) only
current members of the euro area (and only their correlations with other euro area countries); and (3)
other advanced economies that are not currently in the euro area (and only their correlations with other
members of the group).
Figure 2 graphs correlations for these three groups over time and shows several noteworthy
trends. First, correlations within all three groups generally increase over time, especially since the mid1990’s, despite substantial fluctuations around this upward trend. Second, correlations between current
euro area countries have increased by more than for other countries, including other advanced economies.
Finally, correlations between current euro area countries have been substantially higher than for other
countries since the early 1990’s. Columns 1-3 of Table 2 report correlations for each group of countries in
5-year intervals over the same period and confirm these trends. Average correlations have increased
steadily over each five-year window for each group of countries since 1985. These correlations have also
increased more in the euro area than in other advanced economies. Even though correlations within the
euro area were lower than in other groups at the start of the sample, they increased quickly to be higher
over most of the period, including today.
This increase in correlations over time (and within the euro area) may result purely from
increased volatility (over time and within the euro area) and not necessarily any change in cross-country
linkages. As shown in Forbes and Rigobon (2001, 2002), higher volatility in one country’s stock market
will automatically increase the unconditional correlation in returns between the two countries for purely
statistical reasons. If volatility in one country increases, even if the transmission mechanism between the
two countries is constant, a larger share of the return in the 2nd country will be driven by the larger,
idiosyncratic shocks in the first country. Although this would still qualify as contagion using the broad
definition of contagion in this paper (albeit not in many academic papers), it is still useful to understand if
the increased correlations in Figure 2 and Table 2 are simply an artifact of increased market volatility.
To analyze the impact of changes in volatility over time, I calculate the 52-week, moving-average
standard deviation in stock returns for the same sample of 48 countries from 1980 through June-2012.
Figure 3 graphs average volatilities for the same three groups of countries. The graph shows that volatility
increases during key crisis periods as expected—such as during the 1987 U.S. stock market crash, 1998
LTCM collapse, and peak of the GFC. The graph also shows, however, that there is no steady upward
trend in volatility over time as for the cross-market correlations in Figure 2. There is also no evidence of a

16

In the analysis below, I focus on local currency returns in order to exclude any increase in correlations resulting
purely from similar exchange rate movements relative to the dollar. Cross-market correlations based on U.S. dollar
returns tend to be slightly higher than those based on local currency returns due to this exchange rate effect. All of
the key trends reported below, however, are unchanged when calculations are based on U.S. dollar returns.

11

greater increase in volatility in the euro area relative to other countries (except in the last few months) or
of higher levels of volatility within the euro area throughout the sample. These trends are confirmed in
columns 4-6 of Table 2. Therefore, the increase in cross-market correlations for the full sample (and the
euro area) since 1980 does not simply result from greater market volatility over time (or in the euro area).
An alternative explanation for this increase in cross-market correlations could be a greater role of
global shocks in determining equity returns. This could result from global shocks that are larger in
magnitude (such as greater swings in commodity prices) or from countries becoming more vulnerable to
these global shocks. Either of these effects could cause cross-market correlations to increase, even if there
is no change in the direct linkages between economies. To test if global shocks could explain the
correlation patterns in Figure 2 and Table 2, I recalculate the bilateral correlations between each pair of
markets, except now control for global shocks. I use several controls for global shocks: the change in
commodity prices, the change in U.S. interest rates, the TED spread, and the VXO.17 The resulting graphs
of average, cross-market correlations are virtually identical to Figure 2 (and therefore not shown).
Columns 7-9 of Table 2 report the resulting correlations over 5-year windows with controls for global
shocks. Controlling for these global shocks slightly reduces average cross-market correlations (as
expected), but does not affect the main trends discussed above.
To summarize, Figures 2 and 3 and Table 2 show that cross-market correlations have increased
over time for the full sample of countries, and by even more within the euro area, so that correlations
within the euro area are now higher than in other groups. These increases in correlations do not result
from changes in volatility or from global shocks. Instead, countries’ markets appear to have become more
closely linked and more interdependent over time, especially within the euro area. As discussed in Section
II.B, however, these correlations capture comovements between markets during boom years as well as
after negative events and crises. Correlations calculated over long windows may also miss important links
between markets that only exist during short windows after a shock. Therefore, although the results in this
section document trends in interdependence over time and within the euro area, this does not necessarily
capture contagion when defined as the transmission of extreme negative events.

B.

Extreme Value Analysis
To better capture contagion, this section uses a form of extreme-value analysis to examine the

incidence and cross-country patterns in extreme negative returns over time. More specifically, I identify
17

Some measures of global shocks may capture contagion resulting from the transmission of a negative event in one
country to global variables. Data measuring the global shocks are from Global Financial Data, Inc., accessed 06/12.
Commodity prices are measured as the change in the Economist All-Commodity Dollar Index. U.S. interest rates are
measured as the change in the 10-year constant-maturity government bond. Following the stock market data, all
weekly prices are measured as the Friday market close. I do not include the VXO in the reported results as it is only
available since 1986 and shortens the time series. They main results, however, are unchanged.

12

the weeks from 1980 through end-June 2012 when each country has an extreme-negative return, defined
as a return in the bottom 5% of that country’s return distribution. If countries’ extreme negative returns
result purely from idiosyncratic shocks and are not related to events in other countries or global shocks,
than about 5 percent of the sample should experience extreme negative returns in each week. If extreme
negative returns are more likely when other countries have negative returns (due to either contagion or
global shocks), then the percent of countries with extreme returns should vary across time.
The top panel of Figure 4 graphs the percent of countries in the full sample with an extreme
negative return in each week. There is clearly not an even distribution with a steady 5% of the sample
experiencing extreme negative returns each week. Instead, there is substantial volatility in the coincidence
of extreme returns and several spikes when a large percentage of the sample has extreme negative
returns—such as 86% of the sample in the week ending on 10/24/87 (after “Black Monday”) and 90% for
the week ending on 10/11/08 (during the GFC). There also appears to be an increase in extreme negative
values over time—with more frequent spikes later in the sample. These patterns are confirmed in column
1 of Table 3, which reports the average percent of the sample with an extreme value each week over fiveyear windows. The percent of the sample experiencing extreme negative returns has steadily increased
over time (at least until 2010), nearly doubling from only 3.3% of the sample from 1981-84 to 6.5% from
2005-2009. Countries have become more likely to experience extreme negative returns simultaneously.
Next, to test if countries in the euro area were more or less likely to experience extreme returns
simultaneously and whether this has changed over time, the middle and bottom panels of Figure 4 graph
the percent of countries in the euro area and in other advanced economies, respectively, that experienced
extreme negative returns each week. These graphs are similar to that for the full sample in the top panel.
One noteworthy difference, however, is that the graph for the euro area has taller spikes, showing that a
larger share of this group has extreme negative returns at the same time. There are six weeks when 100%
of euro area countries had an extreme negative return simultaneously (compared to only one week for the
other advanced economies). Table 3 confirms these observations. Although countries in the euro area
were less likely to experience extreme negative returns simultaneously in the 1980s and 1990s, since then
they have had a greater increase in the joint coincidence of extreme returns. As a result, countries in the
euro area are now more likely than other advanced economies to experience extreme negative returns
simultaneously.
The coincidence of extreme negative returns, however, is only a rough proxy for contagion across
countries. As mentioned above, a number of countries could experience large negative returns
simultaneously due to a global shock. To disentangle the effect of global shocks from linkages between
markets, I next estimate a series of regressions. More specifically, I estimate the conditional probability
that a country has an extreme negative return in any week as a function of the percent of the sample that
13

also has an extreme negative return and global shocks. I include different combinations of global shocks:
the change in a commodity price index, the change in U.S. long-term interest rates, and the TED spread
(with all variables defined in Section III.A.). The formal specification is:
1

∗

∗

,

(1)

where ENRit is a dummy equal to one if country i is experiencing an extreme negative return in week t,
with an extreme negative return defined above. Globalt measures global shocks during week t. ENRtAll is
the percent of the sample that has an extreme negative return during week t. The appropriate methodology
to estimate equation (1) is determined by the distribution of the cumulative distribution function, F().
Because extreme negative returns occur irregularly (95 percent of the sample is zeros), F() is asymmetric.
Therefore I estimate the equation using the complementary logarithmic (or cloglog) framework, which
assumes that F() is the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the extreme value distribution.18 I also
cluster the standard errors by country.
Table 4 reports regression results without any controls for global shocks and then with different
combinations of controls.19 It also reports results for the full sample of countries, for countries currently in
the euro area and for other advanced economies. For each specification and group of countries, the
estimates show that the percent of the sample with extreme negative returns is significantly and positively
correlated with a country’s probability of having an extreme negative return in each week.20 These results
are stable even after controlling for global shocks, suggesting that much of this joint coincidence of
extreme negative returns results from linkages between these economies and contagion.
To summarize, Section III provides evidence of increased interdependence and contagion over
time. The evidence for interdependence is based on cross-market correlations and for contagion is based
on extreme value analysis. The increases in cross-market correlations and the coincidence of extreme
returns do not result from global shocks or changes in volatility. Therefore, interdependence during all
states of the world, as well as contagion after negative events, appears to be greater today than in the past
and greater for countries in the euro area than in other advanced economies (and the world as a whole).
These results, however, do not answer the fundamental question: what causes these trends in
interdependence and contagion across time and countries?

18

This estimation strategy assumes that F(z) = 1− exp[−exp(z)] . An alternative is to use a logit or probit model but
these assume that the distribution of F() is logistic or normal, respectively, and therefore symmetric around zero.
19
I have also included a control for changes in global risk as measured by the VXO. This has no effect on the key
results but shrinks the sample size significantly because it is only available starting in 1986.
20
Since this is a non-linear probability function, interpreting the magnitude of the coefficients is not straightforward
and requires calculating exponentiated coefficients (which are hazard ratios for the cloglog estimator). These ratios
are the marginal effects in multiplicative form after controlling for differences in the baseline odds of experiencing
an extreme negative return for each country. The exponentiated coefficients are similar for the different groups.

14

IV. The Channels of Contagion
A.

Theory and Trends
Understanding the channels through which shocks are transmitted across countries is the key

issue for policymakers hoping to mitigate any negative effects. A large literature models and tests various
channels of contagion.21 There are several ways in which these channels can be categorized—such as by
the theoretical models that explain why actors make certain decisions (i.e., imperfect information,
information cascades, compensation structures, etc.) or by the actors that cause contagion (i.e., banks,
investors, etc.). For this paper, I divide this extensive literature into four main channels of contagion:
trade, banks, portfolio investors, and wake-up calls. These categories are broad and there are important
links between them. For example, portfolio investors may be a key source of funding for banks; a “wakeup call” can cause portfolio investors to liquidate positions; banks may withdraw credit and therefore
affect trade. These four categories are useful, however, to directly link the discussion of contagion
channels to the empirical analysis and evaluation of policy responses. This section briefly summarizes the
theoretical and empirical evidence on each channel and examines trends showing how these channels
have evolved over time for the full sample and the euro area. The second part of the section then uses this
framework to estimate the role of these four channels in causing contagion around the world since 1980.

1.

Trade: Trade can cause contagion through two effects: bilateral trade and competition in third

markets.22 A crisis in one country can reduce income and the corresponding demand for imports, thereby
affecting exports from other countries through bilateral trade. In addition, if a country devalues its
currency, this can improve the country’s relative export competitiveness in third markets. The greater use
of global supply chains could magnify these effects. Most empirical papers find that trade channels are
significant and play an important role in transmitting crises. They also find that trade does not explain all
of the contagion observed during recent crises and other transmission channels are also important.
The top two graphs in Figure 5 show the median and mean trade exposures (measured as imports
plus exports relative to GDP) for the different groups of countries in the sample from 1980 through
2011.23 The graphs show the well-known trend that trade exposure has increased substantially for
countries around the world since 1990. It also shows that trade has increased relatively more for euro area

21

For overviews of various channels of contagion and different ways to categorize them, see Claessens et al. (2001),
Karolyi (2003), Forbes (2004), Allen et al. (2009), and Didier et al. (2010).
22
For a theoretical model, see Gerlach and Smets (1995). For empirical evidence, see: Glick and Rose (1999),
Forbes (2002, 2004), and Claessens et al. (2011). For evidence on the role of global supply chains, see Burstein et al.
(2008).
23
This section focuses on median values for each group of countries in order to reduce the effect of several extreme
outliers. Mean values (when reported) are calculated after dropping the largest and smallest two values in each year.

15

economies, so that these economies are now more exposed to trade than other advanced economies
(especially when compared using average exposures). This is not surprising; one of the key goals of the
European Union was to reduce barriers to trade between members. These trends in trade exposure could
be a factor causing increased contagion over time, especially in the euro area.

2.

Banks and Lending Institutions: One important financial channel for contagion is through banks

and other financial intermediaries.24 A shock to one country can cause banks to reduce the supply of
credit in other countries, reducing liquidity and raising the cost of credit. This could occur in a number of
different ways. For example, the initial shock could occur because individuals withdraw bank deposits,
because a weak economy increases non-performing loans and reduces asset values, and/or because a
bank’s holdings of sovereign debt lose value. Any of these effects could force the bank to reduce lending
in other countries in order to restore capital adequacy, meet other regulations, or adjust exposures to
follow VaR models. The reduction in credit in other countries could occur through: (1) a contraction in
direct, cross-border lending by the foreign banks; (2) a contraction in local lending by the foreign banks’
affiliates; and/or (3) a contraction in lending by domestic banks resulting from the funding shock to their
balance sheets from declines in interbank, cross-border lending.
Moreover, the role of banks in causing contagion can be aggravated by characteristics of banks:
their close relationship to the solvency of their sovereign, their high degree of leverage, and their
extensive interconnections. As recently seen in Ireland and shown in Acharya et al. (2011), a shock to a
country’s banking system can not only cause contagion directly through bank lending, but also indirectly
through increased risks to country solvency. As shown in Greenwood et al. (2011), Van Wincoop (2011),
and Shin (2012), any negative shocks to banks are magnified in the presence of leverage, causing an even
greater reduction in loans and unwinding of positions. This has been called “liquidation spirals”, “rapid
deleveraging”, or a “diabolic loop”. As shown in Allen et al. (2012), common asset holdings and similar
funding maturities across banks can aggravate contagion and systemic risk.
The middle two graphs in Figure 5 show key characteristics of banking systems from 1980
through 2011: gross international bank exposure (measured as international bank assets plus liabilities
relative to GDP) and bank leverage (measured as the ratio of private credit by deposit money banks and
other financial institutions to bank deposits, including demand, time and saving deposits in nonbanks).
There is a striking increase in international bank exposure in the euro area and advanced economies since
the mid/late 1990s. There is also a steady increase in bank leverage in the euro area over the same period.

24

An extensive literature models or tests different mechanisms of contagion through banks. Allen and Gale (2000)
provides the first model and Peek and Rosengreen (1997) the first empirical evidence. Other influential papers
include: Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2001), Cetorelli and Goldberg (2010, 2012), and Shin (2012). An excellent
discussion of mechanisms linking banks, crises and contagion is Allen et al. (2009).

16

These high levels of international bank exposure and leverage have been slower to adjust after the GFC in
the euro area relative to in other advanced economies. These trends of increased international banking
exposure and banking leverage in euro area countries could be another factor causing increased contagion
over time, especially in the euro area.

3.

Portfolio Investors: Another financial channel for contagion is portfolio investors.25 An extensive

literature explains various mechanisms by which investors can transmit shocks across countries.26 In the
simplest versions, an idiosyncratic shock to one country reduces the value of investors’ portfolios, forcing
them to sell assets in other countries to meet margin calls or cash requirements or to rebalance portfolios
according to VaR models. More complicated models show how increased risk aversion after a negative
shock or informational asymmetries and other forms of imperfect information can cause investors to sell
assets across countries and “overreact”. For example, investors may find it less costly to “herd” and
follow other investors, especially if they are unable to differentiate between idiosyncratic shocks and
informed trading by others, or if they are evaluated relative to an index. These models can be further
complicated in situations of self-fulfilling expectations and multiple equilibria. For example, Masson
(1999) shows how investors could suddenly withdraw from a country if they fear that others may sell first
and they will be left with no claim on a limited pool of foreign exchange reserves. Allen and Carletti
(2006) show how the creation of new financial instruments—such as to transfer credit risk—can
aggravate contagion through portfolio investors. Several papers use detailed fund-level information to
document contagion through portfolio investors and find that these effects can be substantial.27
Moreover, recent research highlights that it is not just the net value of a country’s international
portfolio flows and investment positions which determines contagion, but instead it is the gross flows and
positions.28 Even if a country’s current account is relatively balanced, if this masks large capital inflows
balanced by large outflows, the country is still vulnerable to any disruption in capital inflows,
counterparty risk, or breakdown in international payments. Similarly, even if a country has a moderate net
international investment position, large underlying gross investment assets and liabilities make the
country vulnerable to shocks which affect the relative values or liquidity of its assets and liabilities.

25

Portfolio investors include a range of investors, such as hedge funds, mutual funds, pension funds, individuals,
and some sovereign wealth funds. This includes their investments in equities and debt (government and corporate).
It does not include investments classified as foreign direct investment (FDI)—when the investor owns 10 percent or
more of the entity. Including FDI in the definition of portfolio investment does not change the paper’s main results.
26
For excellent surveys of this literature, see Gelos (2011) and de Bandt and Hartmann (2000). Important papers in
this literature include: King and Wadhwani (1990), Kodres and Pritsker (2002), and Kyle and Xiong (2001).
27
For evidence, see Fratzscher (2009) and Raddatz and Schmukler (2012).
28
See Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007), Gourinchas and Rey (2007), Forbes and Warnock (2012), and Gourinchas
(2012). This point also applies to contagion through banks, as highlighted in Shin (2012).

17

The bottom two graphs in Figure 5 graph gross portfolio investment positions (equity and debt)
and gross portfolio inflows (both relative to GDP) from 1980 through 2011. The graphs show an increase
in international investment positions and portfolio inflows in the 2000’s for the group of other advanced
economies, and a much sharper increase for countries in the euro area starting in the mid-1990’s
(although portfolio inflows fell sharply during the GFC for all groups). The much greater increase in
international portfolio investment exposure in the euro area is not surprising as one of the key goals of the
euro was to increase financial integration across members. These trends of increased exposure to
international portfolio investment and inflows, especially for the euro area, could be another factor
causing increased contagion over time, especially in the euro area.

4.

Wake-up Calls/Fundamentals Reassessment: A final (and closely related) mechanism by which

contagion can occur is “wake-up calls”— when additional information or a reappraisal of one country’s
fundamentals leads to a reassessment of the risks in other countries.29 Wake-up calls could happen
because investors were not focused on or aware of certain vulnerabilities, or because fundamentals only
become problematic during a crisis—thereby generating multiple equilibria. Weaker fundamentals—or
even just increased concern about a country’s fundamentals—could also strengthen various channels of
contagion. For example, if a shock to banks in one country reduces funding for banks in other countries,
this would be more likely to generate a wake-up call and bank runs for a country with a weaker financial
system. The risk of these types of wake-up calls is also greater when there is more uncertainty –especially
about economic fundamentals or financial institutions in the country.
These wake-up calls can involve many forms of reassessment—including not only the
macroeconomic, financial or political characteristics of the country—but also the functioning of financial
markets or the policies of international financial institutions. For example, if a shock to one country
increases uncertainty about the ability of major financial institutions to trade assets or provide liquidity,
financial markets could freeze up.30 Or one country’s terms for its debt restructuring or financial support
package could provide information on how other countries would be treated in a similar situation. Chen
(1999) shows that generous financial support for one country could even be interpreted as evidence that
other countries might receive less instead of more support if a package depletes a limited supply of funds.
Any such reassessment of the functioning of financial markets or policies of international institutions
could cause investors to sell assets across countries, thereby causing contagion.

29

Goldstein (1998) coined this term to capture the sudden awareness of risks in Asian financial systems during the
1997-98 crisis. For evidence of the role of wake-up calls and macroeconomic variables in transmitting crises, see
Forbes (2004), Fratzscher (2009, 2012), Didier et al. (2010), and Bekaert et al. (2011).
30
See de Bandt and Hartmann (2000) for a more detailed discussion of this risk and review of literature.

18

B.

Regression Results
The last section discusses four important channels for contagion: trade, banks, portfolio investors

and wake-up calls. Recent increases in trade, international bank exposure, and international investment
positions for many countries in the world would therefore be expected to increase linkages between
countries in all states of the world as well as after extreme negative events. This is especially true for the
euro area where integration has proceeded even more quickly along most of these measures than in other
advanced economies. But how important are these channels in explaining recent episodes of contagion?
Since many of these trends of increased integration occurred simultaneously, are certain types of
integration more important than others? This section empirically tests if these four channels for contagion
can explain the coincidence in extreme negative stock returns around the world since 1980.
For this analysis, I estimate the conditional probability that a country has an extreme negative
return in each week as a function of global shocks and the four channels of contagion. Each channel is
interacted with the percent of the sample that has an extreme negative return that week. The equation is:
1

∗

∗
∗

∗
∗

,

(2)

where ENRit is a dummy equal to one if country i is experiencing an extreme negative return in week t.
Extreme negative returns are defined as weeks when the country’s return is in the lowest 5% of its
distribution for the sample period (as discussed in Section III.B). Globalt measures global shocks during
week t, such as the change in commodity prices, change in U.S. interest rates, or a measure of risk and/or
volatility—such as the TED spread or VXO. ENRtAll is the percent of the entire sample that has an
extreme negative return during week t. Tradeit, Banksit, Portfolioit, and WakeUpit are measures of the four
channels of contagion for country i at time t. I estimate equation (2) using the complementary logarithmic
(or cloglog) framework and cluster standard errors by country (as discussed in Section III.B.)
There are a number of different ways to measure these channels of contagion, so I begin with a
parsimonious specification that follows the discussion in the previous section. More specifically, the trade
channel is measured by the country’s total exposure to trade. The banking channel is measured with two
variables: gross international banking exposure and banking leverage. The portfolio investor channel is
also measured by two variables: gross international portfolio investment exposure and gross portfolio
inflows. All variables except leverage are calculated as a share of the country’s GDP and are defined in
more detail in Section IV.A. The wake-up call channel is measured by two dummy variables: “medium
credit rating” (which is equal to one if the country’s average credit rating is below investment grade but

19

above “Substantial Risks”) and “low credit rating” (which is equal to one if the country’s average credit
rating is “Substantial Risks” or below).31
Table 5 reports estimates of equation 2 with and without controls for global shocks (which have
no effect on the key results). Columns 1-3 report results for the full sample, and column 4 includes only
the euro area. The estimates show that several channels of contagion are significant and follow theoretical
predictions—while others are insignificant. The estimates for the euro area generally mirror those for the
full sample, suggesting that contagion in the euro area does not occur through significantly different
channels than in other countries.32 The positive and significant coefficients on Trade and Leverage
indicate that countries with greater trade exposure and more leveraged banks are more likely to have
extreme negative returns when other countries are also experiencing extreme negative returns. The
positive coefficients on the credit rating variables indicate that countries with weaker credit ratings are
more vulnerable than the most highly rated countries to extreme negative shocks elsewhere in the world.
The insignificant coefficients on a country’s international exposures through banks and portfolio
investment suggest that total exposure through these channels may not affect vulnerability to extreme
returns occurring elsewhere—at least after controlling for leverage in the banking system.
Since international financial exposure through banks and portfolio investors is believed to be an
important determinant of country vulnerability to contagion, Table 6 further explores these channels.
Columns 1 and 2 break bank exposure into gross international bank assets and liabilities. It also controls
for gross international bank inflows and outflows in column 1. Column 3 performs the same breakdown
for international portfolio investment. The coefficient estimates from these disaggregated international
positions and flows are reported near the bottom of the table. The coefficients on international banking
positions tend to fluctuate in significance—as shown by the changes in columns 1 and 2 (as well as in a
number of unreported sensitivity tests). The coefficients on international portfolio investment positions,
however, are more robust (including in a number of unreported sensitivity tests). Countries with greater
portfolio investment liabilities are more vulnerable to contagion, but this vulnerability can be reduced if
the country holds greater international portfolio assets. These results highlight the importance of
separating out gross assets and liabilities and not just looking at net or total positions.
International portfolio investment can be further disaggregated into the proportion of this
investment in the form of debt versus equity. Columns 4 and 5 of Table 6 control for the share of total
portfolio investment or flows in the form of debt. The results suggest that countries with a greater share of
31

Credit ratings are constructed as the average rating on the country’s sovereign foreign-currency bonds as reported
by S&P, Moodys and Fitch. All available ratings are incorporated in the average at each week. The cutoff for
investment grade is BBB- for S&P and Fitch and Baa3 for Moodys. “Substantial Risk” is below B- for S&P and
Fitch and below B3 for Moodys.
32
The only exceptions are coefficients on credit ratings for the euro area; these estimates fluctuate in sign and
significance across specifications due to the limited observations of euro area countries with low credit ratings.

20

international portfolio investment or flows in debt tend to be more vulnerable to contagion. It is also
worth noting that in column 4, the coefficients on gross investment liabilities and assets become
insignificant when a control for the debt share of portfolio investment is included. Although not a
definitive test, this may indicate that the form of any portfolio investment may be even more important
than the volume of investment in determining a country’s risk of contagion.

C.

Implications of Regression Results
This series of regression results has a number of important implications. First, there is evidence

that contagion through all four channels—trade, banking, portfolio investors and macroeconomic
fundamentals/wake-up calls can be important in explaining a country’s vulnerability to extreme returns in
other countries. (The evidence on wake-up calls, however, is weakest given the challenges in formulating
a clear test for this channel.) Therefore, it is not surprising that as international integration through trade,
banking, and portfolio investment has increased over time, contagion has also increased. Second, there is
no evidence that contagion in the euro area occurs through different channels than in the full sample.
Third, leverage in the domestic banking system plays a critically important role. In each regression and
with a variety of controls (including several tests not reported), leverage is a highly significant
determinant of country vulnerability to extreme events elsewhere in the world.
Finally, these results also indicate that the simple interpretation that “more integration = more
contagion” is not accurate and there are important subtleties in how integration affects country
vulnerability. Although greater international portfolio investment liabilities increase vulnerability, greater
international portfolio investment assets reduce vulnerability. This supports analysis in Milesi-Ferretti and
Tille (2011) and Forbes and Warnock (2012) that countries with large international asset positions can
liquidate foreign assets after negative shocks and this “retrenchment” of funds can provide stability during
crises. The results also suggest that greater reliance on debt (versus equity) tends to increase country
vulnerability. The natural risk sharing properties of equity may reduce country vulnerability after extreme
negative events. Therefore, it is not just the level of financial integration, but its structure that determines
a country’s vulnerability to contagion.

V. Implications and Contagion in the Euro Area
The high levels of interdependence in global stock markets generally do not concern
policymakers—except during periods of contagion when an extreme negative shock in one country
affects others. Many channels of contagion, however, result from healthy trends toward greater
integration in the global economy. Can the risks from contagion be mitigated without reversing these
trends? Will attempts to reduce contagion lead to even greater costs—such as generating additional
21

contagion through other channels? The longer version of this paper, written for the Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City’s annual symposium in Jackson Hole, Wyoming includes a detailed evaluation of various
policy options for mitigating contagion.33
Policies discussed in this paper include measures that could be taken a priori to reduce contagion
over the long term, focusing on the underlying structural trends that determine the channels for contagion,
as well as situations when contagion risks are imminent and policies are aimed at providing immediate
relief. Various long-term structural policies discussed include: reducing leverage in the banking system,
diversifying trade across countries and industries, supporting portfolio investment abroad to balance
portfolio liabilities, ensuring that portfolio flows are not distorted by an over-reliance on debt, improving
macroeconomic fundamentals, and better advance communication of the policies of international financial
institutions. Various shorter-term responses to immediate contagion risks that are discussed include:
deposit insurance, policies that ensure liquidity and well functioning markets, policies to address key
macroeconomic vulnerabilities, capital controls, and easing banking regulations. Any discussion of how
to best address immediate contagion risks should also consider two additional considerations. Can the
policy effectively stop a form of contagion that would not otherwise occur (such as a bank run) or simply
delay an inevitable adjustment (such as through changes in relative prices affecting trade)? Does the
policy effectively internalize an externality that might not otherwise be considered in one country’s or
investor’s cost-benefit analysis?
A thorough discussion of these various policy options helps establish a clear hierarchy of policies
that can be adopted to address contagion risks—both in the long- and short-term. Most of these policies
can mitigate contagion risks without reducing real and financial integration across borders. This
discussion also shows that some of the mechanisms aimed at mitigating contagion in the short term (such
as reducing bank regulations or increasing fiscal liabilities for at-risk countries) can directly contradict
recommendations to reduce vulnerability to contagion in the longer term. Any evaluation of policy
responses to mitigate contagion should carefully consider these unintended consequences, as financial
crises can have various phases so that contagion risks persist for an extended period of time.

A.

A Closer Look at Contagion in the Euro Area
Although the primary goal of this paper is to analyze contagion around the world, the analysis

also applies to the current challenges in the euro area. This section assimilates the key results from
throughout the paper to show that contagion from current events in Europe should come as no surprise
and follows the same channels documented for the rest of the world. An evaluation of contagion in the
33

This discussion of policy responses is not included in this working paper in order to comply with NBER
guidelines on not supporting specific policies but is available at
http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2012/kf.pdf .

22

euro area, however, also involves several additional considerations resulting from the unique structure of
the euro area.
Section III showed that interdependence and contagion have increased steadily since 1980 for the
full sample of countries, and especially for countries within the euro area. This trend is particularly
striking in measures of interdependence. The euro area has experienced a substantial increase in crossmarket correlations since 1980, so that these markets now show very high degrees of comovement in all
states of the world. This is not surprising given the trends documented in Figure 5. Many factors linking
countries—such integration through trade, banks and portfolio investment—have increased more rapidly
within the euro area than in other advanced economies. This rapid increase in integration within the euro
area is also not surprising as it naturally follows from the requirements to join the common European
market and adopt the common currency—such as requirements for removing barriers to the cross-border
movement of goods and capital, regulatory harmonization, and the freedom of establishment.
Not only should high levels of interdependence and contagion within the euro area be expected,
but contagion from the euro area to other countries should also come as no surprise. If the euro area is
treated as a single country, it would have the second largest economy in the world, the largest share of
world trade, and the largest international banking exposures. It is highly integrated with countries around
the world through trade, banking flows, and portfolio investment—three of the primary channels through
which shocks are transmitted internationally. A number of studies have analyzed the expected spillovers
through these channels from moderate changes to growth in the euro area (i.e., IMF, 2011). These
spillover effects resulting from interdependence in normal times can be challenging enough for other
countries, even without a crisis or extreme negative event.
It is contagion from these extreme negative events, however, which presents the greatest
challenges. Several papers have already attempted to measure contagion from the recent crisis in the euro
area using several different definitions of contagion and measurement strategies.34 The evidence suggests
that contagion within the euro area is occurring through the standard channels discussed throughout this
paper. For example, several papers highlight the role of euro area banks in transmitting the crisis across
borders, others focus on portfolio investors, and others highlight the “wake-up call” effects from new
information in one country on others. Column 4 of Table 5 reports results that support this conclusion; the
regressions testing the channels of contagion find similar results for the euro area as the full sample.
There is no evidence that contagion within the euro area is occurring through any new mechanisms, or
that the level of contagion within the euro area is greater than would be expected given the high degree of
trade and financial integration in the region.

34

See Constancio (2012), De Santis (2012), and Caceres et al. (2010) for evidence of contagion from the euro crisis.
Aizenman et al. (2012) finds that there has been little contagion from Europe to other countries.

23

Policy proposals to mitigate contagion in the euro area should also incorporate the same
considerations as for contagion anywhere in the world—both in terms of long-term structural reforms to
reduce contagion risks a priori as well as short-term policies to mitigate imminent risks. Just as for
contagion in other regions, it is critically important to assess whether any policy response will prevent a
bad equilibrium and thereby avoid a form of contagion that would not otherwise occur (such as bank runs
or markets that stop functioning) versus a policy response that would simply delay an inevitable
adjustment resulting from interdependence between countries. The key considerations for evaluating
different policies to mitigate contagion are thoroughly discussed in the longer version of this paper and
apply to the euro area as well as to the rest of the world.35
There are, however, several additional considerations unique to the euro area that are important
when evaluating responses to contagion in this region. First, each country lacks a national currency and
independent central bank. Currency depreciations and monetary easing can provide key mechanisms by
which countries adjust to negative shocks. Since individual euro area countries do not have these
adjustment mechanisms, they may need to undergo more prolonged and painful internal adjustments to
shocks that originate elsewhere. This makes it more important for euro area countries concerned about
contagion to support flexible economies that can more easily adjust to external shocks. In extreme
circumstances, the more limited tools for adjustment in the euro area may justify additional policy support
through other mechanisms to avoid slipping into a negative equilibrium. On a more positive note, the lack
of independent currencies within the euro area will prevent sudden currency devaluations that cause
contagion through trade. Even if relative prices adjust over time through internal devaluations, trading
competitors should have more time to adjust to this slow-moving contagion.
A second consideration for the euro area is the relatively large international exposures of the
banks backed by sovereign governments which cannot provide the traditional “lender of last resort”
function available in most countries. This aggravates the risk of contagion through banks—especially
through bank runs. Since contagion through bank runs is a form of contagion that can be prevented
through prompt policy action, euro area officials could build a strong argument to take action to prevent
this avoidable form of contagion. In any country, it is critically important to restore confidence that
money deposited in banks will be accessible in the future. The most straightforward alternative for
restoring this confidence is well-designed deposit insurance combined with appropriate banking
regulations and supervision. This is likely to require support from an entity other than the sovereign, one
with large enough financial resources that the financial backing is credible and sufficient to restore
confidence.

35

See http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2012/kf.pdf

24

A third issue that merits special consideration for the euro area is the heightened risk that policies
and information in one country generate contagion through wake-up calls/reassessments about others.
Although there are important differences between euro area countries, they also share a number of
macroeconomic and institutional similarities—including shared governance over a number of policies.
Any new information about the actions and treatment of one country will provide information about
prospects for other euro area countries. These externalities should be incorporated when evaluating
various policy responses to contagion. For example, the treatment of different bondholders in Ireland’s
bank restructuring was closely watched to provide information about how bondholders would be treated
in other countries. These types of externalities should be considered when evaluating any policy
responses to mitigate contagion, but they are especially important in the euro area where the shared
governance and institutional similarities aggravate the risks of contagion through wake-up calls.
A final (and closely related) consideration is the current structure for sharing certain liabilities
through institutions such as the ECB, ESM and EFSF. In other regions, financial support to help mitigate
contagion generally comes from sources (such as the IMF) that have sufficiently large resources and
widely shared liabilities that any increase in financial support does not increase solvency risks for
individual nations. In the case of the euro area, however, much of the financial support is being provided
(implicitly or explicitly) from other euro area nations that are vulnerable to contagion through “wake-up
calls” about their own fiscal situation. For example, if Spain or Italy requires a large increase in financial
support to prevent contagion and this support is provided by the ESM or EFSF, this could substantially
increase the fiscal liabilities of countries such as France. This could generate contagion to France through
a negative reassessment of its fiscal solvency. There could be further feedback effects on the credit ratings
and borrowing costs of the institutions intended to provide financial support. As a result, any financial
support provided by euro area nations and their joint institutions must be carefully evaluated based not
only on the benefit to the country receiving the support and any corresponding reduction in contagion, but
also on the additional externalities arising from the fiscal liabilities and corresponding risks of contagion
through wake-up calls to other countries in the future.

V.

Conclusions
Global integration has increased dramatically since 1980 when measured by countries’

international exposures through trade, banking, and portfolio investment. Not surprisingly, this increased
integration has caused countries’ financial markets to move together more closely during good times and
bad. This increased interdependence causes extreme negative events in one country to quickly affect
others. These extreme negative events, and their joint coincidence across countries, have increased over
time, creating substantial challenges for countries affected by contagion.
25

But exactly how does this contagion occur? This paper analyzes extreme negative stock returns to
show that contagion occurs through several channels—including trade, banks, portfolio investors, and
“wake-up calls”/ fundamentals reassessments. Countries with more leveraged banking systems, greater
trade exposure, and weaker macroeconomic fundamentals are significantly more vulnerable to contagion.
A country’s total international exposure through portfolio investment does not increase country
vulnerability, but countries with greater international portfolio liabilities are more vulnerable, while
countries with greater international portfolio assets are less vulnerable to contagion.
These results highlight that a country’s financial integration with the rest of the world does not
automatically increase contagion risks. Instead, holding portfolio assets in other countries can reduce
vulnerability, most likely by providing resources that can be “retrenched” when the domestic economy is
under pressure. International bank exposure is less important than domestic bank leverage in determining
country vulnerability. The type of international investment exposure is also important. A larger share of
portfolio inflows or investment in the form of equity (versus debt) reduces the probability of contagion—
undoubtedly as equity has more automatic risk sharing properties. Therefore, although increased financial
integration over time has increased interdependence and contagion between countries, certain forms of
financial integration can also help reduce contagion risks.
Since contagion can occur through so many channels—can anything be done to mitigate the
risks? For a foresighted policymaker, the best approach to minimizing contagion risks is through
fundamental structural reforms before a negative shock occurs and contagion is imminent. The empirical
analysis suggests a number of priorities that would not involve reducing international integration through
trade and financial channels. Policymakers also need to carefully evaluate if a proposal could effectively
stop contagion—or have the unintentional effect of creating additional contagion through other channels.
Finally, this analysis has a number of direct implications for current challenges in the euro area.
Integration through trade, banks, and portfolio investment has proceeded even more quickly in this region
than in the rest of the world. This has yielded substantial benefits for Europe and naturally increased the
interdependence between euro area economies in all states of the world. This has also increased
vulnerabilities to contagion after negative events in the region. There is no evidence, however, that
contagion in the euro area occurs through any different channels or than would be expected given the high
degree of regional interdependence. This does not mean that the euro area is powerless to mitigate
contagion without sacrificing the integration that was a key goal of the common market and euro. Instead,
European policymakers need to consider several aspects of their unique institutional arrangements when
evaluating how best to mitigate the risk of contagion in the future.

26

References
Acharya , Viral V., Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl. “A Pyrrhic victory? – Bank Bailouts and
Sovereign Credit Risk.” NBER Working Paper No. 17136, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Julio Cacho-Diaz, and Roger Laeven. “Modeling Financial Contagion Using
Mutually Exciting Jump Processes.” NBER Working Paper No. 15850, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2010.
Aizenman, Joshua, Yothin Jinjarak, Minsoo Lee, and Donghyun Park. “Developing Countries’ Financial
Vulnerability to the Euro Crisis: An Event Study of Equity and Bond Markets.” NBER Working Paper
No. 18028, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2012.
Allen, Franklin, Ana Babus, and Elena Carletti. “Asset Commonality, Debt Maturity and Systemic Risk.”
Journal of Financial Economics, (2012) forthcoming.
Allen, Franklin, Ana Babus and Elena Carletti. “Financial Crises: Theory and Evidence.” Annual Review
of Financial Economics 1 (2009): 97-116.
Allen, Franklin, and Elena Carletti. “Credit Risk Transfer and Contagion.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 53 (2006): 89-111.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. “Financial Contagion.” Journal of Political Economy 108, no.
1(2000): 1-33.
Bae, Kee-Hong, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René Stulz. “A New Approach to Measuring Financial
Contagion.” Review of Financial Studies 16, no. 3 (2003): 717-763.
Bekaert, Geert, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, and Arnaud Mehl.“Global Crises and Equity
Market Contagion.” NBER Working Paper No. 17121, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R. Harvey. “Time-varying World Market Integration.” Journal of Finance
50, no. 2 (1995): 403-444.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Angela Ng. “Market Integration and Contagion.” Journal of
Business 78, no. 1 (2005): 39-70.
Bordo, Michael, and Antu Murshid. “Are Financial Crises Becoming More Contagious?: What is the
Historical Evidence on Contagion.” In International Financial Contagion, edited by Stijn Claessens and
Kristin Forbes, 367-406. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001.
Boyer, Brian H., Michael S. Gibson, and Mico Loretan. “Pitfalls in Tests for Changes in Correlations.”
Working Paper 597R, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance
Discussion Paper, 1997.
Boyer, Brian H., Tomomi Kumagai, and Kathy Yuan. “How Do Crises Spread? Evidence from
Accessible and Inaccessible Stock Indices.” Journal of Finance 61, no. 2 (2006): 957-1003.
Boyson, Nicole, Christof Stahel, and René Stulz. “Hedge Fund Contagion and Liquidity Shocks.” Journal
of Finance 65, no. 5 (2010): 1789-1816.
27

Burstein, Ariel, Christopher Kurz, and Linda Tesar. "Trade, Production Sharing, and the International
Transmission of Business Cycles." Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (2008):775-795.
Caceres, Carlos, Vincenzo Guzzo, and Miguel Segoviano. “Sovereign Spreads: Global Risk Aversion,
Contagion or Fundamentals.” IMF Working Paper WP/10/120, International Monetary Fund, May 2010.
Calomiris, Charles W., Inessa Love, and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria. “Crisis ‘Shock Factors’ and the
Cross-Section of Global Equity Returns.” NBER Working Paper No. 16559, National Bureau of
Economic Research , 2010.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda S. Goldberg. “Liquidity Management of U.S. Global Banks: Internal Capital
Markets in the Great Recession.” Journal of International Economics 88, no. 2 (2012): forthcoming.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda S. Goldberg. (2010). “Global Banks and International Shock Transmission:
Evidence from the Crisis.” Staff Report no. 446, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May 2010.
Chen, Yehning. “Banking Panics: The Role of the First-come, First-served Rule and Information
Externalities.” Journal of Political Economy 107 (1999): 946-968.
Chudik, Alexander, and Marcel Fratzscher. “Identifying the Global Transmission of the 2007-09
Financial Crisis in a GVAR Model.” ECB Working Paper No. 1285, European Central Bank, January
2011.
Claessens, Stijn, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Yung-Chul Park. “Contagion: Why Crises Spread and How
This Can Be Stopped.” In International Financial Contagion, edited by Stijn Claessens, and Kristin
Forbes, 19-41. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001.
Claessens, Stijn, and Kristin Forbes, eds. International Financial Contagion. Boston: MA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 2001.
Claessens, Stijn, Hui Tong, and Shang-Jin Wei. “From the Financial Crisis to the Real Economy: Using
Firm-Level Data to Identify Transmission Channels.” NBER Working Paper No. 17360, National Bureau
of Economic Research, 2011.
Constancio, Vítor. “Contagion and the European Debt Crisis.” Financial Stability Review (Banque de
France) 16 (2012):109-121.
De Bandt, Olivier, and Philipp Hartmann. “Systemic Risk: A survey.” ECB Working Paper No. 35,
European Central Bank, November 2000.
De Gregorio, José, and Rodrigo Valdés. "Crisis Transmission: Evidence from the Debt, Tequila, and
Asian Flu Crises." In International Financial Contagion, edited by Stijn Claessens, and Kristin Forbes,
99-127. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001.
De Santis, Roberto A. “The Euro Area Sovereign Debt Crisis: Save Haven, Credit Rating Agencies and
the Spread of the Fever from Greece, Ireland and Portugal.” ECB Working Paper No. 1419, European
Central Bank, February 2012.
Didier, Tatiana, Inessa Love, and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria. “What Explains Stock Markets'
Vulnerability to the 2007-2008 Crisis?” Policy Research Working Paper 5224, World Bank, Latin
America & Caribbean Region, March 2010.
28

Didier, Tatiana, Paulo Mauro, and Sergio Schmukler. “Vanishing Financial Contagion?” Journal of
Policy Modeling 30 (2008): 775-791.
Dungey, Mardi, Renée A. Fry, Brenda González-Hermosillo, and Vance Martin. Transmission of
Financial Crises and Contagion: A Latent Factor Approach. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Ehrmann, Michael, Fratzscher, Marcel and Mehl, Arnaud. “What Has Made the Current Financial Crisis
Truly Global?” European Central Bank, 2009. Unpublished mimeo.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ashoka Mody, Milan Nedeljkovic, and Lucio Sarno. “How the Subprime Crisis
Went Global: Evidence from Bank Credit Default Swap Spreads.” NBER Working Paper No. 14904,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2009.
Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose, and Charles Wyplosz. “Contagious Currency Crises: First Tests.”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 98, no. 4 (1996): 463–484.
European Central Bank. Financial Stability Review, December (2005). http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/
pdf/other/financialstabilityreview200512en.pdf?6caadca688bfe789e446581c0a0e1998
Favero, Carlo, and Francesco Giavazzi. “Is the International Propagation of Shocks Non-Linear?:
Evidence from the ERM.” Journal of International Economics 51 (2002): 231-246.
Forbes, Kristin J. “The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free Lunch.” In Capital
Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and Consequences, edited by
Sebastian Edwards, 171-132. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2007.
Forbes, Kristin J. “The Asian Flu and Russian Virus: The International Transmission of Crises in FirmLevel Data.” Journal of International Economics 63, no. 1 (2004):59-92.
Forbes, Kristin. “Are Trade Linkages Important Determinants of Country Vulnerability to Crises?” In
Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, edited by Sebastian Edwards, and Jeffrey A. Frankel,
77-132. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2002.
Forbes, Kristin J., and Roberto Rigobon.” No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring Stock Market
Co-Movements.” Journal of Finance 57, no. 5 (2002): 2223–2261.
Forbes, Kristin J., and Rigobon, Roberto. “Measuring Contagion: Conceptual and Empirical Issues.” In
International Financial Contagion, edited by Stijn Claessens, and Kristin Forbes, 43-66. Boston, MA:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001.
Forbes, Kristin J., and Francis Warnock. “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight and Retrenchment.”
Journal of International Economics 88, no. 2 (2012): forthcoming
Fratzscher, Marcel. “Capital Flows, Push Versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis.” Journal of
International Economics 88, no. 2 (2012): forthcoming.
Fratzscher, Marcel. “What Explains Global Exchange Rate Movements During the Financial Crisis?”
Journal of International Money and Finance 28, no. 8 (2009): 1390-1407.

29

Gelos, Gaston. “International Mutual Funds, Capital Flow Volatility, and Contagion—A Survey.” IMF
Working Paper WP/11/92, International Monetary Fund, April 2011.
Gerlach, Stefan, and Frank Smets. "Contagious Speculative Attacks." European Journal of Political
Economy 11, no. 1 (1995): 45-63.
Glick, Reuven, and Andrew Rose. "Contagion and Trade: Why Are Currency Crises Regional?” Journal
of International Money and Finance 18 (1999):603-617.
Goetzmann, William. N., Linfeng Li, and K. Geert Rouwenhorst. “Long-Term Global Market
Correlations.” Journal of Business 78, no. 1 (2005): 1–38.
Goldstein, Morris. The Asian Financial Crisis: Causes, Cures, and Systematic Implications. Washington,
DC: Institute for International Economics, 1998.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier. “Global Imbalances and Global Liquidity.” Paper presented at the 2011 Asia
Economic Policy Conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California,
November 28-30, 2012.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Oliver, and Hélène Rey. “International Financial Adjustment.” Journal of Political
Economy 115, no. 4 (2007): 665-703.
Greenwood, Robin, Augustin Landier, and David Thesmar. “Vulnerable Banks.” TSE Working Paper 11280, Toulouse School of Economics, November 2011. http://www.tse- fr.eu/index.php?option
=com_wrapper&Itemid=371&lang=en.
Hamao, Yasushi, Ronald W. Masulis, and Victor Ng. “Correlations in Price Changes and Volatility
Across International Stock Markets.” Review of Financial Studies 3, no. 2 (1990): 281-307.
Hartmann, Phillipp, Stefan Straetmans, and Casper G. de Vries. “Asset Market Linkages in Crisis
Periods.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86, no. 1 (2004): 313-326.
International Monetary Fund. “Euro Area Policies: Spillover Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation
and Selected Issues.” IMF Country Report No. 11/185, July 2011.
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2011/cr11185.pdf.
Karolyi, Andrew G. “Does International Finance Contagion Really Exist?” International Finance 6, no. 2
(2003):179-199.
Kindleberger, Charles P. Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. New York, NY:
Basic Books, Revised edition, 1989.
King, Mervyn A., and Sushil Wadhwani. “Transmission of Volatility Between Stock Markets.” Review of
Financial Studies 3, no. 1 (1990): 5-33.
Kodres, Laura E., and Matthew Pritsker. “A Rational Expectations Model of Financial Contagion.”
Journal of Finance 57, no. 2 (2002):769-799.
Kyle, Albert S., and Wei Xiong. “Contagion as a Wealth Effect.” Journal of Finance 56, no. 4 (2001):
1401-1440.

30

Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. “The External Wealth of National Mark II: Revised and
Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004.” Journal of International Economics
73, no. 2 (2007): 223-250.
Longin, Francois, and Bruno Solnik. “Extreme Correlation of International Equity Markets.” Journal of
Finance 56, no. 2 (2001): 649-676.
Masson, Paul R. “Multiple Equilibria, Contagion, and the Emerging Market Crises.” IMF Working Paper
WP/99/164, International Monetary Fund, 1999.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria, and Cédric Tille. “The Great Retrenchment: International Capital Flows
During the Global Financial Crisis.” Economic Policy 26, no. 66 (2011): 285-342
Morgan, J. P. (2004). “Emerging Markets External Debt as an Asset Class.” October 24.
Morgenstren, Oskar. International Financial Transactions and Business Cycles. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1959.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengreen. “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: The Case of
Japan.” American Economic Review 87, no. 4 (1997): 495-505.
Pukthuanthong, Kuntara, and Richard Roll. “Internationally Correlated Jumps.” ECB Working Paper No.
1436, European Central Bank, May 2012.
Quinn, Dennis P., and Hans-Joachim Voth. “A Century of Global Equity Market Correlations.” American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 98, no. 2 (2008): 535–540.
Raddatz, Claudio, and Sergio Schmukler. “On the International Transmission of Shocks: Micro-Evidence
from Mutual Fund Portfolios.” Journal of International Economics 88, no. 2 (2012): forthcoming.
Shin, Hyun Song. “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium.” IMF Economic Review 60, no. 2
(2012): 155-192.
Van Rijckeghem, Caroline, and Beatrice Weder. “Sources of Contagion, is it Finance or Trade?” Journal
of International Economics 54, no. 2 (2001): 293-308.
Van Wincoop, Eric. “International Financial Contagion Through Leveraged Financial Institutions.”
NBER Working Paper No. 17686, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.

31

Appendix A
Country Groups for Empirical Analysis
Euro Area
Austria
Belgium
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain

Notes:

Other Advanced
Economies
Australia
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Hong Kong
Israel
Japan
Korea
New Zealand
Norway
Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
United Kingdom
United States

Rest of Sample
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
China
Colombia
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Mexico
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Russia
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
Thailand
Turkey
Venezuela

Country groupings based on IMF classifications as of April 2012.
Several current members of the euro area are not included in this base sample due to data availability.

32

Table 1
Definitions of Contagion
Paper
King and
Wadhwani (1990)

Definition of Contagion
a model in which correlations between markets increase after an idiosyncratic shock
to one market because information is imperfectly revealed

Masson (1999)

the residual in a model of market comovement; the comovement that is not
explained by global shocks, linkages through normal trade and economic
relationships, and country-specific shocks

Forbes and
Rigobon (2002)

“a significant increase in cross-market linkages after a shock to one country (or
group of countries)”

Kodres and
Pritsker (2002)
Karolyi (2003)

“a price movement in one market resulting from a shock in another market”
“irrational comovements” which are the residual in a model after controlling for
“fundamentals-based co-movements” (from real and financial linkages) and
“rational investor-based co-movements” (from rational investment decision making
by financial agents)

Bae, Karolyi and
Stulz (2003)

the fraction of “exceedance events” in a region that are not explained by the
covariates (exchange rates, interest rates, market volatility) but are explained by
“exceedance events” from another region; “exceedance events” are extreme returns
shocks (above or below the 5th or 95th quantile of the marginal return distribution) in
equity indices

Hartmann,
Straetmans, and de
Vries (2004)
Boyer, Kumagai
and Yuan (2006)

a significant increase in the conditional probability of having a crash in one market,
given one occurred in another

Dungey, Fry,
GonzálezHermosillo, and
Martin (2010)
Bekaert, Ehrmann,
Fratzscher, and
Mehl (2011)

“the effects of contemporaneous movements in asset returns across countries
having conditioned on a range of factors as represented by the common factors,
regional and idiosyncratic factors”

Forbes and
Warnock (2012)

large changes in a country’s gross capital inflows or outflows “resulting from
circumstances in another country or group of countries (but not the entire world)”

“excess correlation” between stock markets during periods of high volatility, with
“excess” defined as a significant increase in cross-market correlations for investable
stocks (relative to less accessible stocks)

“the co-movement in excess of that implied by the factor model, i.e. above and
beyond what can be explained by fundamentals taking into account their natural
evolution over time”

33

Table 2
Stock Market Correlations and Volatility Over Time
Correlations

Volatility

Correlations with controls for
global shocks
Full
Euro
Other
Sample
Area
Advanced
(7)
(8)
(9)

Full
Sample
(1)

Euro
Area
(2)

Other
Advanced
(3)

Full
Sample
(4)

Euro
Area
(5)

Other
Advanced
(6)

1981-1984
1985-1989

0.155
0.158

0.119
0.210

0.231
0.195

0.024
0.032

0.024
0.025

0.024
0.027

0.153
0.155

0.127
0.206

0.218
0.184

1990-1994
1995-1999

0.229
0.293

0.449
0.497

0.252
0.294

0.034
0.033

0.024
0.025

0.027
0.026

0.220
0.288

0.444
0.491

0.238
0.283

2000-2004
2005-2009

0.333
0.491

0.582
0.759

0.400
0.554

0.032
0.032

0.030
0.028

0.028
0.027

0.312
0.472

0.546
0.730

0.378
0.527

2010-Jun 2012

0.567

0.802

0.659

0.028

0.032

0.025

0.481

0.728

0.556

0.683
0.640

0.428
0.323

0.004
0.008

0.009
0.004

0.002
0.004

0.328
0.319

0.601
0.603

0.338
0.309

Change from 1981/84 to:
2010/12
0.412
2005/09
0.336

Notes: Columns 1-3 and 7-9 report average 52-week bilateral correlations in weekly stock market returns based on indices in local currency. Columns 4-6 report average 52-week
standard deviations for the same returns. “Full Sample” is the full sample of 48 countries. “Euro Area” is all current members of the euro area in the sample. “Other Advanced” is
advanced economies other than those in the euro area as specified by the IMF in April 2012. Countries in each group are listed in Appendix A. Columns 7 –9 include controls for
three global shocks: changes in the Economist All-Commodity Dollar Index, changes in U.S. interest rates (on a 10-year constant maturity government bond) and the TED spread.

34

Table 3
Percent of Group with Extreme Negative Returns

1981-1984
1985-1989

Full Sample
(1)
3.3%
4.3%

Euro Area
(2)
2.6%
3.7%

Other Advanced
(3)
3.9%
4.1%

1990-1994
1995-1999

4.7%
5.2%

3.0%
3.3%

4.5%
4.3%

2000-2004
2005-2009

5.1%
6.5%

6.7%
7.7%

6.0%
6.8%

2010-Jun 2012

4.7%

8.3%

5.3%

Change from 1981/84 to:
2010/12
1.5%
2005/09
3.3%

5.7%
5.1%

1.3%
2.9%

# of weeks with an extreme negative return for:
100% of group
0
6
80% of group
4
17
50% of group
22
44

1
8
38

Notes: Top of table reports the percent of each group of countries that has an extreme negative return each week in the specified period.
Extreme negative returns are local currency stock returns in the bottom 5% of the return distribution for each country over the full period.
“Full Sample” is the full sample of 48 countries. “Euro Area” is all current members of the euro area in the sample. “Other Advanced” is
advanced economies other than those in the euro area as specified by the IMF in April 2012. See Appendix A for members of each group.

35

Table 4
Extreme Value Analysis: Regression Results

% with an extreme
negative return

(1)
6.092**
(0.222)

Full Sample
(2)
(3)
6.187** 6.206**
(0.230)
(0.229)
0.017**
(0.006)

Commodity prices

(4)
6.366**
(0.297)

0.019**
(0.006)

Euro Area
(5)
(6)
6.407** 6.371**
(0.325)
(0.332)
0.017
(0.016)

Other Advanced Economies
(7)
(8)
(9)
6.317**
6.448** 6.446**
(0.362)
(0.380)
(0.393)

0.021
(0.017)

0.029**
(0.011)

0.034**
(0.012)

U.S. interest rates

0.137
(0.134)

-0.197
(0.355)

0.145
(0.333)

TED spread

0.030
(0.044)

0.090
(0.099)

0.097
(0.076)

Observations

69,190

69,190

68,758

18,226

18,226

18,118

25,549

25,549

25,405

Notes: Dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one if a country has an extreme negative return in any week. Extreme negative returns are local currency stock returns in
the bottom 5% of the return distribution for each country. Regressions estimated using the complementary logarithmic estimator with standard errors clustered by country. ”% with
an extreme negative return” is the percent of the group with an extreme negative return in the given week. Commodity prices is the change in the Economist All-Commodity Dollar
Index. U.S. interest rates are changes in the interest rate on a 10-year constant maturity government bond. “Full Sample” is the full sample of 48 countries. “Euro Area” is all
current members of the euro area in the sample. “Other Advanced” is advanced economies other than those in the euro area as specified by the IMF in April 2012. See Appendix
A for members of each group.

36

Table 5
Channels of Contagion: Regression Results
(1)

Full Sample
(2)

(3)

Euro Area
(4)

Trade * ENRAll

1.592**
(0.373)

1.580**
(0.371)

1.479**
(0.357)

3.436**
(1.116)

Bank exposure * ENRAll

0.231
(0.157)
2.776**
(0.271)

0.229
(0.158)
2.764**
(0.270)

0.180
(0.161)
2.578**
(0.271)

-0.288
(0.568)
2.194**
(0.467)

Portfolio investment
exposure * ENRAll
Portfolio inflows * ENRAll

-0.058
(0.051)
0.383
(0.608)

-0.058
(0.050)
0.398
(0.602)

-0.044
(0.046)
0.369
(0.525)

0.050
(0.116)
-0.130
(0.190)

Middle credit rating
* ENRAll
Lowest credit rating
* ENRAll

1.157**
(0.555)
0.870*
(0.528)

1.144**
(0.548)
0.873*
(0.523)

0.986**
(0.487)
0.800*
(0.466)

-4.674**
(2.290)
3.246**
(1.218)

-0.007
(0.009)

0.004
(0.011)
-1.594**
(0.302)
0.126
(0.080)

-0.007
(0.016)
-1.850**
(0.396)
-0.315**
(0.124)

23,459

23,350

7,994

Leverage * ENRAll

Commodity prices
U.S. interest rates
TED spread

Observations

23,459

Notes: Dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one if a country has an extreme negative return. Extreme negative
returns are local currency stock returns in the bottom 5% of the return distribution for each country in any week. Estimated using
the complementary logarithmic estimator with standard errors clustered by country. ENRAll is the percent of the sample with an
extreme negative return in the given week and this variable is interacted with each of the channels for contagion. Trade is
(imports + exports) / GDP. Bank exposure is (gross banking assets + liabilities) / GDP. Leverage is the ratio of private credit by
deposit money banks and other financial institutions to bank deposits, including demand, time and saving deposits in nonbanks.
Portfolio investment exposure is (gross portfolio assets + liabilities) / GDP. Portfolio inflows is gross portfolio inflows / GDP.
Middle credit rating is a dummy variable equal to 1 if countries have a credit rating below investment grade but above
“substantial risks” and Lowest credit rating is countries with a credit rating of “substantial risk” and below. Commodity prices is
the change in the Economist All-Commodity Dollar Index. U.S. interest rates are changes in the interest rate on a 10-year
constant maturity government bond.

37

Table 6
A Closer Look at Financial Channels of Contagion

Trade * ENRAll

Breakout Banking
(1)
(2)
1.088**
1.352**
(0.370)
(0.386)

Bank exposure * ENRAll
Leverage * ENRAll
Portfolio investment
exposure * ENRAll
Middle credit rating
* ENRAll
Lowest credit rating
* ENRAll
Commodity prices
U.S. interest rates
TED spread

Gross assets
Gross liabilities
Gross inflows
Gross outflows
Share of debt in
portfolio positions
Share of debt in
portfolio flows
Observations

2.795**
(0.291)
-0.096
(0.065)
0.608
(0.870)
1.181
(0.749)

2.726**
(0.278)
-0.073
(0.063)
0.834
(0.577)
0.885*
(0.507)

0.010
(0.013)
-1.849**
(0.330)
0.114
(0.102)
1.952**
(0.685)
-1.165**
(0.573)
1.221
(1.072)
-1.983
(1.369)

16,060

Breakout Portfolio Investment
(5)
(3)
(4)
1.694**
1.239**
1.825**
(0.299)
(0.318)
(0.288)
0.995**
0.509
0.800**
(0.358)
(0.345)
(0.303)
2.201**
1.165**
2.083**
(0.243)
(0.339)
(0.235)

0.982*
(0.525)
1.041**
(0.471)

-0.597
(0.860)
-0.347
(0.654)

0.738
(0.545)
1.061**
(0.478)

0.004
(0.011)
-1.587**
(0.301)
0.147*
(0.087)

0.006
(0.011)
-1.528**
(0.309)
0.138
(0.087)

0.015
(0.010)
-1.160**
(0.256)
0.033
(0.087)

0.003
(0.011)
-1.645**
(0.289)
0.106
(0.088)

1.381*
(0.825)
-0.817
(0.620)

-2.609**
(0.883)
1.815**
(0.626)
0.858
(1.507)
0.714
(1.145)

-1.216
(0.944)
0.887
(0.710)
-0.384
(1.037)
1.005
(1.066)
4.903**
(1.204)

-2.423**
(0.739)
1.737**
(0.551)
1.008
(1.542)
0.359
(1.325)

23,350

23,142

23,056

0.293**
(0.117)
22,476

Notes: See notes to Table 5 for estimation strategy and variable definitions. Gross assets, gross liabilities, gross inflows, and gross outflows all
report coefficient estimates when the gross position or flow is measured for banking or portfolio investments as specified at the top of the column.
Share of debt in portfolio positions or flows is the share of total portfolio investment positions or flows in the form of debt (instead of equity).

38

Figure 1
Media References to "Contagion"

3,500

5206

5/2011 | "Flash crash"
and major Greek protets

3,000
11/2009 | Greece more than doubles its
budget deficit estimate to 12.7% of GDP
9/2008 | Lehman declares
bankruptcy

8/1998 | Russia devalues ruble

2,500

7/1997 | Thailand devalues baht
2,000

6/2007 | Collapse of 2
Bear Stearns subprime
hedge funds

1,500
12/1994 | Mexico
devalues peso
1,000

Jan-12

Jan-11

Jan-10

Jan-09

Jan-08

Jan-07

Jan-06

Jan-05

Jan-04

Jan-03

Jan-02

Jan-01

Jan-00

Jan-99

Jan-98

Jan-97

Jan-96

Jan-95

Jan-94

Jan-93

Jan-92

0

Jan-91

500

Jan-90

Financial Press articles with references to "contagion"

12/2001 | Argentina defaults

Sources: Factiva monthly search for number of articles using the term "contagion" in the Commodity/Financial News or Economic News.

39

100%

Figure 2
Average Bilateral Correlations in Equity Returns

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%
1/3/1981

Full Sample
Euro Area
Other Advanced Economies
1/3/1986

1/3/1991

1/3/1996

1/3/2001

1/3/2006

1/3/2011

Notes: Averages are 52-week moving averages of the bilateral correla tions in equity returns based on local currency stock
indices for all countries in the specified group. "Euro Area" is the group of countries currently in the euro area. "Other
Advanced Economies" is advanced economies other than those in the euro area as specified by the IMF in April 2012.

Figure 3
Volatility in Equity Returns

6%
5%
4%
3%
2%

Full Sample
1%

Euro Area
Other Advanced Economies

0%
1/3/1981

1/3/1986

1/3/1991

1/3/1996

1/3/2001

1/3/2006

1/3/2011

Notes: Volatility is the 52-week standard deviation in equity returns based on local currency stock indices for all
countries in the specified group. "Euro Area" is the group of countries currently in the euro area. "Other Advanced
Economies" is advanced economies other than those in the euro area as specified by the IMF in April 2012.

40

Figure 4
Percent of Sample with Extreme Negative Returns
Full Sample

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%

Jan-12

Jan-08

Jan-04

Jan-00

Jan-96

Jan-92

Jan-88

Jan-84

Jan-80

0%

Euro Area

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%

Jan-04

Jan-08

Jan-12

Jan-04

Jan-08

Jan-12

Jan-00

Jan-96

Jan-92

Jan-88

Jan-84

Jan-80

0%

Other Advanced Economies

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%

Jan-00

Jan-96

Jan-92

Jan-88

Jan-84

Jan-80

0%

Notes: Extreme negative returns defined as weeks when a country's weekly stock market return is in the bottom 5% of each
country's return distribution over the full sample. “Euro Area” is the group of countries currently in the euro area. "Other
Advanced Economies" is advanced economies other than those in the euro area as specified by the IMF in April 2012.

41

Figure 5
Channels of Contagion
Median Total Trade
(as % of GDP)

90%

Average Total Trade
(as % of GDP)

120%
110%

Full Sample

80%

100%

Euro Area
Other Advanced Economies

Full Sample
Euro Area

90%

70%

Other Advanced Economies
80%

60%

70%
60%

50%
50%
40%

40%
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Notes: Sum of imports plus exports a s a percent of GDP. Mea n values exclude the two largest and sma llest
values for ea ch country group.

Notes: Sum of imports plus exports as a percent of GDP.

Mean Gross International Bank Exposure
(as % of GDP)

160%

1980

2010

150%

Median Bank Leverage
Full Sample

140%
Euro Area

140%
120%

Full Sample

100%

Euro Area

Other Advanced Economies
130%

Other Advanced Economies
80%
120%

60%
40%

110%

20%
100%

0%
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Notes: Sum of gross international ba nking assets plus liabiliites as a percent of GDP. Mean va lues exclude
the two la rgest and sma llest values for each country group.

Median Gross Portfolio Assets and Liabilities
( as % of GDP)

300%

1980

2010

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Notes: Ra tio of priva te credit by deposit money banks and other fina ncial institutions to ba nk deposits,
including dea mnd, time and saving deposits in nonba nks.

Mean Gross Portfolio Inflows
(as % of GDP)

10%

200%

Full Sample
8%

Euro Area

100%
Other Advanced Economies
6%
0%
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

Full Sample
-200%

2010
4%

-100%

2%

Euro Area
Other Advanced Economies

-300%

0%
1980

Notes: Gross portfolio assets (positive) and lia bilities (nega tive) a s a percent of GDP.

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Notes: Gross portfolio inflows (equity plus debt) a s a percent of GDP. Mea n values exclude the two largest
and sma llest values for ea ch group.

42

