NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BEHAVIORAL HAZARD IN HEALTH INSURANCE
Katherine Baicker
Sendhil Mullainathan
Joshua Schwartzstein
Working Paper 18468
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18468
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012

We thank Dan Benjamin, David Cutler, John Friedman, Drew Fudenberg, Ben Handel, Ted O’Donoghue,
Matthew Rabin, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Jonathan Skinner, Douglas Staiger, Glen Weyl, Heidi
Williams, and Danny Yagan for helpful comments. Schwartzstein thanks National Institute on Aging,
Grant Number T32-AG000186 for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18468.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Katherine Baicker, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Behavioral Hazard in Health Insurance
Katherine Baicker, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein
NBER Working Paper No. 18468
October 2012
JEL No. D01,D03,D8,I13
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a model of health insurance that incorporates behavioral biases. In the traditional
model, people who are insured overuse low value medical care because of moral hazard. There is ample
evidence, though, of a different inefficiency: people underuse high value medical care because they
make mistakes. Such “behavioral hazard” changes the fundamental tradeoff between insurance and
incentives. With only moral hazard, raising copays increases the efficiency of demand by ameliorating
overuse. With the addition of behavioral hazard, raising copays may reduce efficiency by exaggerating
underuse. This means that estimating the demand response is no longer enough for setting optimal
copays; the health response needs to be considered as well. This provides a theoretical foundation
for value-based insurance design: for some high value treatments, for example, copays should be zero
(or even negative). Empirically, this reinterpretation of demand proves important, since high value
care is often as elastic as low value care. For example, calibration using data from a field experiment
suggests that omitting behavioral hazard leads to welfare estimates that can be both wrong in sign
and off by an order of magnitude. Optimally designed insurance can thus increase health care efficiency
as well as provide financial protection, suggesting the potential for market failure when private insurers
are not fully incentivized to counteract behavioral biases.
Katherine Baicker
Professor of Health Economics
Department of Health Policy and Management
Harvard School of Public Health
677 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
kbaicker@hsph.harvard.edu
Sendhil Mullainathan
Department of Economics
Littauer M-18
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
mullain@fas.harvard.edu

Joshua Schwartzstein
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
josh.schwartzstein@dartmouth.edu

1

Introduction

Health insurance comes at a price: subsidizing health care causes people to use too much of it
(Arrow 1963, Zeckhauser 1970, Cutler and Zeckhauser 2000). Moral hazard of this kind has been
well documented empirically: there are many cases of people overusing expensive care that provides few health beneﬁts (Newhouse 1993). At the same time, the “opposite” inefﬁciency is also
well documented: the underuse of (often inexpensive) care that provides large health beneﬁts. For
example, glucose-lowering drugs increase life span, reduce the risk of limb loss or blindness and
improve the quality of life for diabetic patients. Despite these beneﬁts, many diabetics take these
drugs sporadically, with only roughly 65% adherence (Rubin 2005). Diabetes is not the exception:
the underuse of beta blockers for heart disease, medication to control HIV, antibiotics for tuberculosis, prenatal care by Medicaid populations (for whom it is free), and immunosuppresants after
organ transplants are but a few other examples (van Dulmen et al. 2007). This inefﬁcient underuse
is hard to explain in the standard model.1 Parallel to moral hazard, we call the root (mis)behavior
behavioral hazard: that is, misbehavior resulting from mistakes or behavioral biases, rather than
privately optimal but socially suboptimal choices resulting from misaligned incentives. Under
moral hazard, people overuse low value care because it is priced below cost. Under behavioral
hazard, people fail to use high-value care or inefﬁciently use low-value care because of psychological biases.2 Factoring in behavioral hazard as well as moral hazard changes the fundamental
trade-off between insurance and incentives.
Behavioral hazard does not come from one particular bias. Attention matters: choice of care
may depend on the salience of symptoms, which is particularly problematic because many severe
diseases have few salient symptoms. Timing matters: people may overweigh the immediate costs
of care, such as co-pays and hassle-costs of setting up appointments or ﬁlling prescriptions. Memory matters: people may simply forget to take their medications or reﬁll their prescriptions. Beliefs
matter: people may have false beliefs and poor learning mechanisms about the efﬁcacy of different
1

In principle, it is possible to argue that unobserved costs of care, such as side effects, drive what seems to be
underuse. However, in practice, this argument is difﬁcult to make for many of the examples we review. It is also worth
noting that the underuse we focus on is very different from the underuse that can arise in dynamic moral hazard models.
In such models, patients may underuse preventive care that generates future monetary costs for the insurer (Goldman
and Philipson 2007). Here, we focus on the underuse of care whose beneﬁts outweigh costs to the consumer. For
example, though the underuse of diabetes medications does generate future health care costs, the uninsurable private
costs to the consumer alone (e.g. higher mortality and blindness) make non-adherence likely to be a bad choice even
if she is fully insured against future health care costs. We also abstract from underuse due to health externalities (e.g.
the effect of vaccination on the spread of disease).
2
While our examples often focus on underuse, behavioral hazard can also produce overuse of care. For example,
people seek out antibiotics for children’s ear infections, an often ineffective treatment, even at prices near true costs
(Spiro et al. 2006). Older men demand surgery following a diagnosis of prostate cancer when “watchful waiting”
would be more effective (for patients themselves) and lower cost (Cohen et al. 2008; Liebman and Zeckhauser 2008).
Overuse of MRIs for low back pain doubles the number of surgeries with no improvement in outcomes (Jarvik, 2003).

2

treatments. Differentiating between biases is clearly important in designing targeted behaviorallyinformed interventions, but we show that signiﬁcant progress can be made in analyzing the effects
of traditional price levers without such differentiation. Following Mullainathan, Schwartzstein and
Congdon 2012, we nest a broad set of behavioral biases in a single model of behavioral hazard that
yields welfare calculations, optimal copay formulas, and market equilibrium predictions that are
functions of reduced-form elasticities and do not depend on the speciﬁc psychological primitives.3
4

The presence of these psychological factors changes the central insights of the standard model.
Consider the welfare impact of reducing copays. Typically this effect is decomposed into two
parts: an insurance value and a moral hazard cost. A key feature is that the moral hazard cost
can be inferred directly (and solely) from the demand response. The consumers who respond to
reductions in the copay are the ones who are close to indifference. Since copays are below cost,
this means the marginal consumers are inefﬁciently using care: they must value it less than it truly
costs. This insight is used to calculate the deadweight cost due to moral hazard (which is weighed
against some measure of insurance value which is calculated separately). For example, the RAND
Health Insurance Experiment suggests a demand elasticity of roughly .2 by comparing demand
under a plan with no coinsurance to demand under one with 95 percent coinsurance (Manning et
al. 1987, Feldman and Dowd 1991). This implies that the moral hazard induced by moving from
the plan with 95% coinsurance to the one with no coinsurance generated a welfare loss of $291 per
person from moral hazard (in 1984 dollars). Importantly for empirical work, this inefﬁciency can
be inferred without analyzing the impact on actual health, since the health beneﬁt equals the copay
on the margin.5
Behavioral hazard alters this logic. When consumers are biased, the marginal consumer may
not have a true marginal health beneﬁt equal to the copay. The rise in demand may not come from
a consumer who is inefﬁciently using more care. Instead it might come from one who was underusing the treatment before. This means that lowering copays could increase welfare by alleviating
behavioral hazard rather than reduce welfare by worsening moral hazard. We cannot tell which
case we are in from the demand response alone. Empirical work suggests that this is more than an
3

Chetty (2009) proposes a model of salience and taxation in a similar way: he derives empirically implementable
formulas for the incidence and efﬁciency costs of taxation that are robust across positive theories for why agents may
fail to incorporate taxes into choice.
4
We take the policy-maker’s welfare function as given. This sidesteps a challenge that every exercise in behavioral welfare economics faces. How should the policy-maker reconcile in a systematic way individuals’ inconsistent
preferences? See Bernheim and Rangel (2009) for a discussion of a choice-based approach to recovering consistent
welfare functions from inconsistent choice behavior. In effect, we are assuming in Bernheim and Rangel’s framework
that there is some (unmodeled in our framework) ancillary condition that the policy-maker uses to infer a consistent
preference for the agent and the objective of the welfare problem is to maximize this preference.
5
We can only equate the marginal private utility beneﬁt with the co-pay, but presumably much of this beneﬁt derives
from the health effects.

3

abstract concern: higher copays seem to dissuade the use of high-value care as much as of lowvalue care, suggesting that behavioral hazard is quite prevalent. Our model provides guidance in
some cases: it shows that the welfare impact of copay changes can be calculated using both demand
and health responses, which is useful when we can conﬁdently bound the health responses relative
to unobserved costs or beneﬁts of care. We apply this approach to a large scale ﬁeld experiment
that eliminated copays for recent heart attack victims (Choudhry et al. 2011). Taking behavioral
hazard into account proves quantitatively important: the standard moral hazard formula implies
that eliminating copays generated a modest marginal welfare cost; but once behavioral hazard is
taken into account this becomes a marginal welfare gain that is ten times larger.
In the same way, behavioral hazard changes the optimal design of insurance. In the standard
model, the optimal copay increases in the elasticity of demand, since it must balance this measure
of moral hazard against insurance value (Zeckhauser 1970). With behavioral hazard, in contrast,
the optimal copay formula now depends on both demand and health responses. This formula
provides a formal foundation for “value-based insurance design” proposals that argue for lower
cost sharing for higher value care (Chernew, Rosen, and Fendrick 2007); our model nests a more
speciﬁc result of Pauly and Blavin (2008) that applies to the case of uninformed consumers.6
For example, it implies that we should optimally have zero copays for drugs where (marginal)
health beneﬁts are large and demand is elastic.7 The introduction of behavioral hazard thus does
not just suggest novel “psychological” interventions or “nudges” (Thaler and Sunstein 2009), but
fundamentally changes how we analyze standard price levers. Nevertheless, our framework also
allows us to analyze the use of nudges, such as defaults and reminders, to mitigate overuse and
underuse. We show that responses to nudges can also be used to calculate the welfare impact of
policy changes in the absence of health data: the extent of behavioral hazard can be inferred from
comparing the demand response to prices to the demand response to nudges.
Finally, behavioral hazard changes our understanding of the structure of health insurance markets. Insurance no longer provides only ﬁnancial protection: it can also increase the efﬁciency
of health care utilization by reducing behavioral hazard (rather than just reducing efﬁciency by
creating moral hazard). This may shed light on recent evidence of the health impact of expanding insurance coverage (Finkelstein et al. 2011, Baicker and Finkelstein 2011). It also implies
a novel insurance market failure: even though optimal insurance could reduce behavioral hazard,
market-provided insurance may not. If enrollees were sophisticated about their behavioral biases –
perfectly predicting their behavioral hazard and insuring accordingly – then market-provided insurance would be optimally designed to counteract the biases.8 But with naive enrollees, insurers have
6

Liebman and Zeckhauser (2008) make a similar point, though they do not provide a formal model.
We may even want negative copays when possible, e.g., paying people to take highly effective medications.
8
We ignore ex ante heterogeneity among consumers and issues of selection. Of course, adverse selection provides
a rationale for government intervention even in the standard model.
7

4

less incentive to mitigate underuse since naive consumers will not fully value co-pays designed to
counteract their biases.9 These problems are especially severe when insurers have nudges as well
as prices available and when they have limited time horizons (and thus do not bear the full cost
of enrollees’ future health care use). We show that this accords with some existing patterns of
insurance plan features and coverage.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 makes the case for the need to incorporate behavioral
hazard into the standard model, laying out evidence of behavior inconsistent with moral hazard
alone. Section 3 presents the model, beginning with traditional moral hazard and then adding
behavioral hazard. Section 4 considers optimal design and Section 5 develops tools for empirically
calibrating the welfare impact of co-pay changes as well as the optimal co-pay formula. Section 6
analyzes the equilibrium insurance contract and examines when and how this contract differs from
the optimum. Section 7 concludes. Proofs are in the Appendix, as are some extensions of the basic
model and a case study applying the model to treatment of hypertension.

2

Behavioral Hazard

2.1

Evidence

In this section, we describe some evidence that is meant to motivate our analysis of behavioral
hazard. Table 1a summarizes some examples suggestive of underuse. Much of the evidence on
underutilization comes from (lack of) adherence to prescribed drugs. Partly this is because costs
(including side effects) and beneﬁts are often better measured for drugs than for other treatments.
In the case of diabetes, for example, estimates suggest that despite the dire health consequence of
unmanaged diabetes, adherence to glucose-controlling drugs is only between 60 and 80% (Rubin
2005). One study showed that almost half of diabetic patients did not have their prescriptions ﬁlled
consistently, despite the fact that consistent ﬁlling cut the risk of hospitalization in half (Sokol et
al., 2005). Adherence appears to be even lower among Medicaid recipients, for whom the cost of
the medication is zero. Underuse is of course not restricted to prescription drug non-adherence.10
Patients do not receive recommended care across a wide range of categories, with only 55 percent
receiving recommended preventive care including screenings (e.g., colonoscopies) and followup care for conditions ranging from diabetes and asthma management to post-hip-fracture care
9

Insurers will face some incentive to counteract negative behavioral hazard since naive consumers over-estimate
their demand in this case, which creates some beneﬁt to reducing copays. But negative behavioral hazard will not be
efﬁciently managed in equilibirum.
10
Cleemput et al. (2002) note some of the methodological challenges in cost-beneﬁt analysis of non-compliance.

5

(McGlynn et al., 2003; Denberg et al., 2005; Ness, 2000).11 12
While highly suggestive of behavioral factors at work, this evidence can nevertheless be interpreted through the lens of the standard model. Health care can have unobserved costs (such
as side-effects) or unobserved beneﬁts (such as hard-to-quantify reductions in pain). There can
be heterogeneous treatment effects and patients might know (or learn) that certain treatments do
not work for them despite high average returns or do work for them despite low average returns.
As a result, choices that appear to reﬂect some bias might actually be optimal. These arguments
are surely relevant in some cases. For example, reducing obesity through exercise and calorie
control decreases mortality and morbidity. Yet many overweight people over-eat and fail to exercise. Labeling these behaviors as suboptimal or irrational may reﬂect misinterpretation based on
the mismeasurement of the private costs of exercise and the private enjoyment from food. Our
research has deﬁnitively determined that running is unpleasant and donuts are tasty!13
Nonetheless, as we argue in more detail after presenting the formal model, some of the behaviors described in Table 1a likely reﬂect misutilization due to behavioral hazard. First, the
magnitudes involved often make the case for unobservable factors less plausible, as discussed in
greater detail in Section 5. It is difﬁcult to argue that preferences are consistent with rationally
choosing not to pay a $5 copayment and swallowing a pill with minimal side-effects when it
produces a substantial reduction in the probability of mortality. To take one particularly striking
example, relatively small reductions in copayments even after an event as salient as a heart attack
still produce improvements in adherence: providing post-heart attack medications for free (instead
of roughly a $10-$25 copayment) increased adherence by about 5 percentage points (relative to a
base of 35-50 percent), and this increase was associated with a reduced rate of subsequent major
vascular events (Choudhry et al., 2011). Second, while there is plenty of evidence of heteroge11

For example, less than 66 percent of recommended immunizations were delivered, 54 percent of recommended
care for asthma patients, and 45 percent of recommended care for diabetics. Rates of recommended screening for colorectal cancer are only 40%, despite the fact that one-time screening among younger populations is highly cost-effective
and estimates suggest compliance would prevent almost 10,000 deaths annually (Denberg et al., 2005; Ness, 2000).
Prenatal care has an important effect on the health and survival of newborns, but despite expansions of Medicaid to
many low-income pregnant women, more than 30 percent of women do not receive prenatal care in the ﬁrst trimester
of pregnancy (Currie and Gruber 1996; Institute of Medicine; HRSA). An NCQA study (2005) concluded that half of
chronically ill patients are not compliant with recommended care.
12
Evidence on the effects of expanding health insurance is consistent with these patterns of underuse. For example,
in a recent randomized trial expanding public health insurance to low-income adults, insurance coverage increased
use of preventive care such as mammograms by 60%, blood sugar testing for diabetes by 15%, cholesterol monitoring
by 20%, and pap smears by 45% (Finkelstein et al., 2011; Baicker and Finkelstein 2011). While we would expect
insurance to increase use (because of both subsidized copays and relaxation of budget constraints with imperfect
credit markets), the magnitude of the change in use of care with high marginal value and moderate costs seems likely
to be driven by behavioral factors as well.
13
However, there is some evidence suggesting that even for these examples there are behavioral forces at work.
Individuals display signs of time inconsistency in both of these cases, reporting a desire to change behavior but not
doing so.

6

neous treatment beneﬁts, there is less indication that people self sort in the manner predicted by
the standard moral hazard model. For example, Goldman et al. (2006) estimate that a $10 increase
in copayments drives similar reductions in use of cholesterol-lowering medications among those
with high risk (and thus high health beneﬁts) as those with much lower risk. Finally, observed
reactions to “nudges” further builds the case for behavioral hazard. If people are simply rationally
trading off current costs and future beneﬁts, then a text message reminder or simpliﬁcation of the
dosage schedule should not produce a substantial change in adherence, but there is ample evidence
that such nudges do produce substantial changes (Schedlbauer et al. 2010; Schroeder et al. 2004;
Strandbygaard et al., 2010).14
It is also worth noting that there are examples of overuse that are hard to reconcile with the
standard model, as summarized in Table 1b.15 The case of (over)treatment of back pain is illustrative. Back pain is wide-spread and expensive: it is the second leading symptomatic cause of
physician visits and cost more than $25 billion in 1998 (Deyo 1992, 2006; Strine 2007, Luo 2004).
Routinely doctors prescribe fMRIs despite evidence that suggests they are ineffective (Di Iorio,
2000, Jarvik, 2003; American College of Radiology 2010; Chou 2009; Sheehan 2010). Similarly,
there is also mounting evidence of the overuse of detection and treatment of prostate cancer. Because the disease is rarely fatal and the cancers are quite slow-growing, the ﬁve-year survival rate
for those diagnosed is 99.4% (Howlader et al., 2011). Perlroth, Goldman, and Garber (2010) show
that “watchful waiting” is as effective as more expensive clinical teatments, yet 58% of prostate
cancer patients pursue these more aggressive options – costing Medicare $1.7-$3.0 billion, exposing patients to risk, and not improving their prognosis.16 Unlike the evidence on underuse,
though, it is practically difﬁcult to rule out psychic beneﬁts that drive this overuse (such as “peace
of mind”), making it difﬁcult to empirically separate overuse due to behavioral hazard from that
due to moral hazard. While our model allows for overuse that is behaviorally motivated, most of
the examples we focus on are thus of underuse.
14
For example, adherence to statins is far from perfect and is responsive to nudges and small copayment changes.
Schedlbauer et al. (2010) note that poor patient adherence “is a major factor in the lack of success in treating hyperlipidaemia.” They ﬁnd that nudges focusing on reminders and reinforcements were particularly promising, with four
out of six trials reviewed producing signiﬁcant increases in adherence ranging from 6-24 percentage points. Similarly,
simplifying the dosing schedules for blood pressure medication can lead to a 10-20% increase in adherence (Schroeder
et al., 2004) and text reminders increased adherence to asthma medication by almost 20% (Strandbygaard et al., 2010).
15
Of course, there are many examples of overuse consistent with traditional moral hazard – where patients face very
low marginal costs and consume care with extremely high social costs but not commensurately high health beneﬁts.
For example, one study of the use of Cetuximab (Erbitux) for non-small cell lung cancer calculated a total cost of
$80,352, but only increased overall survival by 1.2 months – or a cost of $800,000 per life-year (Fojo et al. 2009).
16
Testing for prostate cancer may be similarly overused. Prostate speciﬁc antigen (PSA) testing has been performed
on most men in the US over age 50 (Ross, Berkowitz, & Ekwueme, 2008). However, recent large scale clinical trials
indicate that PSA screening has, at best, a small effect in reducing mortality, and that the risks likely outweigh the
beneﬁts (Andriole et al. 2009, Schröder et al. 2009, M. Djulbegovic et al., 2010).

7

2.2

Underlying Psychologies

What drives behavioral hazard? The literature has uncovered several different psychological forces.
Individuals appear to overweight salient symptoms and underweight less salient ones (Osterberg and Blaschke 2005). Salience of symptoms relative to the costs and beneﬁts of care can drive
overuse or underuse. In the case of diabetes, symptoms of elevated glucose levels are not salient
(Rubin 2005), and it is easy to undervalue the health beneﬁts of taking a pill whose effects cumulate slowly over time.17 Rates of recommended screening for colo-rectal cancer are only 40%
(compared with around 75% for mammograms), despite the fact that one-time screening among
younger populations is highly cost-effective (Denberg et al., 2005; Ness, 2000), perhaps because
there are no salient symptoms that would drive one to get screened. Patients at stage B or C of
HIV/AIDS (symptomatic stages) are more likely to be adherent to their treatment regimens than
are patients at stage A (the asymptomatic stage) (Gao et al. 2000). With tuberculosis, most treatment regimins are at least six months in length, but effective therapy leads to improved symptoms
after the ﬁrst four weeks and a concurrent drop-off in adherence. Similarly, salience may also drive
overuse. Pain, for example, is highly salient. Even knowing in the abstract that the pain may selfresolve, patients may overweight the current pain and push for costly tests and treatments. Stories
in the popular press highlight the role of symptom salience: a recent report noted the death of an
uninsured patient with a tooth infection who was prescribed an antibiotic and a painkiller and who
spent his limited resources to ﬁll the painkiller prescription (ABC news, 2011).
Other biases are likely important as well. Present bias (Laibson 1997, O’Donoghue and Rabin
1999) may drive behavior when the beneﬁts of care are in the distant future but its costs appear
in the present. In these cases, present bias would lead one to under-use care. For example, the
hassle of obtaining prenatal care is paid now, whereas the beneﬁts happen later. False beliefs could
play a role. Tuberculosis patients may stop taking their antibiotics halfway through their drug
regimen not just because salient symptoms have abated but also because they believe the disease
has disappeared. People may falsely attribute efﬁcacy as well. For example, people may confuse
reversion to the mean with treatment efﬁcacy.
Finally, people may simply forget. In addition to forgetting to take medication on a given day,
people can forget to reﬁll prescriptions. A related phenomenon is “white coat adherence”, whereby
patients tend to improve their adherence 5 days before and after a doctor’s appointment compared
to 30 days after (Osterberg and Blaschke 2005). Who among us does not ﬂoss more regularly right
before a dentist appointment?
Given this evidence, how should insurance contracts optimally respond to the presence of behavioral hazard?
17

There are short term beneﬁts of controlling glucose, such as increased energy and better quality sleep, but many
patients do not recognize these beneﬁts (Rubin 2005).

8

3

Model Incorporating Moral Hazard and Behavioral Hazard

We begin with a stylized model of health insurance. Consider an individual with wealth y. Insurance has price, or premium, P . When healthy the individual has utility U (y − P ) if she buys
insurance. With probability q, she can fall sick with a varying degree of severity s that is private
information on the part of the individual. For example, individuals may be afﬂicted with asthma
that varies in how much it debilitates. In Appendix B, we extend the model to consider a situation
with multiple illnesses and treatments covered by the same insurance contract. Assume s ∼ F (s),
where F has support on S = [s, s̄] ⊂ R+ and s < s̄. Assume further that F (s) has strictly positive
density f (s) on S. Severity is measured in monetary terms so that when sick, absent treatment, the
agent receives utility U (y − P − s).
Treatment however can lessen the impact of the disease. Treatment costs c and its beneﬁt
b(s) depends on severity. The more severe the disease the greater the beneﬁts: b (s) > 0. We
also assume b(0) = 0 (the unaffected get no beneﬁt) and b (s) ≤ 1 (the treatment cannot at the
margin make the person better off than not having the disease). Once again the beneﬁts are put in
monetary terms. It is efﬁcient for some but not all of the sick to get treated: b(s) < c < b(s̄). We
assume that the insured individual pays price or “co-pay” p to receive treatment. Notice that the
price p is independent of severity; we implicitly assume that severity of any given disease cannot
be contracted over because the insurer cannot perfectly measure it. The interpretation is that the
co-pay is conditional on all information known to the insurer (e.g., the disease and treatment), but
the individual may have some residual private information. In this way, we nest the traditional
moral hazard model. An insured individual who receives treatment for his disease gets utility
U (y − P − s + b(s) − p).

3.1

Moral Hazard

In this simple setup the choice to receive treatment when insured is easy: the rational person gets
treated whenever beneﬁts exceed price: p < b. This decision is the source of moral hazard. As we
will see, the insurance value in insurance comes from setting price below true cost. This subsidized
price can generate distortions. Individuals should efﬁciently get treated whenever b > c, but they
get treated whenever b > p. So individuals for whom beneﬁts are in between the price and the cost
p < b < c are inefﬁciently receiving service: privately, getting treated makes sense (beneﬁts exceed
private costs) but socially it does not (beneﬁts do not exceed social cost). Figure 1 illustrates this
issue of moral hazard that is at the heart of the insurance design problem. Individuals are arrayed
on the line according to treatment beneﬁts. Those to the right of the cost c should receive treatment
and do. Those to the left of the price p should not receive treatment and do not. The middle region
represents the problem: those individuals should not receive treatment but they do. Raising the
9

price individuals face diminishes this over-utilization, but as we will see this comes at the cost of
diminished insurance value.

p
 

c
  

 

b
  
 

  

Figure 1: Standard Model

Notice a key prediction of the standard model: insurance is the source of misutilization. Since
people accurately trade off the beneﬁts and costs of medical care, misutilization stems from copays deviating from social cost. More formally, deﬁne m(p) to be an individual’s demand for care
at a given price: for the rational agent, it equals 1 if and only if b(s) > p. Now let
H(p) = E[m(p)b − s]

(1)

represent the aggregate level of health and deﬁne
E(p) = H(p) − cM (p)

(2)

as the level of health net of the costs of supplying that level, where M (p) = E[m(p)] is the
aggregate demand for medical care at a given copay level p. H(p) represents the expected value of
disease severity post treatment decisions at co-pay level p (again, in income-equivalent units), and
E(p) nets out the costs of treatment at that co-pay level. An efﬁcient level of health is generated
when H  (p) = cM  (p), which holds if and only if p = c. That is, the amount of care consumed
is efﬁcient if and only if people are uninsured and bear the full costs of care. When p < c, the
resources devoted to producing health are inefﬁciently high.18
18

For simplicity, we are assuming away income effects or issues of affordability. In a standard framework, insurance could lead to more efﬁcient levels of health insofar as it makes high-value, high-cost procedures affordable
to consumers (Nyman 1999). However, in this framework, insurance cannot lead consumers to make more efﬁcient
decisions on the margin. Abstracting from income effects serves to highlight this well-known fact (Zeckhauser 1970).

10

3.2

Incorporating Behavioral Hazard

As the discussion in Section 2 suggests, however, there is ample evidence of behavior that is difﬁcult to interpret as a rational actor’s response to subsidized prices. We next incorporate behavioral
hazard alongside the traditional moral hazard.
3.2.1

Capturing Diverse Psychologies in One Framework

We incorporate behavioral hazard through a simple modiﬁcation of the original model. Instead
of decisions being driven by a comparison of true beneﬁts to price, evaluating whether b(s) > p,
people choose according to whether b(s) + ε(s) > p, where ε is positive in the case of positive
behavioral hazard (for example, seeking an ineffective treatment for back pain) and negative in the
case of negative behavioral hazard (for example, not adhering to effective diabetes treatment). We
assume that b(s) + ε(s) is differentiable and strictly increasing in s.
When behavioral biases exist, other non-price levers - “nudges” - also affect demand. For
example, as detailed in Section 2, reminders or explanations that make the costs of non-adherence
more salient can affect utilization, as can hassle factors like making it difﬁcult to make a doctor’s
appointment or requiring prior authorization to reﬁll a prescription. Formally, there is a set N of
nudges available to insurers, where a nudge is modeled as affecting demand through inﬂuencing
the behavioral error ε. The direct cost to the insurer of nudge n is ψ(n) ≥ 0. Suppose there is a
“default nudge” n = 0 ∈ N with ψ(0) = 0. Unless otherwise noted, we assume the insurer sets
the default nudge and notationally suppress the relationship between the nudge and the behavioral
error.
This formulation follows Mullainathan, Schwartzstein and Congdon (2012) and implicitly captures a divide between preference as revealed by choice and utility as it is experienced, or between
“decision utility” and “experienced utility” (Kahneman et al. 1997). In our framework b − p affects
the experienced utility of taking the action. Individuals instead choose as if b + ε − p affects this
utility. We focus on behavioral models that imply a clear wedge between these two objects – in
other words, models that generate a non-zero ε term, or an “internality”. This clariﬁes a category
of behavioral models that lies outside our focus: models of non-standard preferences. For example,
anticipation and anxiety may alter how individuals experience beneﬁts (Koszegi 2003): beneﬁts
will vary depending on whether taking the action (such as getting an HIV test) leads to anxiety
in anticipating the outcome. In these kinds of situations it may be wrong to model the behavioral
factor as a bias affecting ε, but rather as a force that affects the mapping between outcomes (such
as getting a diagnostic test) and beneﬁts b.
Note also a simplifying feature of the basic model: biases are homogeneous and expressed with
certainty, conditional on the disease and severity – i.e., ε(s) is non-stochastic (ﬁxing s). The case
11

where ε is stochastic is formally considered in Appendix B, where this extension allows us to analyze psychologies like forgetfulness, where ε(s) is strongly negative only with some probability.19
Allowing for heterogeneity in the degree to which people are biased does not substantively affect
the normative analysis, but complicates the presentation.
At the same time, this simple formalization captures a variety of behavioral phenomena. Three
examples are summarized here.
Example 3.1. Present-bias (e.g., Laibson 1997, O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999)
Take the canonical (β, δ) model of present-bias, where, for simplicity, δ = 1. Suppose each
treatment is associated with an immediate cost but a delayed beneﬁt. Formally, b(s) = v(s) −
k(s), where v(s) represents delayed beneﬁts and k(s) represents immediate costs. While standard
agents (for simplicity) are assumed not to discount future beneﬁts, behavioral agents discount these
beneﬁts by factor β ∈ (0, 1), quantifying the degree to which they are present-biased. Instead of
getting treated whenever b(s) = v(s) − k(s) > p, present-biased agents get treated whenever
b(s) + ε(s) = βv(s) − k(s) > p. In this case, ε(s) = −(1 − β)v(s). Given this micro-foundation,
behavioral hazard is negative whenever the beneﬁts of treatment are delayed, where the magnitude
of the bias is increasing in these beneﬁts. (Behavioral hazard is positive if beneﬁts are immediate
and costs are delayed, corresponding to the situation where k(s) < 0, v(s) < 0.)
Example 3.2. Inattention (e.g., DellaVigna 2009)
Consider DellaVigna’s (2009) model of limited attention and suppose the severity of symptoms
is the sum of three components: the severity of highly visible or painful symptoms, v, the severity
of opaque or non-painful symptoms, n, and other symptoms, o. Formally,
s = v + n + o.

(3)

The behavioral agent overweighs the painful symptoms and underweighs non-painful symptoms,
so he acts not on true disease severity s, but on “decision severity”
ŝ = αv + βn + o,

(4)

where α > 1 and β < 1. Thus,
b(s) + ε(s) = b(v + n + o) + ε(s) = b(αv + βn + o) ⇒
ε(s) = b(αv + βn + o) − b(v + n + o).
19

(5)

Allowing for forgetfulness does not change how copays affect welfare, but the equilibrium co-pay does depend
on the level of forgetfulness since it inﬂuences the degree to which the agent misforecasts her demand for treatment.

12

From (5) we see that behavioral hazard is negative whenever non-painful symptoms are sufﬁciently
prominent (i.e., n > v(α − 1)/(1 − β)) and is positive whenever painful symptoms are sufﬁciently
prominent (i.e., v > n(1 − β)/(α − 1)). The magnitude of the hazard depends on the composition
of painful and non-painful symptoms.
Example 3.3. False beliefs
An extremely simple example consistent with our formulation is one where agents mis-estimate
or have false beliefs about the beneﬁt to getting treated. For example, people may overweigh the
beneﬁts to buying an herbal medicine with no known efﬁcacy. Instead of getting treated when
b(s) > p, such agents get treated when b̂(s) > p, where b̂(s) is the decision beneﬁt to getting
treated. In this case, ε(s) = b̂(s) − b(s). Under this model, behavioral hazard is positive whenever agents overweigh the beneﬁts of treatment (b̂(s) > b(s)) and is negative whenever agents
underweigh the beneﬁts of treatment (b̂(s) < b(s)).
3.2.2

Implications for the Demand Curve

No matter the micro-foundation, behavioral hazard changes how we think about the demand for
treatment. We illustrate this in Figure 2. We have now added a second axis to form a square instead
of an interval. The vertical axis now represents b + ε, once again recognizing that b + ε can vary
by individual. The horizontal line now separates the region where b + ε > p. We see the ranges of
misutilization are no longer clear. The people in the bottom left corner (where b + ε < p and b < c)
are efﬁcient non-users. Those in the top right corner (where b + ε > p and b > c) are efﬁcient
users. But there are now three other interesting regions.
The bottom right area is a region of underutilization. People fail to consume care in this region
because b + ε < p but the actual beneﬁts exceed social cost. Such a region is intriguing because
the traditional model does not generate underutilization. Examples from Table 1a illustrate such
underutilization. The top left area illustrates overutilization. In this area, beneﬁts of care are below
cost so b < c, and the efﬁcient outcome is for the individual not to get treated. Yet because
b + ε > p the behavioral agent receives care. This area can be broken down further, according to
whether b + ε > c. When this inequality holds, decision beneﬁts are above cost even though true
beneﬁts are below cost. In this case, overutilization will not be solved by setting price at true cost.
Examples from Table 1b illustrate such overutilization.
In short, misutilization is not solely a consequence of health insurance in the behavioral framework. Insurance can thus lead to more efﬁcient health delivery by counteracting biases. In particular, health net of costs, E(p), is maximized not at p = c but rather when p = c + ε, where ε
should be evaluated at the disease severity of the marginal agent given co-pay p. The efﬁcient level

13

b+ε

 

 

 

p
  


 

  

c


   


b
  


Figure 2: Model with Behavioral Hazard

of health may be greater or lower than that absent insurance. Given that health insurance can have
this beneﬁt, how is it efﬁciently designed?

4

Optimal Health Insurance Design

Using this more ﬂexible model, we ﬁrst solve for the socially optimal insurance policy (before
turning to what the market is likely to provide). To begin, we model an insurance policy as having
only two components: the ﬁxed premium P paid irrespective of care received and the price paid for
care p that cannot be based on s. (Later, we will consider what happens when insurers can also set
nudges.) Since the baseline model only considers a single disease and treatment, the co-pay can be
interpreted as conditional on all information known the insurer, e.g., the diagnosis and treatment.20
Recall that m(p) represents an individual’s demand for care at a given price: it equals 1 if and only
if b(s) > p for the rational agent and b(s) + ε(s) > p for the behavioral agent.
We focus ﬁrst on a benevolent social planner designing health insurance to maximize social
20

Appendix B considers a situation with multiple illnesses and treatments exogeneously covered by the same co-pay.

14

welfare. Speciﬁcally, it maximizes:
W = (1 − q)U (y − P ) + qE[U (y − P − s + m(p)(b − p))|sick].

(6)

W represents the expected utility. The ﬁrst term is the utility if individuals do not get sick: they
simply pay the premium. The second term is the utility if they do get sick: the expected utility
(depending on disease severity) which includes the loss due to being sick (−s) as well as the
beneﬁts of care net of costs to individuals (b − p) for the times they choose to use care (m(p) = 1).
We assume that the social planner faces a break-even constraint – insurance must be self-funding:
P = M (p)(c − p).
To understand how the social planner should design insurance, it is useful to think about how
social welfare changes as the co-pay p changes. Assume the (positive) copay is below cost c
and we are considering an increase. Absent a demand response, a rise in co-pay lowers utility for
people who are sick enough that they demand treatment. Since these are the times when individuals
have the highest marginal utility (by assumption), this produces a negative effect of increasing the
copay: it diminishes insurance value.21 Of course, people’s choice of care could change. We will
begin by focusing on rational actors.

4.1

Rational Actors

Consider in Figure 3 the effect of raising the price from p < c to p . All those whose beneﬁt of
treatment falls between p and p will now no longer consume that care. Assuming this change is
small, p < c, so beneﬁts for these marginal individuals lie below costs and increasing the co-pay
has the beneﬁt of reducing overutilization. This produces the basic tradeoff of insurance design
when people are rational: a higher price reduces moral hazard but lowers insurance value.
This intuitive trade-off has a quantitative analogue. Differentiating W with respect to p subject
to the break-even constraint, and converting into a money metric by normalizing the increase in
welfare by the welfare gain from increasing income by 1 yields:22
dW dW
/
= −M  (p)(c − p) − I · M (p),
dp dy

(7)

To be more precise, our assumptions guarantee that a rise in the co-pay from p ∈ (0, c) diminishes insurance
value when all individuals are rational actors because, in that case, the sick who demand treatment are worse off than
the sick who do not, even post treatment. Since this may not hold with behavioral hazard, stronger conditions (for
example, that q is sufﬁciently small) are necessary to guarantee that the people who demand treatment on average have
higher marginal utility than those who do not.
22
Demand M (p) is differentiable almost everywhere, but may not be differentiable at pmin = inf {p : M (p) < q}
max
= sup {p : M (p) > 0}. In both these cases, M (p) still has left- and right-hand derivatives. To ease notation,
or p
take M  (p) to be the right-hand derivative unless otherwise noted, with the understanding that this equals the derivative
almost everywhere.
21

15

p p'

c
  

 

 

b
  
 

  

Figure 3: Effect of Changing the Co-pay on Utilization in the Standard Model

where I =



E[U  (C)|m=1]−E[U  (C)]
E[U  (C)]



equals the insurance value to consumers (C = y − P − s +

m(b − p)).23
Equation (7) captures the trade-off discussed above. The ﬁrst term, −M  (p)(c − p), represents
the welfare gain from reducing moral hazard: it can be thought of as the number of people who
are at the margin multiplied by the difference between the social cost and social value of their
treatment – the marginal inefﬁciency – (c − p). Note that the sensitivity of demand, M  (p), is a
sufﬁcient statistic for measuring this gain, since the marginal social value is a known function of
the co-pay when people are rational. The second term represents the reduction in insurance value
for all treated individuals.
The optimal co-pay balances this trade-off, as illustrated in the following Proposition.
Proposition 1. An optimal co-pay, pS , under the standard model exists. Supposing pS = 0 and
demand is positive and price-sensitive at this co-pay, i.e., M (pS ) > 0 and M  (pS ) < 0, the co-pay
also satisﬁes
c − pS
I
= ,
S
p
η

(8)

M  (p)p
M (p)

(9)

where
η=−
equals the elasticity of demand for treatment.
According to Equation (8), ﬁxing insurance value, co-pays should be higher the larger the cost
23

To better interpret this expression, note that when U is quadratic, I can be simply expressed as


(E[C])
− UU  (E[C])
E[C]

γL
E[C] ,

where

γ=
is the coefﬁcient of relative risk aversion evaluated at E[C] and L = E[C] − E[C|m = 1] is the
magnitude of the loss.

16

and elasticity of demand.24 This intuition is at the heart of rational models of copays. It suggests,
for example, that copays should be lower for emergency care (where demand is less elastic) than
for regular doctor’s ofﬁce visits (where it is presumably more sensitive). The elasticity of demand
at a co-pay below cost provides a signal of the degree to which demand at that co-pay is driven by
the utilization of those with a correspondingly low valuation; i.e., the extent of the moral hazard
problem. The value of treatment does not enter into the standard formula: the social planner need
not make this determination when patients optimally choose whether to receive care.
Proposition 1 additionally implies bounds on the optimal co-pay under the standard model. Let
pF I denote the co-pay that would make the individual fully insured under the standard model. In
other words, pF I is implicitly deﬁned as the co-pay under which I = 0, given that m = 1 if and
only if b > p. We will assume parameter values are such that pF I is unique so long as U  < 0.
For the case where U  = 0, just pick an arbitrary value of p below c. Note that in the special
case where b(s) = s for all s (getting treated always returns the individual to full health), pF I = 0
whenever the individual is risk averse.
Corollary 1. Under the standard model:
1. The optimal co-pay is below cost so long as the individual is risk averse: pS ≤ c with strict
inequality if and only if U  < 0.
2. The optimal co-pay is above the level that provides full insurance so long as demand is
price-sensitive at this co-pay: pS ≥ pF I with strict inequality so long as M  (pF I ) < 0.
Corollary 1 implies that, under the standard model, optimal insurance is almost always partial.
So long as the individual is risk-averse, all treatments should to some extent be covered. So long
as there is moral hazard and demand is price-sensitive at low co-pays, people should bear some of
the risk of needing treatment. As we will see, these qualitative features of the optimal insurance
contract no longer hold in the presence of behavioral hazard.

4.2

Behavioral Actors

How should the social planner design insurance for behavioral actors? Consider in Figure 4 the
effect of raising the price from p < c to p . While in the standard model, all those whose true
beneﬁt of treatment falls between p and p no longer consume care, now those whose perceived or
decision beneﬁt of treatment falls in this range are marginal. Since decision beneﬁt may lie below
true beneﬁt, for example when symptoms are not salient or following through is difﬁcult, raising
24

Proposition 1 does not guarantee uniqueness of the optimal co-pay. Statements regarding “the” optimal co-pay
(e.g., the optimal co-pay is above X) should be read as holding for “any” optimal co-pay (e.g., any optimal co-pay is
above X).

17

the co-pay may discourage high value care. The behavioral model does not produce as simple a
tradeoff between moral hazard and insurance value.

b+ε

 

 

 

p'
p
  


 

  

c


   


b
  


Figure 4: Effect of Changing the Co-pay on Utilization in the Behavioral Model

Differentiating W with respect to p subject to the break-even constraint, and normalizing
yields:
dW dW
/
= −M  (p)(c − p + ε ) − I · M (p),
dp dy
where ε =

(10)

U (y−P −s)−U (y−P −s−ε)
E[U  (C)]

is an increasing function of ε and should be evaluated at the disease severity of the marginal agent.25 (Note that ε = ε for linear U , so we have the approximation
ε ≈ ε if we take U to be approximately linear). Equation (10) illustrates the discussion above.
The second term again represents the reduction in insurance value for all treated individuals. The
ﬁrst term, −M  (p)(c − p + ε ), captures the welfare-effect of lower utilization: it can be thought of
as the number of people who are at the margin multiplied by the difference between the social cost
and social value of their treatment, (c−(p−ε )). Unlike in the standard model, the sign of this term
is ambiguous. When behavioral hazard is positive, ε > 0, and this term is positive: increasing the
25

In other words, let s̃ denote the disease severity of the marginal agent: b(s̃) + ε(s̃) = p. Then ε =

U (y−P −s̃)−U (y−P −s̃−ε(s̃))
.
E[U  (C)]

18

co-pay from an amount less than cost has the beneﬁt of decreasing overutilization. On the other
hand, when behavioral hazard is negative, ε < 0, and this term may be negative: increasing the
co-pay can have the cost of increasing underutilization. In this case, a greater elasticity of demand
may signal a greater marginal cost of raising the co-pay, rather than a greater marginal beneﬁt as
the standard model suggests.
With certain diseases, we might expect that when the co-pay is set sufﬁciently below cost some
individuals will inefﬁciently receive care even with negative behavioral hazard. In this case (or with
positive behavioral hazard), the optimal co-pay again trades-off the beneﬁt of reducing demand
against the cost of diminishing insurance value.
Proposition 2. An optimal co-pay, pB , under the behavioral model exists. Supposing pB = 0 and
demand is positive and price-sensitive at this co-pay, i.e., M (pB ) > 0 and M  (pB ) < 0, the co-pay
also satisﬁes
c − pB
ε
I
−
=
.
pB
η pB

(11)

There are two key implications of Equation (11). First, co-pays should vary across treatments
with similar demand elasticities, unlike in the standard model where the elasticity of demand is a
sufﬁcient statistic for the optimal co-pay (ﬁxing cost c and insurance value I). To illustrate, it may
be optimal to vary co-pays across classes of drugs with similar costs and demand elasticities if we
expect drugs across these classes to be differentially misvalued. Despite having similar demand
elasticities, it is possible that co-pays for drugs treating chronic conditions (e.g., antidiabetics)
should be lower than co-pays for symptom-alleviating drugs (e.g., pain medications), for example.
While advocated by some health researchers (for example, Chernew et al. 2007), such differential
cost-sharing is a rarity in practice, as illustrated in Table 2. We will return to the question of
why competitive markets may fail to result in efﬁcient outcomes following the positive analysis of
Section 6.
A second implication of Equation (11) is that health “insurance” is no longer just about ﬁnancial protection: it can also result in more efﬁcient health care delivery. As noted above, newly
insured patients consume much more high-value, low-cost care - a jump unlikely to be solely
driven by the change in prices and relaxation of credit constraints that come with insurance. Even
when individuals are risk-neutral and there is no value to ﬁnancial insurance (I = 0), Equation
(11) indicates that the optimal co-pay can differ from cost to provide behavioral consumers with
incentives for more efﬁcient utilization decisions.26 In fact, when consumers are risk-neutral and
26

In this spirit, some insurers have begun to experiment with incentivizing patients to take their medications, as
reported in a recent New York Times article (http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/14/health/14meds.html). See also
Volpp et al. (2009).

19

biased (ε(s) = 0 for all s), the extent of behavioral hazard (at the margin) fully determines the
optimal co-pay, which differs from cost and maximizes health net of costs, or E(p).
Proposition 2 implies that optimal co-pays may be outside the bounds implied by the standard
model.
Corollary 2. Under the behavioral model:
1. The optimal co-pay may be above cost even when the individual is risk averse: can have
pB ≥ c even when U  < 0.
2. The optimal co-pay may be below the level that provides full insurance even if demand is
price-sensitive at this co-pay: can have pB ≤ pF I even when M  (pF I ) < 0.
Corollary 2 implies that, under the behavioral model, optimal insurance need not be partial.27
If positive behavioral hazard is sufﬁciently large, it can be optimal for the insurance company to
deny coverage of certain treatments, even if they beneﬁt some risk-averse individuals. If negative
behavioral hazard is sufﬁciently large, it can be optimal for the insurance company to fully cover
(or even subsidize) treatments, even when demand is price sensitive.
It is important to emphasize that both behavioral and moral hazard vary across conditions and
can be forces that work in the same direction or opposite directions in jointly determining the
optimal co-pay. In the case of blood pressure medication, for example, moral hazard may drive
use up (increasing the optimal copay) while negative behavioral hazard drives use down (reducing
the optimal copay). On the other hand, in the case of MRIs for back pain, both moral hazard
and positive behavioral hazard drive use up (increasing the optimal copay). Finally, take the case
of setting a broken bone (a high value, hard-to-overdo procedure). In this situation, there may be
little scope for moral hazard (b(s) > c) and thus no case for positive copays, even absent behavioral
hazard.
Nudges
In Section 6 we consider some properties of the optimal plan when nudges are available, and
compare it to the plan provided by the market.28 For now, we merely point out that the optimum
may involve nudging that encourages care. For example, ﬁx the co-pay at the optimal level under
27

To be precise, the amount of insurance coverage is measured with respect to the degree to which people would
be insured if they behaved according to the standard model. For example, if b(s) = s for all s, then we say the agent
is fully covered when p = 0 because in this case his marginal utility would be independent of disease severity if he
acted in accordance with the b > p choice rule. Note that in this example the agent’s marginal utility may be still be
stochastic if he sometimes fails to get treated at zero co-pays due to negative behavioral hazard.
28
A detailed analysis of optimal nudging in more general policy problems can be found in Mullainathan,
Schwartzstein and Congdon (2012).

20

the default nudge. A sufﬁcient condition for it to be better to nudge in a way that encourages care
is roughly that such nudging results in health beneﬁts that outweigh direct costs of greater demand
plus any costs of implementing the nudge.29

4.3

Interpreting the Evidence

These results (particularly Equation (10)) highlight an important point for empirical work. They
suggest that simply looking at demand responses alone can provide a misleading impression. When
there is merely moral hazard, the overall demand response is a powerful tool for measuring the
welfare impact of the changes in utilization driven by co-pay changes. When there is behavioral
hazard, this composite response is harder to interpret. For example, a high response might indicate
a great deal of moral hazard (and hence a cost of providing insurance) or could indicate a great deal
of negative behavioral hazard or price-responsive underutilization (and hence an additional beneﬁt
to insurance).
There are many empirical estimates of these aggregate demand responses. When one looks
closer, these aggregate responses hide a great deal of diversity, some of which is consistent with
behavioral hazard. In fact, there is evidence that demand for “effective care” is often as elastic
as demand for “ineffective care” - as summarized in Table 3. A quasi-experimental study of the
effects of small increases in copayments (rising from around $1 to around $8) among retirees in
California by Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight (2010) suggests that HMO enrollees’ elasticity for
“lifestyle drugs” such as cold remedies and acne medication is virtually the same as for acute care
drugs such as anti-convulsants and critical disease management drugs such as beta-blockers and
statins - all clustered around -0.15 (2007; unpublished details provided by authors, summarized in
Table 4). Johnson et al. (1997) ﬁnd that small drug copay increases (rising from 50% coinsurance
up to a max of $25 to a 70% coinsurance up to a max of $30) drove reductions of 40% in both
anti-asthma medications and in mild analgesics. Adherence to antidiabetic medications is also
quite price sensitive and reductions in adherence are associated with greater rates of amputation,
ulcers, and short-term disability days (Gibson et al. 2010; Goldman et al. 2004). Analysis of the
RAND health insurance experiment found that cost-sharing induced the same 40% reduction in
beta blockers as it did in cold remedies - with reductions in drugs deemed “essential” on average
the same as those deemed “less essential” (Lohr et al., 1986).
Much of the “effective care” that is reduced with the introduction of small increases in low copays seems likely to be indicative of behavioral hazard rather than moral hazard - and can lead to
29

Nudges that reduce demand can also be useful when there is positive behavioral hazard, since such nudges can
curb overuse without undermining insurance value. It is tempting to suppose that nudging in a way that eliminates
errors is always optimal when such nudging is possible and does not have direct costs. However, such debiasing can
undermine broader social welfare in cases when it increases demand and, with it, the moral hazard cost of insurance
(Mullainathan et al. 2012, Pauly and Blavin 2008).

21

serious health consequences (as summarized in Table 5). The reduction in high-value care shown
in Chandra et al. (2010) is associated with increases in subsequent hospitalizations. Similarly,
Hsu et al. (2006) found that the imposition of a cap on Medicare drug beneﬁts reduced adherence
to chronic disease medications and was associated with a subsequent increase in hospitalizations.
Selby et al. (1996) ﬁnd that the imposition of a $25-$35 emergency room copay resulted in a decrease of emergency room utilization in truly emergency situations (such as cardiac arrest, stroke,
heart attack, appendicitis, or respiratory failure) of almost 10%. A number of studies (Chernew,
2008; Goldman, 2006; Landsman, 2005; Johnson, 1997; Lohr, 1986) show reductions in use of
statins, anti-depressants, beta blockers, or asthma medications of known efﬁcacy associated with
even small increases in low copayments. Beta blockers, for example, can reduce post-heart attack
mortality by 20-30% (Yusuf et al., 1985), and statins can reduce the risk of events like heart attacks
by 25% (Zhou et al., 2006).
In light of this empirical evidence, optimal copays cannot be determined solely using demand
responses to co-pay changes. Rather, Proposition 2 highlights the need to understand the degree to
which people make mistakes on the margin – the marginal behavioral error (or internality), ε.

5

Empirical Implementation

5.1

Using Estimates of the (Marginal) Health Value of Care: A Foundation
for Value-Based Insurance Design

Several methods for estimating the marginal behavioral error (or internality), ε, are available. First,
we consider how this error can be estimated by comparing health and demand responses to higher
co-pays.
Proposition 3. Consider a co-pay, p, at which demand is price-sensitive, so M  (p) < 0. Let s(p)
denote the disease severity of the marginal agent given the co-pay and let ε(p) ≡ ε(s(p)) denote
the behavioral error of the marginal agent. The following relationship holds between the marginal
behavioral error, demand responses, and health responses:
ε(p) = p −

H  (p)
.
M  (p)

(12)

From Equation (12), we see that behavioral hazard is negative at the margin whenever there
is a positive net return to the last private dollar spent on treatment, and is positive otherwise.30 A
slightly more complicated formula holds in more general models allowing for heterogeneity (see
To clarify, for p > 0, Equation (12) is negative whenever ε(p)
p < 0 which is true if and only if
i.e., if and only if there is a positive net return to the last private dollar spent on treatment.
30

22

1
p

·

H  (p)
M  (p)

− 1 > 0,

Proposition 8 in Appendix B), but that formula has identical implications for understanding the
welfare impact of raising the co-pay and for setting optimal co-pays.
Proposition 3 can be used to estimate the welfare impact of raising the co-pay and to calibrate
the optimal co-pay formula. Plugging (12) into (10) and making the approximation ε ≈ ε yields


dW dW
H  (p)

/
≈ −M (p) c − 
− I · M (p).
dp dy
M (p)

(13)

In the standard model, Equation (13) reduces to (7) (because, in the standard model, |H  (p)| / |M  (p)| =
p), and the ﬁrst term of (13) is positive because there is a negative net return to the last social dollar
spent on treatment (assuming p < c).31 More generally, the ﬁrst term of (13) is positive if and only
if there is in fact a negative net return to the last social dollar spent on treatment; i.e., increasing the
co-pay results in social cost savings that exceed the monetary value of health losses. Otherwise,
raising the co-pay is costly both because it reduces insurance value and utilization.32
Turning to the optimal co-pay, we make the approximation ε ≈ ε and plug (13) into (11),
yielding
I
c−p
≈ +
p
η




H  (p)
−1 .
pM  (p)

(14)

From Equation (14) we roughly have that co-pays should be lower (higher) than traditionally
argued if increasing the co-pay tends to result in a reduction of consumer spending on health
that is lower (greater) than the associated dollar value of health losses. Put another way, co-pays
should be lower than traditionally argued when there is a positive net return to the last private
dollar spent on treatment and should be adjusted according to the magnitude of this net return,
|H  (p)| / (p |M  (p)|) − 1.
Note that, unlike in the standard model, the value of treatment now enters into the determination
of the optimal co-pay insofar as it inﬂuences H  (p). For a given demand response to co-pays,
co-pays should be lower when this demand response has greater adverse effects on health. This
response should be estimated treatment by treatment. Thus, it is possible that copays should be
lower for routine maintenance visits for people with chronic diseases than for general doctor’s


H (p)
p−c
In the standard model, the net return on the last social dollar spent on treatment equals 1c · M
 (p) − 1 =
c .
32
Standard estimates of the welfare loss of “excess health insurance” fail to take into account the deviation between
|H  (p)| / |M  (p)| and p (e.g., Feldstein 1973, Feldman and Dowd 1991). When, over the relevant range, the ﬁrst term
exceeds the second (health responses are quite big), standard estimates of the welfare beneﬁt of setting a higher co-pay
will be too large. In particular, if insurance value is small (e.g., because of low levels of risk aversion), then standard
estimates tend to suggest a welfare gain to reducing insurance coverage from existing levels whenever demand is
sufﬁciently elastic. In a more ﬂexible model, this ﬁnding would be reversed for treatments where the net return to the
last social dollar spent on treatment is positive over the relevant range.
31

23

ofﬁce visits (Newhouse 2006). More broadly, behavioral hazard provides a foundation for valuebased insurance design (Chernew et al. 2007, Pauly and Blavin 2008), where, all else equal, cost
sharing is lower for higher value care.
Note also that equations (13) and (14) are robust to more general assumptions about the nature
of insurance contracts and biases. As demonstrated in Appendix B, these equations continue to
hold even when (i) a co-pay change affects demand for a broad category of treatments (e.g., the
insurer faces a prohibitively high administrative cost to differentiating between many treatments),
(ii) biases are heterogeneous across the population (e.g., some people are more present-biased than
others), and (iii) people may simply be forgetful in deciding whether to get treated.
An Empirical Example
We draw on Choudhry et al.’s (2011) work on the effects of eliminating copays for recent heart attack victims to illustrate the potential importance of taking behavioral hazard into account.33 They
randomly assigned patients discharged after heart attacks to a control group with usual coverage
(with copayments in the $12-$20 range) or a treatment group with no co-payments for statins, beta
blockers and ACE inhibitors (drugs of known efﬁcacy), and tracked adherence rates and clinical
outcomes over the next year. Faced with lower prices, consumers used more drugs: the full coverage group was signiﬁcantly more adherent to their medications, using on average $106 more worth
of cardiovascular-speciﬁc prescription drugs.
Under the moral hazard model, this fact alone tells us the health consequences of eliminating
copays. Rational patients forgo only care with marginal value less than their out-of-pocket price.
The average patient share under usual coverage in the Choudry data is about 25%, implying that
the extra care consumed when copays are eliminated has a monetized health value of at most $.25
on the dollar. Given the $106 increase in spending, the moral hazard model then predicts a health
impact of at most $106 · .25 = $26.50 per patient. This in turn implies a moral hazard welfare loss
from eliminating copayments of at least $106(1 − .25) = $79.50 per person. In other words, the
$106 increase in spending is comprised of $26.50 of health value plus $79.50 of excess utilization.
This is the kind of exercise routinely performed with demand data.34
But Choudhry et al. collected data on health impacts, which we can use to gauge the performance of the moral hazard model by comparing the implied health beneﬁts with the observed ones.
33

We use this particular study because it measures not only demand responses, but also a rich variety of health
responses. While the setting is admittedly quite speciﬁc, we believe the qualitative conclusions are illustrative for
broader populations and treatments. Appendix C provides a stylized example using the case study of treatment for
high blood pressure, though it is difﬁcult to perform a rigorous analysis given data limitations.
34
Given the standard assumption that people have linear demand curves, we can derive a tighter lower bound on the
welfare loss. In this case, the moral hazard model implies a welfare loss of at least $106(1 − .25/2) = $92.75 (see,
e.g., Feldman and Dowd 1991).

24

The increase in prescription drug use was associated with signiﬁcantly improved clinical outcomes:
patients in the full coverage group exhibited lower rates of vascular events (1.8 percentage points),
myocardial infarction (1.1 percentage points), and death from cardiovascular causes (.3 percentage
points). We apply the commonly used estimate of a $1 million value of a statistical life to the
reduction in the mortality to get a crude measure of the dollar value of health improvements.35
This implies that the elimination of copays leading to a .3 percentage point reduction in mortality
generates a value of $3,000. This $3,000 improvement substantially exceeds the standard model’s
prediction of $26.50, suggesting large negative behavioral hazard.36
This also suggests that we need a very different welfare calculation. In the presence of behavioral hazard, we need to use an estimate of the marginal private health beneﬁt to calculate
welfare. To perform a rough back-of-the-envelope calculation, take the $3,000 ﬁgure from above.
The $106 increase in spending then generates a surplus of $2,894 per person (a gross return of $28
per dollar spent).The presence of behavioral hazard thus reverses how we interpret the demand
response to eliminating copayments in this example: Moral hazard implies a welfare loss, while
behavioral hazard implies a gain that is over 30 times larger in magnitude.37 In both models, of
course, lowering copays also increases the insurance value of the plan.
This example illustrates the importance of having estimates of both demand responses and
health responses to changes in prices. This information is not available for all services, in part
because of the difﬁculty in linking clinical and administrative data (Goldman and Joyce 2012). It
would certainly be daunting to perform an exhaustive list of experiments and calculations, but it
is worth noting that a small number of conditions account for a large share of health spending.
In particular, the areas in which we observe substantial underutilization – such as management of
chronic diseases like diabetes, high blood pressure, asthma, and high cholesterol – are responsible
for a substantial share of total health care utilization. Patients with circulatory system conditions
like high blood pressure and high cholesterol are responsible for 17% of total health care spending;
mental conditions like depression for another 9%; respiratory conditions like asthma another 6%;
35

This calculation is admittedly crude, but provides an illustrative example. Estimates of the value of a statistical
life clearly vary based on the age at which death is averted and the life expectancy gained – averting the death of a
young healthy worker might be valued at $5 million - and mortality is only one aspect of the potential changes in
health. While the estimated reduction in mortality is not statistically signiﬁcant at conventional levels, the other health
impacts are. We focus on the mortality reduction because it is easiest to monetize.
36
Making this point in a slightly different way, applying the traditional moral hazard calculus in this situation implies
that people place an unrealistically low valuation on their life and health.
37
As in basic moral hazard calculations, this analysis ignores substitution between treatments. In this example,
total spending (prescription drug plus nondrug) went down by a small, non-statistically signiﬁcant amount when
co-payments were eliminated on preventive medications after heart attack, as did insurer costs. Taking these nonsigniﬁcant offset effects at face value would imply that welfare goes up even before taking behavioral hazard into
account (Glazer and McGuire 2012), though it raises a puzzle as to why private insurers did not reduce co-pays on
their own. However, even in this case, incorporating behavioral hazard substantially changes the analysis by providing
a strong rationale for reducing the co-pay that does not rely on offsetting cost savings.

25

and endocrine conditions like diabetes another 4% (Roehrig et al., 2009). This means that a limited
number of studies linking price changes, demand changes, and health changes could go a long way.
Even absent such multi-step evidence, however, we can glean some benchmarks about the
potential beneﬁts of optimal copayment design in a model with both moral hazard and behavioral
hazard from the literature that looks at particular steps in this chain. This requires applying results
from one particular step (e.g. the effect of a co-pay change on one measure of adherence, such
as reﬁlling prescriptions) generated from a particular marginal population to the next step (e.g.
effect of a different measure of adherence, such as missed pills, on heart attacks) generated in a
different setting with a different population, over a different time frame, etc. Appendix C provides
a very stylized example using the case study of treatment for high blood pressure. High blood
pressure afﬂicts 68 million adults in the U.S. (CDC Vital Signs 2011) and is an important driver
of overall health care costs. Anti-hypertensive drugs are effective, but adherence is only between
50 and 70 percent, suggesting negative behavioral hazard. Using existing estimates, we show
that small reductions in copays increase compliance with anti-hypertensive therapy and that better
compliance generates substantial health gains. This implies a large net return on the marginal social
dollar spent on improving blood-pressure medication adherence - and that the failure of existing
plans to address behavioral hazard could be generating large costs.
Potential Challenges
Of course, a challenge to empirically implementing Equation (14) is that portions of the health response may be unobservable, or difﬁcult to map to hedonic beneﬁts. It may be possible to estimate
the degree to which taking a pill reduces the risk of mortality and translate this into (money-metric)
utility; it may be more difﬁcult to estimate certain side-effects, or the inconvenience of treatment.
In some instances, however, we may have enough information to conﬁdently bound the unobservable component in which case we can still say something about the sign and possibly the magnitude
of the behavioral error.
To illustrate, decompose the change in health per marginal change in demand into observable
and unobservable components:
H  (p)
= hO (p) + hU (p),
(15)
M  (p)
where hO (p) represents the observable component, and hU (p) the unobservable component. For
example, the observable component could include a proxy for quality-adjusted life years gained per
marginal ﬁlled prescription and the unobservable component could include non-pecuniary costs
(e.g., side-effects) associated with ﬁlling the prescription (all in dollars). If we can bound the
unobservable component as belonging to [hU (p),hU (p)], then we can also bound the behavioral

26

error:
ε(p) ∈ [p − (hO (p) + hU (p)), p − (hO (p) + hU (p))].

(16)

Bound (16) can be useful in giving a sense of the welfare impact of changing the co-pay or even
in pinning down the optimal co-pay if it is constrained (e.g., to lie in [0, c]) when the magnitude of
the observable health change is large relative to the uncertainty about the unobservable component.
This is more likely to be the case when considering certain highly efﬁcacious treatment regimins
with few suspected painful side effects (e.g., treatments listed in Table 1) than in considering
treatments with direct non-pecuniary costs that may be experienced quite differently across people
(e.g., colonoscopies). Returning to the Choudhry et al. (2011) example, it seems unlikely that
the cost of unobserved side-effects of statins, beta blockers, and ACE-inhibitors is anywhere near
$2894 for a given patient in a year, so taking these effects into account should not reverse the
conclusion that eliminating co-payments leads to a welfare gain.
This bound is also helpful in illustrating where the logic of this framework is on slippery
ground. Take the case of caloric and unhealthy (“junk”) foods. The net beneﬁts of these foods
consists of both the long term health costs of eating these foods and the short term beneﬁts they
provide. While the health costs of the marginal agent are plausibly estimable, the short term
beneﬁts are not (absent a structural model). Trying to apply the bounding exercise above to junk
foods would only be plausible to the extent that one can rule out that individuals do not receive
as much idiosyncratic pleasure as the measured portion of the internality. This is not to say that
there are not internalities, merely that in cases such as these (and others) we may not be able to
effectively use the bounds to build a reasonable case.
In such instances, other data or prior information may be useful. One approach is to examine
demand responses to nudges.

5.2

Other Approaches

Using Nudge Responses
Nudges (e.g., text message reminders) can also be used to help estimate the marginal behavioral
error, so long as there is some belief that a nudge inﬂuences demand through affecting the agent’s
marginal valuation, as illustrated in the following proposition.
Proposition 4.
1. (Negative behavioral hazard). Suppose we know that ε0 ≤ 0 and εn ≤ 0 for all s. Further,
let p0 , pn be such that p0 < pn , but 0 < M0 (p0 ) ≤ Mn (pn ) < q. Then,
−ε0 (p0 ) ≥ pn − p0 ,
27

(17)

where ε0 (p0 ) ≡ ε0 (s(p0 )) is the behavioral error evaluated at the disease severity of the
marginal agent given co-pay p0 and nudge n = 0.
2. (Positive behavioral hazard). Alternatively, suppose we know that ε0 ≥ 0 and εn ≥ 0 for all
s. Further, let p0 , pn be such that pn < p0 , but 0 < Mn (pn ) ≤ M0 (p0 ) < q. Then,
ε0 (p0 ) ≥ p0 − pn .

(18)

To illustrate how Proposition 4 can be used to estimate ε0 , suppose a researcher is convinced
that a treatment is undervalued, and he has access to nudge n which he believes brings decision
utility more in line with hedonic utility. Bound (17) can be applied whenever demand is interior
and M0 (p0 ) ≤ Mn (pn ). The latter condition can be re-written as
−
[M (p ) − Mn (pn )]
≥ 0,
Mn (p0 ) − M0 (p0 )

 n 0
demand response to nudge demand response to co-pay change

(19)

so bound (17) can be applied whenever the demand response to an increase in co-pay from p0 to
pn , ﬁxing the nudge at n, is lower in magnitude than the demand response to the nudge, ﬁxing
the co-pay at p0 . Thus, the tightest lower bound a researcher can estimate for −ε0 (p0 ) is p̃n − p0 ,
where p̃n is the value of pn that equates the demand response to an increase in co-pay to the demand
response to the nudge; i.e., it is the value that makes (19) hold with equality.
This discussion points to an empirical strategy of how to estimate the degree to which treatments are misutilized and therefore how insurance should be designed. Even if some nudge is not
a cost-effective means of promoting better health choices when scaled up, it may nonetheless be
useful to implement the nudge on a small scale to estimate structural parameters of the behavioral
model through comparing demand sensitivity to the nudge with sensitivity to co-pay changes.
Using Positive Models of Behavior
Conﬁdence in speciﬁc, positive, assumptions about utility and behavior can also be useful (Beshears
et al. 2008, Mullainathan et al. 2012). For example, if the marginal internality is thought to arise
from present-bias, then knowledge of the degree to which beneﬁts or costs of treatment are immediate or delayed can give a sense of which treatments should have higher or lower co-pays.
These models can also be useful in quantitatively estimating ε and, in turn, the optimal co-pay.
For example, in the case of present-bias, we showed before that ε(s) = −(1 − β)v(s), where
β ≤ 1 captures the degree of present-bias and v(s) represents delayed beneﬁts of treatment. This
reduces the problem of estimating the marginal internality to estimating the degree of present-bias,
β, and the delayed beneﬁts (or costs) of treatment. If we are conﬁdent that estimates of present28

bias transfer well from one context to another, then this implies that we can estimate the marginal
internality without directly estimating current beneﬁts or costs to treatment, an approach that is
particularly helpful when these terms are the hardest to pin down (e.g., the disutility from getting
a colonoscopy) and we can use previous estimates of β (for example, taken from Laibson et al.
2006).38

6

What Will the Market Provide?

The analysis in Section 4 addressed the normative question of how we should design health insurance. We now address the companion positive question of what the market will actually provide.
Doing so will allow us to analyze whether the equilibrium insurance contract in fact results in
more efﬁcient health delivery through counteracting biases (as compared to a world without health
insurance), and whether there is room for welfare-improving government intervention.

6.1

Basic Model

We derive the equilibrium insurance contract in a competitive market. This contract may differ from the optimal contract because people may not fully understand how they are biased and
misforecast their demand for treatment. Formally, deﬁne m̂(p) to be an individual’s forecasted
demand for care at a given price: it equals 1 if and only if b(s) + ε̂(s) > p, where ε̂(s) represents
the forecasted wedge between decision and hedonic valuations. At the time of contracting, the
agent may not appreciate that she will undervalue the need to take a chronic disease medication or
that she will seek out any treatment for back pain. Deﬁne forecasted aggregate demand to equal
M̂ (p) = E[m̂(p)]. In common with much of the behavioral literature, we will highlight two extreme cases: the case where the agent perfectly understands her biases and the case where she
thinks she is unbiased at the time of contracting. Formally, the agent is said to be sophisticated
when ε̂(s) = ε(s) for all s and to be naive when ε̂(s) = 0 for all s.39
In equilibrium, the market will supply insurance plan (P, p) to maximize the agent’s perceived
38

To take a related example, Gruber and Koszegi (2001) calibrate the optimal tax per pack of cigarettes through
estimating the health consequences of smoking, together with making assumptions about the degree of present bias.
39
There is another potential form of naivete, namely that behavioral agents misperceive treatment beneﬁts at the time
of contracting, not just at the time of making a treatment decision (i.e., at the time of contracting, they misforecast the
beneﬁt of getting treated as b(s) + ε(s) given severity s). It would be natural to assume this form of naivete if decision
errors are the result of incorrect beliefs about treatment beneﬁts, for example, but not if these errors are the result of
biases such as procrastination. We abstract from this form of naivete to limit the number of cases considered. However,
we note that it is particularly easy to characterize the equilibrium outcome given this form of naivete: it is just the
solution to the planner’s problem if the planner mistakenly perceives treatment beneﬁts as equaling b̂(s) = b(s) + ε(s)
for all s. That is, the equilibrium co-pay would satisfy (8).

29

expected utility
Ŵ = (1 − q)U (y − P ) + qE[U (y − P − s + m̂(b − p))|sick]

(20)

subject to zero proﬁt constraint40
P = M (p)(c − p).

(21)

The agent’s perceived expected utility Ŵ can differ from her actual utility W because she may
misforecast her demand for treatment.
Since the optimal contract maximizes W subject to (21), it is immediate that the optimal and
equilibrium contract coincide when the agent is sophisticated. To derive the terms of the contract
for the more general case, totally differentiate Ŵ subject to (21) with respect to p and normalize:
dŴ dŴ
/
= −M̂  (p)(c − p + ε̂ ) − IˆM̂ (p)
dp dy


(22)



+ (|M (p)| − |M̂ (p)|)(c − p) + (M (p) − M̂ (p)),
where Iˆ =
y−P





E[U  (C)|m̂(p)=1]−E[U  (Ĉ)]
equals the forecasted insurance value to consumers (Ĉ
E[U  (Ĉ)]
(y−P −s−ε̂)
− s + m̂(b − p)) and ε̂ = U (y−P −s)−U
is an increasing function of ε̂ and should
E[U  (Ĉ)]
41

=
be

evaluated at the forecasted marginal disease severity.
The terms on the ﬁrst line of (22) just equal the perceived counterparts of those that make up the
true welfare effect of a higher co-pay: the ﬁrst is the perceived welfare effect of lower utilization
and the second is the perceived reduction in insurance value. The terms on the second line are
more interesting. These arise because the agent may misforecast demand and consequently view
the tradeoff between a higher co-pay and a lower premium as being more or less favorable than
it actually is. Formally, the zero proﬁt condition means that the equilibrium insurance contract
is actuarially fair. The premium thus goes down by −M  (p)(c − p) + M (p) for every marginal
40

As is well known, the solution to (20) and (21) will coincide with the outcome when insurers maximize proﬁts
max P − M (p)(c − p)
P,p

subject to an “individual rationality” constraint for the representitive agent
Ŵ ≥ ū,
where ū is such that the solution to this problem yields zero proﬁts. In fact, the formula we derive for the equilibrium
co-pay holds for any ū, so the degree of market power does not change the logic of how co-pays will be set in
equilibrium.
41
In other words, let ŝ denote the forecasted marginal disease severity: b(ŝ) + ε̂(ŝ) = p. Then ε̂ =
U (y−P −ŝ)−U (y−P −ŝ−ε̂(ŝ))
.
E[U  (Ĉ)]

30

increase in the co-pay. However, the agent believes that it should go down by −M̂  (p)(c − p) +
M̂ (p). Differencing these two expressions gives the second line of (22). Overforecasting the
degree to which the premium should go down reduces the apparent desirability of raising the copay; underforecasting raises the apparent desirability.
Setting (22) equal to zero produces a formula for the equilibrium co-pay.
Proposition 5. An equilibrium co-pay, pE , under the behavioral model exists. Supposing pE = 0,
and demand as well as forecasted demand are positive and price-sensitive at this co-pay, the copay also satisﬁes
ε̂
M̂  (pE ) Iˆ
(M̂ (pE ) − M (pE ))
c − pE
−
.
=
+
pE
M  (pE ) η̂ pE
pE |M  (pE )|

(23)

Welfare under pE is (weakly) lower than welfare under pB .
Comparing (23) with (11) shows that the equilibrium co-pay differs from the optimal co-pay
because the agent misforecasts demand: there is a market failure resulting from lack of sophistication.
To gain more intuition for how this works, consider the simple case of a risk-neutral naive agent
(so I = Iˆ = 0, ε = ε, and ε̂ = ε̂ = 0). In this case, the optimal co-pay formula reduces to
pB = c + ε(s(pB )),

(24)

where s(p) denotes the disease severity of the marginal agent given co-pay p. Note that, at the
optimal co-pay, the marginal agent fully internalizes her “internality” (the difference between p
and c acts as a Pigouvian tax set at the level of the marginal internality ε(s(p))).42 Additionally,
this co-pay maximizes health net of costs, or E(p).
On the other hand, the equilibrium co-pay in this case satisﬁes
pE = c +

M (pE ) − M̂ (pE )
.
|M  (pE )|

(25)

Rather than being determined by the level of the marginal internality, the equilibrium co-pay is set
according to the difference between actual and predicted demand: the larger this difference, the
42

Since the optimal co-pay in this case acts as a Pigouvian tax to get the agent to internalize his internality, it
is tempting to think that the analysis would be the same if we were to think of ε as an externality rather than an
internality. However, there are important differences. If ε were an externality then market forces alone would not
correct the problem (Coasian bargaining seems unlikely in this setting) - government intervention would be necessary.
However, when people are sophisticated, market forces can correct an internality. Likewise, even when people are
naive, market forces can lead to an equilibrium in which agents partially internalize their internality, as we will soon
see.

31

greater the co-pay. Since, generically, these terms do not coincide, the equilibrium co-pay tends
to result in inefﬁcient levels of health (E(pE ) < E(pB )): There is a social loss from equilibrium
insurance not being value-based.
However, the difference between co-pay and cost will go in the right direction. With negative
behavioral hazard (ε(s) < 0 for all s), the optimal co-pay is set below the cost of care to encourage
demand, pB < c. In this case the equilibrium co-pay will also lie below the cost of care, pE < c,
but for an entirely different reason: a naif overestimates his own demand and views the tradeoff
between lower co-pays and higher premiums as more favorable than it actually is.43 (By a symmetric argument, with positive behavioral hazard, pB > c and pE > c.) A way to see this intuition
even more sharply is when agents are inattentive and forget to get treated with some probability
that is independent of decision beneﬁts and costs, a case formally considered in Appendix B. The
optimal copay does not depend on the forgetting probability because this probability does not inﬂuence decisions at the margin. Yet, at the same time, forgetfulness leads agents to overforecast
their usage and, in equilibirium, proﬁt maximizing ﬁrms will have an incentive to lower the copay
in response to this bias.

6.2

Nudges

Suppose insurers are able to use nudges. Deﬁne m̂n (p) as the individual’s forecasted demand for
care at a given price conditional on nudge n: m̂n (p) equals 1 if and only if b(s) + ε̂n (s) > p.
Let M̂n (p) ≡ E[m̂n (p)] equal forecasted aggregate demand given a nudge. For a sophisticated
consumer, ε̂n = εn for all n: sophisticates completely understand how nudges will affect their
decisions. For a naive consumer, ε̂n = 0 for all n: naifs think their decisions will be independent of
nudges. Naifs do not appreciate that reminders and educational programs will improve adherence,
or that small hassel factors will greatly inﬂuence whether they seek treatment.
We assume that nudges can be contracted over. In equilibrium, the market will supply insurance
plan (P, p, n) to maximize the agent’s perceived expected utility
Ŵ = (1 − q)U (y − P ) + qE[U (y − P − s + m̂n (b − p))|sick]
43

(26)

This is analagous to why proﬁt-maximizing ﬁrms may charge high up-front fees and below-cost usage prices for
“investment goods” when consumers are partially naive about their self-control problems (DellaVigna and Malmendier
2004). In this way, our model may help explain why the insurance plans we see in the world appear “too generous”
(too low co-pays and deductibles) relative to simulated optimal plans (Cutler and Zeckhauser 2000). Likewise, our
model can help explain why physicals and gym memberships may be covered, despite such coverage having little to
no insurance value.

32

subject to zero proﬁt constraint
P = Mn (p)(c − p) + ψ(n).

(27)

If the representative agent is sophisticated it is again immediate that the equilibrium insurance
contract will be efﬁcient. In particular, nudges will be supplied optimally. Matters are different
if the agent is naive. In this case, m̂n is independent of n, so nudges will only affect Ŵ insofar
as they inﬂuence the size of the premium through zero proﬁt constraint (27). Fixing the co-pay,
the nudge that maximizes Ŵ subject to (27) will be the one that minimizes insurer costs. In other
words, when the agent is naive, the equilibrium nudge given co-pay p will solve
Mn (p )(c − p ) + ψ(n ).
min

n

(28)

We thus have:
Proposition 6. If the representative agent is sophisticated then the equilibrium nudge is efﬁcient
in the sense that the planner would choose such a nudge. If the representative agent is naive,
insurers nudge in a way that minimizes their costs: the equilibrium nudge, nE , solves (28) given
equilibrium co-pay pE .
Note an implication of Proposition 6 when the agent is naive and the equilibrium co-pay is
lower than cost c: since the expression being minimized in (28) is decreasing in demand Mn (p ),
the equilibrium nudge will (weakly) discourage care relative to the default nudge. This is independent of the initial bias: when nudges are available, equilibrium insurance contracts may exacerbate
rather than help counteract biases.
Matters are different when insurers’ bottom line depends indirectly on whether agents are
treated, perhaps because a failure to get treated will lead to greater expenses within the horizon
of the insurer. For example, it may be costly to the insurer if an insuree does not get a ﬂu shot. A
simple reduced form way to capture this is to extend the model so getting treated may reduce other
costs to the insurer, where these other costs are given by λχ(M ) (λ ≥ 0,χ(M ) ≥ 0, χ (M ) < 0).
The zero proﬁt constraint is now:
P = Mn (p)(c − p) + ψ(n) + λχ(Mn (p)).

(29)

The limiting case where λ = 0 is the situation we have considered so far - the case where the
marginal cost of treatment equals the direct cost of providing treatment (e.g., the cost of a pill).
When λ > 0, the marginal cost to the insurer is lower by |λχ (M )| because getting treated reduces
other expenses. The equilibrium nudge may encourage care in this situation even when agents are
naive, as such a nudge may improve the insurer’s bottom line.
33

Proposition 7. Suppose the zero proﬁt condition is given by Equation (29), the representative agent
is naive, and pE < c. If λ = 0 then the equilibrium nudge weakly discourages care relative to the
default nudge: MnE (pE ) ≤ M0 (pE ) with strict inequality if ψ(nE ) > 0. On the other hand, if
λ > 0 and the equilibrium co-pay is (exogeneously) restricted to be positive, then the equilibrium
nudge may encourage care: it is possible that MnE (pE ) > M0 (pE ).

6.3

Evidence on Private Plans

These results suggest that competitive forces do not lead to efﬁcient equilibrium insurance contracts when insurees are naive about their biases, but that the insurer will have an incentive to
counteract biases when this saves the insurer money. These results may shed light on why more
health insurance plans do not incorporate behavioral hazard into their copayment structures. Recall
the evidence from Table 2, which summarizes the features of several major insurance plans. Copayments are rarely a function of the health beneﬁt associated with the care for a particular patient.
Simply lowering copays for beta blockers and other negative behavioral hazard care could have
signiﬁcant social welfare gains - but the gains may not accrue to the insurer. Beaulieu, Cutler et al.
(Commonwealth Report, 2003) estimate that investment in diabetes disease management produces
very small monetary gains for insurers over a 10 year horizon, but would produce $30,000 per
patient in improved quality of life and longevity.44
Nevertheless, insurers could increase proﬁts by promoting adherence to medications and treatments that save money over a reasonably short horizon (relative to the typical tenure of their enrollees), and the model suggests that insurers will invest in encouraging care in such instances. For
example, ﬂu shots are often given for free and at enrollees’ convenience. Perhaps for a similar
reason, insurers are also funding research into promoting adherence to certain treatments (Belluck,
2010) and in-house programs aimed at improving adherence, such as Humana’s “RxMentor” or
United’s “Reﬁll and Save” programs. Aetna’s tracking suggests that its program targeting chronic
disease patients has improved adherence (Sipkoff, 2009). FICO, known for its widely-purchased
credit score, is now even selling medication adherence scores to insurers, intended to predict how
likely patients are to adhere (NYT; FICO).

7

Conclusion

We build a framework for analyzing the relationship between insurance coverage and health care
consumption when people make mistakes. The model produces several broad insights about insur44
Additionally, while it could be efﬁcient to provide negative prices (subsidies) to use high-value care (Volpp. et.
al. 2009), practical considerations may make this infeasible.

34

ance design and market equilibrium. First, health insurance can provide more than just ﬁnancial
protection: it can lead to more efﬁcient health delivery by counteracting biases that may have led
to overconsumption of some services and underconsumption of others. Second, just as the effect
of prices on the quantity of care consumed captures the degree of moral hazard in the traditional
model, the effect of prices on the health beneﬁt of care can be used to back out a measure of behavioral hazard in this model. This allows us to derive a formula for the optimal co-pay that can
be empirically implemented based on these two parameters. Third, unlike in the standard model,
government interventions may be welfare-improving over market outcomes even in the absence
of selection or externalities. Important next steps include empirically calibrating the optimal copay formula and developing a better understanding of how the government can improve on market
outcomes.
The model captures important features of the health care landscape. The areas in which we
observe substantial underutilization - such as managment of chronic diseases like diabetes, high
blood pressure, asthma, and high cholesterol - are responsible for a substantial share of total health
care utilization (Roehrig et al., 2009). Much of the cost of such diseases occurs late in the progression of the condition and likely involves overuse (moral hazard or positive behavioral hazard)
following underuse early in the progression of the condition. That many of these domains of care
seem sensitive both to small changes in copayments and potentially to behavioral nudges - and that
many of the treatments affected seem to be of high health value - suggests that incorporating not
only moral hazard but behavioral hazard into our models of optimal insurance design may have
large-scale implications for public policy.

35

36

Reduce hospital admissions (Odds Ratio= .58). Improve airflow
obstruction (OR .43) (5)

Decrease cardiovascular mortality (OR .74) (7)
Reduce risk of organ rejection seven-fold (9)

Anti-asthmatics

Anti-diabetics
Immunosuppresants for
Kidney Transplant
Recommended
Preventive Care

Increase the number of surgeries with no resultant improvement in
outcomes (15) (16)
No significant mortality change (17)

Estimates of return to care to patient

16% of doctors report routine use of MRI (15)
49% of 50- to 79-year old men have had PSA test
in past 2 years (18)
57% of patients receive radical prostatectomy or
radiation as initial treatment (20)
98% of visits result in antibiotic Rx (22)

Uncertainty reduction

Sources: Authors' summary of literature:
(1) Baigent et al. (2005)
(2) Pittmen et al. (2011)
(3) Yusuf et al. (1985)
(4) Kramer et al. (2006)
(5) Krishnan et al. (2009)
(6) Krishnan et al. (2004)
(7) Selvin et al. (2008)
(8) Bailey and Kodack (2011)

(9) Butler et al. (2004)
(10) Dobbels et al. (2010)
(11) Sloan et al. (2004)
(12) McInerny, Cull, and Yudkowsky (2005)
(13) Gortmaker (1979)
(14) Collins and David (1992)
(15) Jarvick et al. (2003)

Usage rates in populations with low benefits

< 40% of diabetics receive semi-annual blood
tests (11) Recommended immunization rates
60% for children, 24% for adolescents (12)
< 50 % receive adequate or better care (13) (14)

Adherence < 65% (8)
Adherence < 70% (9)(10)

Adherence < 50% (6)

Adherence < 50% (4)

Adherence < 70% (2)

Usage rates of clinically relevant population

Anxiety reduction

Possible unobserved private
benefits

Time costs; discomfort of
screening; acknowledgment of
disease
Time costs
Reduces infant mortality (RR .47 to .57) (13)
Panel B: Overuse of Low-Value Care

Headache, stomach upset
Infections

Stomach upset, headache,
bruising

Fatigue, cold hands

Muscle pain, digestive
problems

Possible unobserved private
costs (side-effects often rare)

(16) Chou et al. (2009)
(17) Schroder et al. (2012)
(18) Ross, Berkowitz, and Ekwueme (2008)
(19) Holmberg et al.(2002)
(20) Lu-Yao and Greenberg (1994)
(21) Glasziou et al. (2004)
(22) Froom (1990)

Prostate cancer
Anxiety reduction
No difference in overall survival (19)
surgery
Antibiotics for children's At best modest improvement, but with common side-effects (rashes, Positive action
ear aches
diarhhea) (21)

PSA testing

MRI for low back pain

Pre-natal care

Reduce mortality by 25% post heart attack (3)

Beta-blockers

Care of known efficacy including immunizations, disease
management, follow-up care post surgery

Reduce all cause mortality (Relative Risk= .88), cardiovascular
disease mortality (RR .81), myocardial infarction or coronary death
(RR .77) (1)

Statins

Estimates of return to care

Panel A: Underuse of High-Value Care

Table 1: Examples of Underuse and Overuse

37

Physician office visit: $20
Inpatient services: 15%
Rx: Mail: $10 generic, $65 branded; Retail: 20%
Physician: 20%
Inpatient: $1,156 deductible (60 days) + $289/day (thereafter)
Rx: 25% up to initial coverage limit, 100% in "doughnut hole"; 5% above

Varies. Averages given

Physician: $22 generalist; $32 specialist
Rx: $10 generic; $29 preferred branded; $49 non-preferred branded

Physician: 20%
Inpatient: max($25/admission, $15.65/day)
Civilian health benefits for military
personnel/additional agenicies, families Rx: Mail: $0 generic, $9 preferred branded, $25 non-preferred; Retail: 5/12/25
Varies state to state
Physician: 25 states have copays for physician visits

D (Drugs). Varied private plans. Basic
plan given

Menu of private plans offered to federal
employees. Details for most popular
plan given
A&B (Hospital and physician)

Copay Structure

Sources:
FEHBP: Blue Cross Blue Shield Standard plan: http://www.fepblue.org/benefitplans/compare/index.jsp.
Medicare : http://www.medicare.gov/cost/ .
Tricare : http://www.military.com/benefits/tricare/tricare-cost-co-pay-schedule.html and http://www.tricare.mil/mybenefit/home/Prescriptions/Costs?.
Medicaid : Kaiser Family Foundation Medicaid Benefits database
Private plan : Kaiser Family Foundation Health Research & Education Trust (2011)

Private Plans
Employer-sponsored

Medicaid

Tricare
Standard Plan

Medicare

Public Plans
Federal Employees
Health Benefits Plan

Notes

Table 2: Typical Health Insurance Plan Features

38

$10 increase in copay (from $10 to
$20)

Goldman
(2006)

Introduction of 25% coinsurance,
$100 deductible, $200 max for Rx

9.1% reduction in essential drugs

Sources: Authors' summary of literature (see bibliography)

Tamblyn
(2001)

Cost-sharing vs. none in RAND

Lohr (1986)

40% reduction in non-opiate analgesics;
22% reduction in topical antiinflammatories

21% reduction in visits for nonemergency conditions

15.1% reduction in non-essential drugs

21% reduction in use of highly
26% reduction in less effective care; 6%
effective care; 40% reduction in beta reduction in hayfever treatment, 40%
blockers, 44% reduction in insulin
reduction in cold remedies, 31% reduction
in antacids

Increase from 50% coinsurance with 40% reduction in use of
$25 max to 70% coinsurance with antiasthmatics; 61% reduction in
$30 max
thyroid hormones

9.6% reduction in visits for
emergency conditions

Lower Value
Compliance with cholesterol meds among
low risk drops from 52% to 46%; medium
drops from 59% to 49%

Change in Use

Compliance with cholesterol meds
among high risk drops from 62% to
53%

High Value

Johnson
(1997)

Selby (1996) Introduction of $25-$35 ER copay

Price Change

Study

Table 3: Demand Responses Often not Related to Value of Care

Table 4: Responsiveness to Copays for Different Types of Drugs

Acute Care
Chronic Care
Lifestyle

Baseline
Price
Use

Change
Price
Use

1.25
1.24
1.38

6.96
6.56
6.49

0.36
0.65
0.39

-0.08
-0.13
-0.08

Elasticity
-0.16
-0.15
-0.16

Source: Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight (2010) (unpublished detail)
Notes:
Table shows the responsiveness of drug use by CALPERS HMO enrollees subject
to an exogenous price increase.
"Use" is measured in prescriptions per person per month.
Examples of acute care drugs include anticonvulsants, antimalarials, antiangials,
vasodilators, and thrombolytics.
Examples of chronic care drugs include analgesics, antivirals, ACE inhibitors,
antigout meds, beta-blockers, hypertension drugs, statins, and glaucoma meds.
Examples of lifestyle drugs include acne meds, antihistamines, motion sickness
meds, cold remedies, and relief of pain drugs.

39

40

Drop in statin adherence of ~10
percentage points
Drop in use of insulin of 44%, beta
blockers 40%, antidepressants 36%
9.6% reduction in visits for emergency
conditions

Goldman $10 increase in copay (from $10 to $20)
(2006)
Lohr (1986) Cost-sharing vs. none in RAND

Introduction of $25-$35 ER copay

Increase from 50% coinsurance with $25 max 40% reduction in use of antiasthmatics;
to 70% coinsurance with $30 max
68% in antidepressants

Addition of third drug tier (moving top
payment from $10 or $20 to $35 or $40)

Selby
(1996)

Johnson
(1997)

Landsman
(2005)

[Relapse into major depressive episode 70% more
likely if treatment discontinued (Geddes et al., 2003)]

[Adherence reduces asthma symptoms that can lead to
hospitalization by 36% (Krishnan et al., 2009)]

Emergency conditions included coronary arrest, heart
attack, appendicitis, respiratory failure, etc.

[Statins reduce risk of major coronary event by 25%
(Zhou et al. 2006)]
[Consistent filling of diabetic med prescriptions
reduces hospitalization risk from 20-30% down to 13%
(Sokol, 2005)]

13% increase in nonelective hospital use; 3% increase
in high blood pressure (among hypertensives); 9%
increase in high cholesterol (among hyperlipidemics);
16% decrease in glycemic control (among diabetics)

Sources: Authors' summary of literature (see bibliography)
Notes: Health value comes from same study when available. ["Illustrative facts" come from other studies.]

Elasticities: -.16 for ACE inhibitors; -.10
for statins; -1.15 for antidepressants

Increase in non-adherence to
antihypertensives, statins, diabetes drugs
~30%

Hsu (2006) Imposition of $1000 annual cap

Reduction in drug copays from $5 to 0 for
Elasticities: -.12 ACE inhibitors; -.11 beta [Maintained use of beta blockers post heart-attack
generics; from $25 to $12.50 for name brands blockers; -.14 diabetes drugs; -.18 statins reduces mortality by 20-30% (Yusuf et al. 1985)]

Offsetting 6% increase in hospitalization

Health Value [illustrative fact]

Chernew
(2008)

Elasticities: -.15 for essential drugs; -.23
for asthma meds, -.12 for cholesterol
meds, -.22 for depression meds

Use Change

$7 increase in drug copay (from ~$1 to ~$8)

Price Change

Chandra
(2010)

Study

Table 5: Small Price Changes Can Change Use with Large Health Implications
Often for Care where Short-run Effects Hard to Observe

 


( -$)*'' " *!$*'*"49>GEFE?9B++-*+-$/ ) ..-$/ -$9B /-$ 1 
 -0-4
FG7
GEFE7
!-*(
#//+8<<2229-9*-"< *)-4$) )0/ "*-$ .<,0'$/4@.! /4<++@-$/
-$<+!<3+ -/) '*) 0-*'*"$ ("$)"< *2&$)*L9.+39
) -.*)7 9 97 9 9  ''7 / '9 >FNNF?9 B-$*1.0'- $. .  -$.& +-*!$' .9B
( -$) -/ *0-)'>F/G?8GNH:GNM9
)-$*' 79 9799-2!*-7 /'9>GEEN?9B*-/'$/4 .0'/.-*()*($5 
-*.// :) -- )$)"-$'9B 2)"') *0-)'*! $$) >FH?8
FHFE:FHFN9
--*27 9 >FNKH?9 B) -/$)/4 ) /#   '!-  *)*($. *!  $' - 9B
( -$)*)*($ 1$ 2>J?8NIF:NLH9
.#799799'*..7 /'9>GEEE?9B .0-$)") -0. *!  ..-4- (*)"
' -'4 $-  ) !$$-$ ..$)" )+/$ )/)0/+/$ )/'$(.9B 
>FM?8GHGJ:GHHH9
$& -7 9 ) 9 $)& './ $) >GEFF?9 B#  !! /. *!  $$ *1 -" : -)$)"
!-*(/# - "*)3+ -$( )/9B)"'  9
$" )/7 97 9
#7 / '9 >GEEJ?9 B!!$4 ) .! /4 *! #*' ./ -*':'*2 -$)"
/- /( )/8+-*.+ /$1 ( /:)'4.$.*!/!-*(NE7EJK+-/$$+)/.$)FI
-)*($. /-$'.*!.//$).9B ) />NINH?8FGKL:FGLM9
$' 479 9)9 *&>GEFF?9B/$ )/# - ) /*( $/$*)- ,0$- ( )/.
!*- /# -+4 *! /4+  G $ / .9B )/ -)/$*)' %*0-)' *! '$)$' +-/$ 
>H?8HFI:HGG9
) ''7 9 >GEFF?9 *1 - '*-$ # '/# +') +-*"-( " //$)" .-++ 9 *0/#
'*-$0.$) .. *0-)'9
 0'$ 07 9 97 9 0/' -7 / '9 >GEEH?9 B#  0.$) .. .  !*- $ / . $. . 
)" ( )/8  .  /04 *!
'/#-/) -. ) ) + ) )/
'/#
..*$/$*)9B# *((*)2 '/#0)$ ' +*-/9
 ''0&79>GEFE?9*-*-" /!0'7.# '+./#  $$) **2)9#  2*-&
$( .9 2*-&79
 -)# $(7 9 9 ) 9 )" ' >GEEN?9 B 4*)  1 '  - ! - ) 8 #*$ :
# *- /$*0)/$*).!*- #1$*-' '!- *)*($.9B0-/ -'4 *0-)'
*!*)*($.>F?8JF:FEI9
 .# -.7 97 9#*$7 /'9>GEEM?9B *2- +- ! - ) .- 1 ' ;B *0-)'*!0'$
*)*($.>M?8FLML:FLNI9
'*# 7 9 9 >GEEK?9 B*).0( -:$- /  '/# - 9B  2 )"') *0-)' *!
 $$) >FL?8FLJK:FLJN9
0/' -7 9 97 9 * -$&7 / '9 >GEEI?9 B- ,0 )4 ) (+/ *! *)# - )  /*
((0)*.0++- ..)/. !/ -  )' -).+')//$*)8  4./ (/$  1$ 29B
-).+')//$*)>J?8LKN9
0/' -7 9 97 9 * -$&7 / '9 >GEEI?9 B- ,0 )4 ) $(+/ *! )*)# - )  /*
$((0)*.0++- ..)/. !/ - - )' /-).+')//$*)8  .4./ (/$ - 1$ 29B
-).+')//$*)8LKN:LLK9

#)-797 9-0 -7 /'9>GEFE?9B/$ )/*./:#-$)") *.+$/'$5/$*)!!. /.
$)/# ' -'49B( -$)*)*($ 1$ 2>F?8FNH:GFH9
# -) 2799799*. )7 /'9>GEEL?9B'0 :. $).0-)  .$")9B '/#!!
>$''2**?>G?82FNJ:GEH9
# -) 27 9 97 9 9 ##7 / '9 >GEEM?9 B (+/ *!  - .$)" *+4( )/. *)
( $/$*) # - )  2$/#$)  $. .  ()" ( )/ )1$-*)( )/9B '/#
!!>$''2**?>F?8FEH:FFG9
# //479>GEEN?9# $(+' *)*($.*!'$ ) )3/$*)7/$*)'0- 0
*!*)*($ . -#9
#*07979 9/'.7 /'9>GEEN?9B*).0-"$'$)/ -1 )/$*)'/# -+$ .!*-'*2&
+$)8- 1$ 2*!/#  1$ ) !*-)( -$)$)*$ /4'$)$'+-/$ 
"0$ '$) 9B+$) >#$'FNLK?>FE?8FELM:FENH9
#*07 97 9 07 / '9 >GEEN?9 B ("$)" ./-/ "$ . !*- '*2:& +$)8 .4./ (/$
- 1$ 2)( /:)'4.$.9B ) />NKKG?8IKH:ILG9
#*0#-47 9 97 9 1*-)7 / '9 >GEFF?9 B0'' *1 -"  !*- +- 1 )/$1  ( $/$*).
!/ -(4*-$'$)!-/$*)9B#  2)"')%*0-)'*!( $$) >GG?8
GEMM:GENL9
' (+0/7 97 9 ./ '**/7 / '9 >GEEG?9 B  1$ 2 *! /#  $/ -/0-  ) /# 
*)*($. *! *)*(+'$) 9 **( !*-  /#**'*"$' (+-*1 ( )/9B
'/#*'$4>F?8KJ:NI9
**7 97 9  -)#$*7 / '9 >GEFE?9 B)" ( )/ *! 0/  /$/$.  $ !/ -
0'$/$*)*!/# GEEI)'$)$'-/$ 0$ '$) 9B $/-$.
>G?8GFI9
*# )7 9 979 9$'' -7 -97 /'9>GEEM?9B ):4 -$*# ($'$. . *)/-*'!*-
+/$ )/.2$/#+-*.// ) -/- / 2$/#-4*.0-" -4.+-$(-4/# -+49B
-*'*"4>H?8JFJ:JFM9
*# )7 9979 9 0())7 /'9>GEEM?9B* .- 1 )/$1 - 1 *) 4; '/#
*)*($. ) /#  - .$ )/$' )$/ .9B  2 )"') *0-)' *!
 $$) >L?8KKF:KKH9
*& -7 9 97 9 9 #)7 / '9 >GEFE?9 B$")*.$.7 $-*$' +$ ($*'*"47 )
)/$$*/$- /( )/*!0/ /$/$. $$)#$'- )9B 8#  *0-)'*!
/# ( -$) $'..*$/$*)>FN?8GFKF9
*''$).7 9 97 -9 ) 9 9 1$ >FNNG?9 B$!! - ) . $) ) *)/' (*-/'$/4 4 - 7
$)*( 7)+- )/'- 9B/#)$$/46$. . >F?8FM:GK9
0--$ 7 9 ) 9 -0 - >FNNK?9 B1$)" $ .8 #  !!$4 ) *./ *!   )/
3+).$*).*! $$'$"$$'$/4!*-- "))/*( )9B *0-)'*!*'$/$'
*)*(4>K?8FGKH:FGNK9
0/' -7 9 97 9 *)"7 / '9 >GEEL?9 B#  1'0  *! )/$#4+ -/ ).$1  -0".8 
+ -.+ /$1 *)( $'$))*1/$*)9B '/#!!>$''2**?>F?8NL:FFE9
0/' -7 9 9 ) 9 9  &#0. - >GEEE?9 B#  )/*(4 *! '/# ).0-) 9B
)**&*!# '/# *)*($.8JKH:KIH9
 -)&7 9979 9$( -7 /'9>GEEN?9B (+/*!$' )0/*(/  ' +#*) 
 ($) -. )   $+/ *!  + / ((*"-(.88  )*($5  *)/-*'' 
-$'9B( -$)%*0-)'*!+- 1 )/$1 ( $$) >K?8IJN:IKL9
 ''$")7 9 >GEEN?9 B.4#*'*"4 ) *)*($.8 1$ )  -*( /#  $ '9B
*0-)'*!*)*($ $/ -/0- >G?8HFJ:HLG9

 ''$")79)9'( )$ ->GEEI?9B*)/-/ .$")) '!:*)/-*'8# *-4
)1$ ) 9B# 0-/ -'4 *0-)'*!*)*($.>G?8HJH:IEG9
 ) -"7 9 97 9 9  '#*7 / '9 >GEEJ?9 B- $/*-. *! *)# - )  /*
- )$)" *'*)*.*+49B *0-)' *! " ) -' $)/ -)' ( $$)  >FF?8 NMN:
NNJ9
 4*79979 9$-57 /'9>GEEK?9B&+$)+- 1' ) )1$.$/-/ .8 ./$(/ .
!-*(99)/$*)'.0-1 4.7GEEG9B+$) >#$'FNLK?>GH?8GLGI:GLGL9
 4*7997 9$)1$'' 7 /'9>FNNG?9B#/)/# #$./*-4)+#4.$' 3($)/$*)
/ ''0.*0/'*2&+$);B >K?8LKE:LKJ9
$ *-$*7 97 9 )' 47 / '9 >GEEE?9 B .0-1 4 *! +-$(-4 -  +#4.$$) +-/$ 
+// -). ) # - )  /* 0/  '*2 & +-*' ( "0$ '$) .9B -#$1 . *!
!($'4( $$) >FE?8FEFJ:FEGF9
%0' "*1$7979 9 4/#7 /'9>GEFE?9B- )$)"!*-+-*.// ) -8.4./ (/$
- 1$ 2)( /:)'4.$.*!-)*($. *)/-*'' /-$'.9B 8IJIH:
IJIH9
* '.79790++-7 /'9>GEFE?9B# - ) /*/# $((0)*.0++- ..$1 - "$( )
$) + $/-$ &$) 4 /-).+')/ - $+$ )/.8  .4./ (/$ - 1$ 29B  $/-$
/-).+')//$*)>J?8KEH:KFH9
)$)*.7979 -)-7 /'9>GEFE?9B* .- .-$+/$*)-0"# - )  0 
*.+$/'$5/$*).)*./.;B*-&$)"+ ->FJKNF?9
 '()7 9 ) 9 *2 >FNNF?9 B  2 ./$(/  *! /#   '!-  *.. *! 3 ..
'/# ).0-) 9B# ( -$)*)*($ 1$ 2>F?8GNL:HEF9
 './ $)7 9 >FNLH?9 B#   '!-  *.. *! 3 .. '/# ).0-) 9B *0-)' *!
*'$/$'*)*(4>G?8GJF:GME9
$)& './ $)79790()7 /'9>GEFF?9B# - "*) '/# ).0-) 3+ -$( )/8
1$ )  !-*( /#  $-./  -9B /$*)' 0- 0 *! *)*($  . -#
*-&$)"+ -9
*%*7 9 ) 9 -4 >GEEN?9 B *2 (0# $. '$!  2*-/#8  /03$(7 )*):.(''  ''
'0)" ) -7 ) /#  CIIE $''$*) ,0 ./$*)9B *0-)' *! /#  /$*)' ) -
)./$/0/ >FJ?8FEII:FEIM9
-**(7 97 9 0'+ ++ -7 / '9 >FNNE?9 B$")*.$. ) )/$$*/$ /- /( )/ *! 0/ 
*/$/$. ( $8 - +*-/ !-*( )/ -)/$*)' -$(-4 -   /2*-&9B  
>KLGI?8JMG:JMK9
))79>GEFF?B)$ .-*(**/## 7*0')A/!!*- .9B 2.9
*7 97 9 07 / '9 >GEEE?9 B#   '/$*).#$+ *! $. .   1 -$/47 '/#  '$ !.
) $/$*)# - ) (*)" /$ )/.9B - >I?8HML:HNM9
  .7 9 97 9 9 -) 47 / '9 >GEEH?9 B '+.  +- 1 )/$*) 2$/# )/$ +- ..)/
-0" /- /( )/ $)  +- ..$1  $.*- -.8  .4./ (/$ - 1$ 29B ) / 8
KJH:KKF9
 -/' -7 9 ) 9 $(*  >GEEN?9 B$. .  )" ( )/8 '+$)" /$ )/. >#*
*)A/? '+# (. '1 .9B
$.*)7979*)"7 /'9>GEFE?9B*./#-$)"7# - ) 7) '/#0/*( .$)
/$ )/.2$/#$ / .9B# ( -$)%*0-)'*!()" - >M?8JMN9
$.*)79979)"7 /'9>GEFF?9B'0 :.  ).0-)  .$")-*"-(/
-" *(+)4**./  $/$*)# - ) !*-(+'*4 .2$/##-*)$
'') .. .9B '/#!!$-.>F?8FEN:FFL9

'.5$*07 9 97 9 9  ' -7 / '9 >GEEI?9 B)/$$*/$. !*- 0/  */$/$. ( $ $)
#$'- )9B*#-) /. *!.4./ (/$- 1$ 2.>F?8EEEGFN9
'5 -7 9)990$- >GEFG?9B '!-  .0- *!B!!. /!! /.B$) '/#
).0-) 9B *0-)'*!0'$*)*($.>J:K?8JGE:JGH9
*'()79)9 9#$'$+.*)>GEEL?9B )/ "-/  ).0-)  .$")$)/# - . ) 
*! 0'/$+'   $'  #)*'*"$ .9B ( -$) *)*($  1$ 2 >G?8 IGL:
IHG9
Goldman, D. P.)G. F. Joyce>2012?9Consumer Demand and Health Effects of
Cost-Sharing9 Oxford Handbook of the Economics of the
Biopharmaceutical Industry9USA7Oxford University Press3659
*'()799799 *4 7 /'9>GEEI?9B#-(4 ) !$/.)/# 0. *!-0".4
/# #-*)$''4$''9B (>FN?8GHII:GHJE9
*'()7 9 97 9 9 *4 7 / '9 >GEEK?9 B-4$)" #-(4  ) !$/. 2$/# '$)$'
//0.8 #  .  *! #*' ./ -*': *2 -$)" # -+49B ( -$) *0-)' *!
)" - >F?8GF:GM9
*-/(& -7 9 9 >FNLN?9 B#  !! /. *! +- )/' -  0+*) /#  # '/# *! /# 
) 2*-)9B( -$)%*0-)'*!+0'$# '/#>L?8KJH:KKE9
Griffin, K. J.)T. D. Elikin>2001?9BNon-Adherence in Pediatric Transplantation:
A Review of the Existing Literature9B Pediatric Transplantation 5>4?8 2462499
-$%'17 9 97 9 9 0*-/$7 / '9 >GEEN?9 B)/$$*/$ - .-$+/$*) / . !*- 0/ 
 .+$-/*-4 -/ )! /$*). $)  (0'/*-4  //$)".9B 8 #  *0-)'
*!/# ( -$) $'..*$/$*)>L?8LJM9
-0 -7 9>GEEM?9B*1 -$)"/# )$).0- $)/# 99B*-&$)"+ -9
-0 -7 %9 ) 9 *.5 "$ >GEEF?9 B . $/$*) B/$*)'B; # *-4 ) 1$ ) 9B
0-/ -'4 *0-)'*!*)*($.>I?8FGKF9
.79979 '*)"#(+.7 /'9>GEEM?9B# 2*-'2$  +$ ($*'*"4*!+-*.// 
) -8+ -.+ /$1 .!-*(0/*+.4./0$ .9B# )$) *0-)'*!-*'*"4
>F?8HMKK:HMLF9
4) .7 9 97 9 &'**7 / '9 >GEEM?9 B )/ -1 )/$*). !*- )#)$)"  $/$*)
# - ) 9B*#-) /. .4./ 19
Health Resources and Services Administration >2011?9 Prenatal - First Timester
Care Access7Department of Health and Human Services9
*".*)7 9 9 ) 9 $ >GEEF?9 B $' -  3+ )$/0- . !*- #4+ -/ ).$*)7 $/.
*(+'$/$*).7)$/.*(*-$$/$ .9B $'- >K?8JNN:KFJ9
*'( -"7 97 9 $'':3 '.*)7 / '9 >GEEG?9 B -)*($5  /-$' *(+-$)" -$'
+-*.// /*(4 2$/# 2/#!0' 2$/$)" $) -'4 +-*.//  ) -9B #   2
)"')%*0-)'*!( $$) >FF?8LMF:LMN9
*2' -7 97 9 **) 7 / '9 >GEFF?9  ) - //$./$.  1$ 27 FNLJ=GEEM9
 /# .77/$*)') - )./$/0/ 9
.07 9 97 9 -$ 7 / '9 >GEEK?9 B)$)/ )  *). ,0 ) . *! +. *)  $- 
-0" ) !$/.9B 2)"') *0-)'*! $$) >GG?8GHIN:GHJN9
4()79 9)991'$&>GEEF?9B#-/ -$./$.*!/$ )/.2$/#)*)/-*'' 
4+ -/ ).$*)$)/# )$/ // .9B 2)"') *0-)'*! $$) >L?8
ILN:IMK9

-1$&7 9 97 9 *''$)"2*-/#7 / '9 >GEEH?9 B+$ (") /$ - .*))  $("$)" 1.
-$*"-+#.!*-+/$ )/.2$/#'*2&+$)8-)*($5 *)/-*'' /-$'9B
>GF?8GMFE:GMFM9
-1$&7 9979 *''$)"2*-/#7 /'9>GEEH?9B+$") /$  .*))  ("$)".
$*"-+#. !*- /$ )/. 2$/# *2 & $)9B 8 /#  %*0-)' *! /# 
( -$) $'..*$/$*)>GF?8GMFE9
)&.7 9 97 9 9 0!!7 / '9 >GEEH?9 B#)"  $) /#  ,0'$/4 *! -   '$1 -  /*
 $-  ) !$$-$ .7FNNM:FNNN/*GEEE:GEEF9B >H?8HEJ:HFG9
*#).*)7 9 97 9 9 **()7 / '9 >FNNL?9 B#  $(+/ *! $)- .$)" +/$ )/
+- .-$+/$*) -0" *./ .#-$)" *) /# -+ 0/$ '.. . *! -0". -  $1  )
*) /#  # '/# .//0. *! ' -'4  ( ( -.9B '/# . -1$ . - . -#
>F?8FEH:FGG9
#) ()7 9 ) 9 9 && - >FNNL?9 B& /*  )/#(; 3+'*-/$*). *!
3+ -$ ) /$'$/49B0-/ -'4 *0-)'*!*)*($.9
$. - ($'4 *0)/$*)9 >GEFG?9 B// 
'/# /.9B GEFG7 !-*(
#//+8<<2229.// # '/#!/.9*-"<+-*!$' "') 9%.+;-")OHN9
$. - ($'4 *0)/$*) )
'/#  . -# ) 0/$*) -0./ >GEFF?9
(+'*4 - '/# ) !$/.GEFF0-1 49 )'*-&79
*.5 "$7 9 >GEEH?9 B '/# )3$ /4 ) +/$ )/  #1$*-9B *0-)' *!
'/#
*)*($.>K?8FELH:FEMI9
-( -7 9 97 9 (($''7 / '9 >GEEK?9 B/$*)' 1'0/$*) *! # - )  /*  /:
'*& -/# -+4!*-F4 -!/ -0/ (4*-$'$)!-/$*)$)+/$ )/.2$/#
*(( -$' # '/# $).0-) 9B ( -$) # -/ %*0-)' >H?8 IJI IJF:
IJM9
-$.#))7 997991$.7 /'9>GEEN?9B)0(- ''- 1$ 28*-/$*./ -*$/# -+4
!*- 0'/. 2$/# 0/  ./#(9B #  ( -$) %*0-)' *! ( $$)  >FF?8
NLL:NNF9
-$.#))7 9 97 9 9 $ & -/7 / '9 >GEEI?9 B*-/$*./ -*$ .  !/ - *.+$/'
$.#-"  (*)" $"#:$.& 0'/. 2$/# ./#(9B ( -$) %*0-)' *!
- .+$-/*-4)-$/$'- ( $$) >FG?8FGMF:FGMJ9
-$.#))7 9 97 9 9 $ & -/7 / '9 >GEEI?9 B*-/$*./ -*$ 0.  !/ - #*.+$/'
$.#-"  (*)" #$"#:-$.& 0'/. 2$/# ./#(9B ( -$) %*0-)' *!
- .+$-/*-4)-$/$'- ( $$) 8FGMF:FGMJ9
$.*)7 9 >FNNL?9 B*' ) "". ) 4+ -*'$ $.*0)/$)"9B #  0-/ -'4
*0-)'*!*)*($.>G?8IIH9
).()7997907 /'9>GEEJ?9B (+/*!H:/$ -+#-(4 ) !$/ .$"))
$)- . *).0( -*./:.#-$)"*)-0"0/$'$5/$*)9B# ( -$)%*0-)'
*!()" - >FE?8KGF:KGM9
).()7997907 /'9>GEEJ?9B (+/*!H:/$ -+#-(4 ) !$/ .$"))
$)- .  *).0( - *./:.#-$)" *) -0" 0/$'$5/$*)9B (  )" - 
>FE?8KGF:KGM9
*)#-/7 9 >GEFE?9 '/# - A. ) 1 ) * /*   2 -9 #   2 *-&
 ( .9 2*-&79
147 9)9 '/5 ->GEEM?9B#  (+/*! '/# ).0-) ) '/#9B))09
 190'$ '/#8HNN:IEN9

$ ()7 9 ) 9  &#0. - >GEEM?9 $(+'  0().7 *(+' 3 ).0-) 7 0/' 
0.$$ .7/$*)'0- 0*!*)*($ . -#9
*#-7 9 97 9 9 -**&7 / '9 >FNMK?9 B.  *!  $' -  $) /#  ) '/#
).0-)  3+ -$( )/8 $")*.$.:)  -1$ :+ $!$ )'4. . $) 
)*($5 *)/-*'' -$'9B $'- >N?8F:ML9
0:*79 9)99- ) -">FNNI?9B#)" .$)+-*.// ) -$)$ ) )
/- /( )/$)9B ) />MMNG?8GJF:GJI9
0*7 97 9 $ /-**)7 / '9 >GEEI?9 B./$(/ . ) +// -). *! $- / # '/# - 
3+ )$/0- . (*)" $)$1$0'. 2$/# & +$) $) /#  )$/  // .9B +$) 
>#$'FNLK?>F?8LN:MK9
!-') 7 97 9 *'( .7 / '9 >FNNL?9 B )!'0 )  *! /$ )/.A 3+ //$*). )
)/$$*/$ )" ( )/ *! 0/  *2 -  .+$-/*-4 -/ '') .. $)  ) -'
-/$ 80 ./$*))$- /049B(%>LFFL?8FGFF:FGFI9
))$)"7997 99 2#*0. 7 /'9>FNML?9B '/# ).0-) )/#  ()!*-
 $' - 8 1$ )  !-*(  )*($5  3+ -$( )/9B ( -$)
*)*($ 1$ 2>H?8GJF:GLL9
$"7 99799 .. -7 /'9>GEEG?9B- ).$))/$($-*$'- .-$$)"/ .
!*- #$'- ) ) *' . )/.9B 8 #  *0-)' *! /#  ( -$)  $'
..*$/$*)>GH?8HENK9
*(.7 9 97 9 9 $#*'7 / '9 >FNNI?9 B#  *./. *! )/ --0+/$)"
)/$#4+ -/ ).$1  -0" # -+4 $)   $$ *+0'/$*)9B  $' - 8
GFI:GGK9
*-($&7 9 97 9 #*)($/- 7 / '9 >GEEJ?9 B*). 1 -  0/  /$/$.  $8 
'$)$' -$' *(+-$)" 0/*( . *! /#!0' $/$)"  -.0. (( $/ 
)/$$*/$- /( )/9B $/-$.>K?8FIJJ:FIKJ9
'4))7 9 97 9 9 .#7 / '9 >GEEH?9 B#  0'$/4 *! '/# -   '$1 -  /*
0'/. $) /#  )$/  // .9B  2 )"') *0-)' *!  $$)  >GK?8
GKHJ:GKIJ9
 ) -)47 9 97 9 9 0''7 / '9 >GEEJ?9 B#4.$$) - $(0-. ( )/ ' 1 '. )
# - )  /* ( -$)  (4 *!  $/-$. 2 '':1$.$/ ) $((0)$5/$*)
- *(( )/$*).9B $/-$.>I?8MHH:MHM9
 )) 47 97 9 0)-* 7 / '9 >FNNG?9 B (+/ *! ) ' /-*)$  $/$*)
*(+'$)  $ ) *)": -( '** - ..0-  *)/-*'9B #  *0-)' *!
'$)$'#-(*'*"4>H?8GLL9
$'' -7 97 9 )"7 / '9 >GEEL?9 B'$/3 ' '0.  1$50(  -.0. '$/3 '
'*)  !*-  /.//$ - ./ ) -9B  2 )"') *0-)' *!  $$) 
>GK?8GKKK:GKLK9
0''$)/#)7 97 9 #2-/5./ $)7 / '9 >GEFG?9 B  0 :*-( ++-*# /*
 #1$*-'0'$$)) 9B))0' 1$ 2*!*)*($. 

/$*)' )/ -!*-#-*)$$. . - 1 )/$*)) '/#-*(*/$*)>GEFF?9$/'
$").8 $"#'**- ..0- )#*' ./ -*'99!99*)/-*'9
/$*)'*(($// !*-0'$/4..0-) >GEEJ?9B# .// *!# '/#- ,0'$/49B
 #)$' +*-/9
 ..7 9 97 9 9 *'( .7 / '9 >GEEE?9 B*./:/$'$/4 *! ) :$(  *'*)*.*+$
- )$)" !*- *'*- /' ) - / -$*0. " .9B #  ( -$) %*0-)' *!
"./-* )/ -*'*"4>L?8FMEE:FMFF9

 2#*0. 7 99>GEEK?9B *).$ -$)"/# *-' 5-:$.&1*$) - *!!9B
*0-)'*! '/#*)*($.>J?8FEEJ:FEFI9
 2#*0. 7 99)#  ).0-) 3+ -$( )/-*0+>FNNH?9- !*-''; ..*).
!-*(/#  '/# ).0-) 3+ -$( )/9/049(-$" )
*)*)7 -1-)$1 -.$/4- ..9
4()7 99>FNNN?9B# *)*($.*!*-' 5- 1$.$/ 9B *0-)'*! '/#
*)*($.>K?8MFF:MGI9
A*)*"#0 7 9 ) 9 $) >FNNN?9 B*$)" / *2 *- / -9B ( -$) *)*($
 1$ 28FEH:FGI9
./ - -"7 9 ) 9 '.#&  >GEEJ?9 B# - )  /*  $/$*)9B  2 )"')
*0-)'*! $$) >J?8IML:INL9
-& -:*+ 7 9 >GEFF?9
+$)" *-  *) *2 *0 &  *0-  $$) 9 #   2
*-&$( .9 2*-&79
-&$)"/*)79) /'9>GEEN?9B--$ -./*- ./) -- )$)"$))" 
- *+0'/$*)9B)" - >+-$'?9
0'4799)99'1$)>GEEM?9B*-' 5-$) ).0-) 7'0 :. *./
#-$)"7)/#  ) !$/.*!'$..!0' ")*-) 9B *0-)'*! '/#*)*($.
>K?8FIEL:FIFL9
 -79>GEFF?9-*"-(*!! -$)"2$1 -.!*-# '/#'2$. )$)"9 2*-&$( .9
 -'-*/#7 9 97 9 9 *'()7 / '9 >GEFE?9 B#  +*/ )/$' $(+/ *! *(+-/$1 
!! /$1 ) .. - . -# *) 99 # '/# -  3+ )$/0- .9B  (*"-+#4 
 8FLH:FNE9
$//()79979# )7 /'9>GEFF?9B# - ) /*.//$).7.0. ,0 )/# '/#- 
*./.7 ) -$*1.0'- #*.+$/'$5/$*).9B #  ( -$) %*0-)' *!
-$*'*"4>FF?8FKKG:FKKK9
./4799799 * +. ''7 /'9>FNNE?9B# - '/$1 -$.&*!$)$ )/*-*)-4# -/
$. .  ..*$/  2$/# -  )/'4 ./*++$)" /#  0.  *!  /:'*& -.9B  8
/# %*0-)'*!/# ( -$) $'..*$/$*)>FG?8FKJH:FKJL9
0$)47 9 >GEEN?9 B//  +*'$$ . /* )*0-"  #$"#: 0/$'  ) '$($/ : ) !$/
# '/#+').8*./.7*).$/0 )/.)*) -).9B/# (/$*'$4-$ !9
$ $-*7 9 97 9 9 $ " '())7 / '9 >GEFF?9 B (+/ *! .//$) *.  *) (%*-
-$*1.0'- 1 )/.8  ($3  /- /( )/ *(+-$.*) ( /:)'4.$.
$)1*'1$)"(*- /#)FLJ7EEE+/$ )/.9B )/ -)/$*)'%*0-)'*!-$*'*"49
* #-$"7979$'' -7 /'9>GEEN?9B/$*)' '/#+ )$)"4 $'*)$/$*)7
FNNK::GEEJ9B '/#!!$-.>G?82HJM:2HKL9
*..7 9 97 9  -&*2$/57 / '9 >GEEM?9 B.  *! /#  +-*.// :.+ $!$ )/$" ) / ./
(*)"99( )8!$)$)".!-*(/# GEEJ/$*)' '/# )/ -1$ 20-1 49B
) -+$ ($*'*"47$*(-& -.6- 1 )/$*)8KHK:KII9
*2 7 9 97 9 -*2):/ 1 ).*)7 / '9 >GEEM?9 B#  !! / *! *).0( -:$- / 
'/# '). ) /#  .  *! - 1 )/$1  ) #-*)$ '') ..  -1$ .9B '/#
!!$-.>F?8FFH:FGE9
0$)799>GEEJ?9B# - ) /*#-(*'*"$# -+4$)/$ )/.2$/#4+ G
$ / . ''$/0.9B# ( -$)%*0-)'*!( $$) >J?8GL:HI9
# '0 -7 97 9 1$ .7 / '9 >GEFE?9 B )/ -1 )/$*). /* (+-*1  # - )  /*
$+$ *2 -$)" $/$*)9B*#-) /. 4./ 1>H?9

#-* -7 97 9 0"*..*)7 / '9 >GEFG?9 B-*.// :) - (*-/'$/4 / FF 4 -. *!
!*''*2:0+9B 2)"') *0-)'*! $$) 8NMF:NNE9
#-*  -7 9 9 ) */# -. >GEEN?9 B- )$)" ) -*.// :) - *-/'$/4 $) 
)*($5  0-*+ ) /049B  2 )"') *0-)' *!  $$)  >FH?8
FHGE:FHGM9
#-*  -7 97 9 # 47 / '9 >GEEI?9 B *2 )   (+-*1  # - )  /* '**
- ..0- : *2 -$)"  $/$*) $) (0'/*-4 - ;8 4./ (/$  1$ 2 *!
)*($5 *)/-*'' -$'.9B-#$1 .*!$)/ -)'( $$) >L?8LGG9
#-*  -7 97 9 # 47 / '9 >GEEM?9 B )/ -1 )/$*). !*- (+-*1$)" # - )  /*
- /( )/ $) /$ )/. 2$/# $"# '* - ..0-  $) (0'/*-4  //$)".9B
*#-)  $--4>I?9
 '47 9 97 9 9 $- ()7 / '9 >FNNK?9 B!! / *!  *+4( )/ ) .  *! /# 
( -" )4 +-/( )/$) '/#$)/ )) -")$5/$*)9B 2)"')
*0-)'*! $$) >FE?8KHJ:KIG9
 '47 9 97 9 9 $- ()7 / '9 >FNNK?9 B!! / *!  *+4( )/ *) 0.  *! /# 
( -" )4 +-/( )/$)# '/#($)/ )) *-")$5/$*)9B)"'  
>FE?8KHJ:KJM9
 '1$)7979*' )7 /'9>GEEM?9B-$*1.0'-*0/*( .$)/-$'.*!*-'$ / .
( $/$*).8  .4./ (/$ - 1$ 29B -#$1 . *! $)/ -)' ( $$)  >FN?8
GELE:GEME9
 )./79 97 99#0.$(7 /'9>GEEF?9B-/$'++-*#/* / -($)$)"*./.)
!- ,0 )4 *! 1 -.  -0" 1 )/. $)  # '/# -  ) /2*-&9B ( -$)
%*0-)' *! # '/#:.4./ ( +#-(4 8   8 *!!$$' %*0-)' *! /#  ( -$)
*$ /4*! '/#:4./ (#-($./.>FG?8FFGK:FFHG9
# #)79>GEFE?9B") /$- .*)) $("$)"!*-'*2&+$)8$)$/$*).)
'$($//$*).9B))# 0($.>F?8L:FF9
$+&*!!7 9 >GEEN?9 (+-*1  # - )  #$"#'$"#/. .+ $'/4 +#-(4A. +*/ )/$'9
)" - "5$) 9
'*)7 9 97 9 9  /# '7 / '9 >GEEI?9 B# - )  /* "0$ '$) . ) $/. !! /. *)
#*.+$/'$5/$*). 2$/# *(+'$/$*). *! /4+  G $ / .9B #  - 1$ 2 *!
$ /$./0$ .8>F?8GN:HM9
*&*'7 9 97 9 9 0$")7 / '9 >GEEJ?9 B (+/ *! ( $/$*) # - )  *)
#*.+$/'$5/$*)-$.&)# '/#- *./9B - >K?8JGF:JHE9
*')&$7 97 9 9 #0!!' -7 / '9 >GEEE?9 B#  $- / ) $)$- / !! /. *! *./:
.#-$)" *) /#  0.  *! +- 1 )/$1  . -1$ .9B '/#  -1$ .  . -# >K?8
FHHF:FHJE9
*)$7 9 >GEEM?9 B- $)! /$*). >*/$/$. ( $? $) #$'- ) >E:FL?8 0.  )
3+ )$/0- .7GEEK9B//$./$'-$ !DGGM9
*0( -$7 9 97 9 9  0"#'$)7 / '9 >FNNL?9 B1 -.  *0/*( . *! 0) -0.  *!
 /:'*& -.$) ' -'4.0-1$1*-.*!0/ (4*-$'$)!-/$*)9B 8
FFJ:FGF9
+$-*7997 9947 /'9>GEEK?9B$/:): - .-$+/$*)!*-/# - /( )/*!
0/ /$/$. $9B 8#  *0-)'*!/# ( -$) $'..*$/$*)
>FE?8FGHJ9
/ $)-**&7 9 >GEEM?9 B4$)" )* $.)A/  8 #  /-1$'. *! -$/$)A. /$*)'
)./$/0/ !*- '/#)'$)$'3 '' ) 9B)"'  8FNLL:FNMF9

/-)4"-7 97 9 9 #*(. )7 / '9 >GEFE?9 B $'4   ($) - )- . .
# - )  /* ./#( - /( )/8  #- :*)/# *''*2:+ /049B
 .+$-/*-4( $$) >G?8FKK:FLF9
/-$) 7 9 9 ) 9 9 **/() >GEEL?9 B )/$*)' +- 1' )  ) *-- '/ . *!
'*2&)) &+$)(*)"0'/.9B-/#-$/$.# 0(>I?8KJK:KKJ9
('4)7979 +-$. 7 /'9>GEEF?9B1 -.  1 )/...*$/ 2$/#+- .-$+/$*)
-0"*./:.#-$)"(*)"+**-) ' -'4+ -.*).9B >I?8IGF:IGN9
('4)7979 +-$. 7 /'9>GEEF?9B1 -.  1 )/...*$/ 2$/#+- .-$+/$*)
-0"*./:.#-$)"(*)"+**-) ' -'4+ -.*).9B 8/# %*0-)'*!/# 
( -$) $'..*$/$*)>I?8IGF:IGN9
#' -7 9 ) 9 0)./ $) >GEEM?9 0" 8 (+-*1$)"  $.$*). *0/
'/#7
 '/#7) ++$) ..7' )$1 -.$/4- ..9
)0'( )7979'0$%.7 /'9>GEEL?9B/$ )/# - ) /* $'- /( )/8
 1$ 2*! 1$ 2.9B '/# -1$ . . -#>F?8JJ9
*'++7 997990'47 /'9>GEEN?9BII8)" )!*- . -#)4:!*-:
 -!*-() !*-/$ )/.9B '/#!!$-.>F?8GEK:GFI9
)"79>GEFF?9B*./:!! /$1 ) ..*! 4+ -/ ).$*)*)/-*'9B$ ./-/9
*-' '/#-")$5/$*)79>GEEH?9# - ) /* *)": -(# -+$ .81$ ) 
!*-/$*)9 ) 17 9
0.0!7 97 9  /*7 / '9 >FNMJ?9 B / '*&  0-$)" ) !/ - (4*-$'
$)!-/$*)8)*1 -1$ 2*!/# -)*($5 /-$'.9B-*"- ..$)-$*1.0'-
$. . .>J?8HHJ:HLF9
0.0!7 97 9  /*7 / '9 >FNMJ?9 B / '*&  0-$)" ) !/ - (4*-$'
$)!-/$*)8)*1 -1$ 2*!/# -)*($5 /-$'.9B-*"- ..$)-$*1.0'-
$. . .8HHJ:HLF9
 &#0. -7 9 >FNLE?9 B $' ).0-) 8  .  /04 *! /#  - *!!  /2 )
$.& +- $)" ) ++-*+-$/  ) )/$1 .9B *0-)' *! *)*($ # *-4
>F?8FE:GK9
#*07 97 9 #( 7 / '9 >GEEK?9 B-  //$). - /  ,0'; 1$ )  -*(
)*($5  -$'. *! -1.//$)7 $(1.//$)7 ) /*-1.//$) !*-
-$*1.0'- $. .  - 1 )/$*)9B ( -$) -/ *0-)' >G?8 GLH:
GMF9
#*07 97 9 #( 7 / '9 >GEEK?9 B-  .//$). - /  ,0'; 1$ )  !-*(
-)*($5  /-$'. *! +-1.//$)7 .$(1.//$)7 ) /*-1.//$) !*-
-$*1.0'-$. . +- 1 )/$*)9B( -$) -/ *0-)'8GLH:GMF9



Appendix
A

Proofs

Proof of Propositions 1 and 2. Proposition 1 is just a special case of 2, so we will prove Proposition 2. Welfare given co-pay p is given by
ˆ

s(p)

W (p) = (1 − q)U (y − P (p)) + q

ˆ
U (y − P (p) − s)dF (s) +

s

s̄


U (y − P (p) − s + b(s) − p)dF (s) ,

s(p)

(30)
where
P (p) = M (p)(c − p)
and
⎧
⎪
⎪
s
⎪
⎨
s(p) = the value s satisfying b(s ) + ε(s ) = p
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩s̄

if p < b(s) + ε(s)
if b(s) + ε(s) ≤ p ≤ b(s̄) + ε(s̄)
if p > b(s̄) + ε(s̄).

We will proceed by ﬁrst showing that there exist ﬁnite bounds p, p̄ with p < p̄ such that if an
optimal value of p exists, there is one that lies in [p, p̄]. Since W (p) is continuous in p and [p, p̄] is
a compact set, this will imply that an optimum exists.
We have W  (p) = 0 for p > b(s̄) + ε(s̄). Thus, if there is an optimum there is one that satisﬁes
p ≤ b(s̄) + ε(s̄). In addition, we have
W  (p) = q(E[U  (C)] − E[U  (C)|m = 1])

(31)

for p < b(s) + ε(s). When p is sufﬁciently low, E[U  (C)] ≥ E[U  (C)|m = 1] and W  (p) ≥ 0.45
As a result, there exists some threshold p such that if an optimum exists there is one that satisﬁes
p ≥ p, and we have established the existence of an optimum.
45

To see this, note that for p < b(s) + ε(s), E[U  (C)] ≥ E[U  (C)|m = 1] iff


U (y − P ) ≥

ˆ
s

s̄

U  (y − P − s + b(s) − p)dF (s).

(32)

Since b(s) − s is decreasing in s, the right hand side of (32) is less than or equal to U  (y − P − s̄ + b(s̄) − p) by
concavity of U . Noting further that U  (y − P − s̄ + b(s̄) − p) ≤ U  (y − P ) for p < b(s̄) − s̄, (32) holds for such p.

50

If demand is positive and price sensitive at an optimal value of p, then dW/dp = 0 at this
value. Equivalently, (10) must equal 0 at such a value. Finally, re-arranging (10) for the case

where M (p) > 0, M  (p) < 0, and p = 0 yields (11).
Proof of Corollary 1. Let
S
(p) ≡ −M  (p)(c − p) − I · M (p)
MW

equal the normalized welfare impact of a marginal increase in the co-pay (by Equation (7)). It is
S
(p) ≤ 0 for p ≥ c, with strict
clear that pS = c when U  = 0. When U  < 0, we have MW
S

inequality at p = c (since I · M (c) > 0). Hence, p < c when U < 0, establishing the ﬁrst part of
the Corollary.
S
(p) ≥ 0 for p ≤ pF I with strict inequality at p = pF I
To establish the second part, we have MW
if M  (pF I ) < 0 (since pF I < c and I = 0 at pF I ). Hence, pS ≥ pF I with strict inequality so long
as M  (pF I ) < 0.

Proof of Corollary 2. Let
B
(p) ≡ −M  (p)(c − p + ε ) − I · M (p)
MW

equal the normalized welfare impact of a marginal increase in the co-pay (by Equation (10)).
We will prove each part of the corollary by example. Let b(s) = s and ε(s) = ε̃ for all s,
where ε̃ equals some real number. For the ﬁrst part of the corollary, suppose ε̃ > c − s. In
this case, for all p ≤ c we have M (p) = q, for p ∈ [0, c] we have I · M (p) ≥ 0 with equality
only at p = 0, and for p < 0 we have I · M (p) < 0 . As a result, for p ∈ [0, c], we have
B
B
(p) ≤ 0 with equality only at p = 0, and for p < 0 we have MW
(p) > 0. Hence, p = 0 is a
MW
local maximum, and the optimal co-pay, pB , is either 0 or some value greater than c. A sufﬁcient
condition for the optimal co-pay to be above c is then for welfare when the co-pay equals 0 to
be lower than welfare when the co-pay is high enough that nobody demands treatment, or for
W (0) = U (y − qc) < (1 − q)U (y) + qE[U (y − s)|s ≥ s] = W (∞), which holds, for example, if
U (y − qc) < E[U (y − s)|s ≥ s].
For the second part, let ε̃ = −s̄ and −ε > c, where ε is evaluated at p = 0. In this case,
B
(p) = 0 for all p > 0. Moreover, M (0) = 0, while
M (p) = M  (p) = 0 for all p > 0, so MW


B
−M− (0)(c + ε ) < 0, implying that MW − (0) < 0 and hence pB < 0.


51

Proof of Proposition 3. Expand
ˆ
H(p) = E[m(p)b − s] = q

s(p)

ˆ
−sdF (s) +

s

s̄


b(s) − sdF (s) ,

(33)

s(p)

so
H  (p) = (b(s(p)) − s(p))M  (p) + s(p)M  (p)
= b(s(p))M  (p),

(34)

which implies that
H  (p)
= b(s(p)).
M  (p)

(35)

b(s(p)) + ε(s(p)) = p.

(36)

By deﬁnition,

Using (35) to substitute for b(s(p)) in Equation (36) and re-arranging yields
ε(s(p)) = p −

H  (p)
.
M  (p)

(37)


Proof of Proposition 4. (Part 1) By deﬁnition,
b(s0 ) + ε0 (s0 ) = p0 .

(38)

Since Mn (pn ) ≥ M0 (p0 ), we also have that
b(s0 ) + εn (s0 ) ≥ pn .

(39)

Inserting the ﬁrst equality into the second expression yields
pn − p0 ≤ εn (s0 ) − ε0 (s0 ) ≤ −ε0 (s0 ),
where the ﬁnal inequality follows from the assumption that εn (s0 ) ≤ 0.
The proof of the second part is similar, and hence omitted.

52

(40)



Proof of Proposition 5. Perceived welfare given co-pay p is given by
ˆ

ŝ(p)

Ŵ (p) = (1 − q)U (y − P (p)) + q

ˆ
U (y − P (p) − s)dF (s) +

s

s̄


U (y − P (p) − s + b(s) − p)dF (s) ,

ŝ(p)

(41)
where
P (p) = M (p)(c − p)
and
⎧
⎪
⎪
s
⎪
⎨
ŝ(p) = the value s satisfying b(s ) + ε̂(s ) = p
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩s̄

if p < b(s) + ε̂(s)
if b(s) + ε̂(s) ≤ p ≤ b(s̄) + ε̂(s̄)
if p > b(s̄) + ε̂(s̄).

We will establish existence of an equilibrium co-pay using the same technique we used to establish
the existence of an optimal co-pay in proving Proposition 2: we show that there exist ﬁnite bounds
p, p̄ with p < p̄ such that if an equilibrium value of p exists, there is one that lies in [p, p̄]. Since
Ŵ (p) is continuous in p and [p, p̄] is a compact set, this will imply that an equilibrium value of p
exists.
We have Ŵ  (p) = 0 for p > max{b(s̄) + ε̂(s̄), b(s̄) + ε(s̄)}. Thus, if there is an equilibrium
value of p, there is one that satisﬁes p ≤ max{b(s̄) + ε̂(s̄), b(s̄) + ε(s̄)}. In addition, we have
Ŵ  (p) = q(E[U  (C)] − E[U  (C)|m = 1])

(42)

for p < min{b(s) + ε̂(s), b(s) + ε(s)}. As established in the proof of Propositions 1 and 2,
E[U  (C)] ≥ E[U  (C)|m = 1] when p is sufﬁciently low, so Ŵ  (p) ≥ 0 when p is sufﬁciently low.
As a result, there exists some threshold p such that if an equilibrium value of p exists there is one
that satisﬁes p ≥ p, and we have established the existence of an equilibrium value of p.
If demand and forecasted demand are positive and price-sensitive at an equilibrium value of p,
then Ŵ  (p) = 0 at this value. Equivalently, (22) must equal 0 at such a value. Re-arranging (22)
for the case where we further have that pE = 0 yields (23).
The fact that welfare is weakly higher under pB than under pE is immediate from the fact that

pE solves the planner’s problem.


Proof of Proposition 6. Proof in text.

53

Proof of Proposition 7. Generally, the equilibrium nudge solves
Mn (pE )(c − pE ) + ψ(n ) + λχ(Mn (pE )).
min

n

Take the case where λ = 0 and pE < c. In this case, we must have
MnE (pE )(c − pE ) + ψ(nE ) ≤ M0 (pE )(c − pE )
since ψ(0) = 0. For this inequality to hold, we must have MnE (pE ) ≤ M0 (pE ) with strict inequality if ψ(nE ) > 0.
Now suppose λ > 0 and pE ∈ [0, c). Then we may have MnE (pE ) > M0 (pE ). To see this,
suppose there are two nudges, n = 0, 1, with ψ(0) = ψ(1) = 0 and M1 (p) > M0 (p) for all
p ∈ [0, c). Further, suppose χ(M ) = 1 − M and λ > c. For all p ∈ [0, c), we then have that
M1 (p)(c − p) + ψ(1) + λχ(M1 (p)) = M1 (p)(c − p − λ) + λ
< M0 (p)(c − p − λ) + λ
= M0 (p)(c − p) + ψ(0) + λχ(M0 (p)),
so nE = 1.


B
B.1

Extensions
Heterogeneity in Diseases and Treatments

Suppose the social planner is restricted to setting the same co-pay for a range of treatments, for
example because of high administrative costs. In practice, many insurance policies set the same copay across a category of treatments (e.g., a drug formulary tier). How does this restriction change
the logic behind how the social planner should design insurance?
We can extend the model to allow for multiple diseases, where there are a ﬁnite number of such
diseases and each is associated with a single treatment. For simplicity, suppose that each treatment
costs society c and is associated with the same co-pay p. Let the probability of disease j be denoted
by qj . The agent cannot have multiple diseases at once. The probability that the agent is healthy is

now 1 − j qj .
Continue to deﬁne m(p) as the individual’s demand for care at a given price: when the individual has disease j, m(p) equals 1 if and only if bj (s) > p for the rational agent and bj (s) + εj (s) > p

54

for the behavioral agent. The social planner’s problem is now to maximize
W = (1 −



qj )U (y − P ) +

j



qj Ej [U (y − P − s + m(b − p))]

(43)

j

subject to break-even constraint
P = M (p)(c − p),

(44)


where M (p) ≡ j qj Ej [m(p)] equals aggregate demand for medical care given co-pay p, and Ej
represents the expectation operator conditional on the individual having disease j. Let Mj (p) =
qj Ej [m(p)] equal total demand for treating disease j, and mj (p) = Ej [m(p)] equal demand conditional on disease j.
As before, raising the co-pay diminishes insurance value and may also affect people’s choice of
care. The analysis of rational actors proceeds almost identically to the single disease case. Raising
the co-pay from p to p leads all those whose true beneﬁt of treatment falls between p and p to
no longer take care. Adding multiple diseases and treatments does not make it more difﬁcult to
calculate the welfare impact of reducing utilization: independent of the treatment, the fact that
someone is marginal reveals that his value of the treatment lies between p and p .
Consider a price p such that, for each disease j, total demand for treatment is positive Mj (p) >
0 and price sensitive Mj (p) < 0. Then, totally differentiating W with respect to p and converting
into a money metric yields:
dW dW
/
= −M  (p)(c − p) − I · M (p),
dp dy


E[U  (C)|m=1]−E[U  (C)]
E[U  (C)]



(45)

again equals the insurance value to consumers. Equation (45)
where I =
is exactly the same as (7): introducing multiple diseases does not affect the logic behind insurance
design when people are rational. In particular, −M  (p)(c − p) continues to represent the welfare
gain from reducing moral hazard and M  (p) remains a sufﬁcient statistic for measuring this gain.
In the rational model, it is unnecessary to consider whether raising the co-pay affects demand for
statins or antibiotics to measure the welfare impact: independent of the treatment, anyone on the
margin has the same treatment value.
Matters are more interesting when individuals are behavioral. Recall that when the co-pay is
raised from p to p all those whose decision value of some treatment falls between p and p no
longer take care. Since the wedge between decision and hedonic valuations may depend on the
treatment, understanding which treatments are forgone may provide information about the welfare
effects of reducing utilization.
55

Totally differentiating W with respect to p and converting into a money metric yields:
dW dW
/
= −M  (p)(c − p) − E[mi (p)εi ] − I · M (p),
dp dy
where εi =

(46)

U (y−P −si )−U (y−P −si −εi )
E[U  (C)]

is an increasing function of εi (this expression should be evaluated at the disease severity of the marginal agent given disease state i, si ). This equation illustrates
the discussion above. The third term again represents the reduction in insurance value for all
treated individuals. The ﬁrst two terms, −M  (p)(c − p) − E[mi (p)εi ], now capture the welfare
effect of lower utilization: the standard term, −M  (p)(c − p), is corrected by −E[mi (p)εi ], reﬂecting that certain treatment decisions are not made according to true value (the expectation is
taken over disease states). When raising the co-pay reduces demand for diseases associated with
positive behavioral hazard (εi > 0) by a substantial amount more than it reduces demand for diseases associated with negative behavioral hazard (εi < 0) then this term is positive and raising the
co-pay has the beneﬁt of decreasing overutilization. In the opposite scenario, raising the co-pay
can have the cost of reducing underutilization. Looking at the overall demand response can be
misleading: to understand the welfare impact of raising the co-pay, it is useful to understand the
extent to which people make errors when making certain treatment decisions (e.g., whether to take
statins, antibiotics), as well as the demand response treatment-by-treatment (elasticity of demand
for statins and antibiotics separately).
B.1.1

Empirical Implementation

How can we estimate the welfare impact of raising the co-pay and calibrate the optimal co-pay
formula when raising the co-pay affects demand for multiple treatments? A key result is that the
lessons from Section 5.1 carry over to this setting: we can continue to look at overall health and
demand responses to higher co-pays. This fact is a direct consequence of the following result.
Proposition 8. Consider a co-pay, p, at which demand is price sensitive, so M  (p) < 0. Let sj (p)
denote the disease severity of the marginal agent with disease j given the co-pay if one exists
¯ and let εj (p) ≡ εj (sj (p)) denote the behavioral error of the marginal
(otherwise, set sj (p) = s)
agent. The following relationship holds between the marginal behavioral error, demand responses,
and health responses:
E[mi (p)εi (p)]
H  (p)
=
p
−
.
M  (p)
M  (p)

(47)

Proof. Let hi (p) = Ei [mi (p)bi (s) − s]. It is clear that hi (p) = mi (p)bi (si (p)), so H  (p) =
E[mi (p)bi (si (p))] = E[mi (p)(p − εi (si (p)))] = pM  (p) − E[mi (p)εi (si (p))]. Rearranging this
equality yields (47).

56

Proposition 8 implies that we can use the same data to estimate the model whether or not there
is heterogeneity. Plugging Equation (47) into (46) (after approximating εi ≈ εi ) gives exactly
Equation (13); i.e., Equation (13) continues to be a valid approximation of the welfare impact of
raising the co-pay. This implies that to estimate the welfare impact of raising the co-pay across a
broad category of treatments and to calibrate the optimal co-pay formula, it is enough to look at
aggregate demand and health responses.

B.2

Heterogeneity in Biases

In the baseline single disease/treatment model, biases are homogeneous and expressed with certainty – i.e., ε(s) is non-stochastic (ﬁxing s). However, biases may be heterogeneous across the
population, for example if some people are more present-biased or inattentive than others. This
can be modeled by introducing a ﬁnite number of behavioral types, θ ∈ Θ, where a given type θ
has measure αθ ∈ [0, 1] in the population and is characterized by making decisions according to
error map εθ (s); that is, type θ demands treatment when sick if and only if b(s) + εθ (s) > p.
The analysis of this case proceeds identically to that of the multiple disease model of Subsection B.1. To see this, note that the extension allowing for heterogeneous biases is formally
identical to a special case of the extension with multiple diseases, where εj (s) varies in j, but
bj (s) does not. For this reason, the welfare impact of raising the co-pay can be expressed as
dW dW
/ dy = −M  (p)(c − p) − E[mθ (p)εθ ] − I · M (p), and can be approximated by Equation (13).
dp

B.3

Forgetfulness

B.3.1

Optimal Insurance

As a ﬁnal extension, consider the psychology of “forgetfulness”, where somebody might completely forget to get treated or ﬁll a prescription (or in general fail to follow through on intended
courses of treatment). Allowing for such forgetfulness does not change the logic of how to set
copays because it does not affect who is marginal. To see this, extend the basic one disease/one
treatment model so that, with some exogeneous probability φ independent of severity, the individual will forget to get treated if sick, and, with probability 1 − φ, will remember and tradeoff
decision beneﬁts with costs (i.e., will compare b(s) + ε(s) to p). In this case, welfare can be written
as
W = (1 − q)U (y − P ) + qφE[U (y − P − s)|sick]
+ q(1 − φ)E[U (y − P − s + m(b − p)|sick, remember]

57

(48)

subject to
P = q(1 − φ)E[m(p)|sick, remember](c − p).


(49)

=M (p)

Differentiating W with respect to p and normalizing then gives exactly (10): allowing for forgetfulness does not change how copays affect welfare.46
Note also that the model with forgetfulness is formally equivalent to a special case of the
extensions analyzed in Subsections B.1 and B.2 (where ε = −∞ with probability φ), so the results
derived in those subsections also hold here. In particular, allowing for forgetfulness does not alter
how we can estimate the welfare impact of raising the co-pay; Equation (13) continues to be a
valid approximation.
B.3.2

Market Provision

Incorporating forgetfulness into the market equilibrium model, suppose that individuals forecast
that they will be forgetful with probability φ̂, where φ̂ = φ for a sophisticate and φ̂ = 0 for a naif.
In equilibrium, the market will supply insurance plan (P, p) to maximize the agent’s perceived
expected utility
Ŵ = (1 − q)U (y − P ) + q φ̂E[U (y − P − s)|sick]
+ q(1 − φ̂)E[U (y − P − s + m̂(b − p))|sick, remember]

(50)

subject to zero proﬁt constraint
P = M (p)(c − p).

(51)

Introducing forgetfulness does not change the equilibrium co-pay formula: the equilibrium copay is still implicitly given by (23). However, adding forgetfulness illustrates that the nature of
the bias is important in determining whether proﬁt motives will lead insurers to set co-pays that
deviate from cost in the optimal direction. To see this, again consider the simple case of a riskneutral naive agent (so I = Iˆ = 0, ε = ε, and ε̂ = ε̂ = φ̂ = 0). In this case, the optimal co-pay
formula reduces to
pB = c + ε(s(pB )).

(52)

The intuition behind why the optimal co-pay is independent of the level of forgetfulness is that
46
Of course, the degree of forgetfulness will change values of the parameters in the formula, e.g., the higher φ, the
lower M (p).

58

this level does not affect the marginal social value of treatment. Consequently, the co-pay that
maximizes health net of costs, E(·), is independent of the forgetting probability φ.
On the other hand, the equilibrium co-pay in this case satisﬁes

where M R (p) =

pE = c +

(1 − φ)M R (pE ) − M̂ (pE )
M (pE ) − M̂ (pE )
=c+
,
|Ṁ (pE )|
(1 − φ)|M˙ R (pE )|

1
M (p)
1−φ

equals demand conditional on the agent remembering to consider treat-

(53)

ment. The equilibrium co-pay thus depends on the level of forgetfulness since this level inﬂuences
the degree to which the agent misforecasts her demand for treatment. In the special case where forφ M R (pE ) 47
:
getfulness is the only bias (ε = 0), (52) and (53) give us that pB = c and pE = c − 1−φ
|M˙ R (pE )|
while the optimal co-pay equals cost, the equilibrium co-pay is below cost.48

C

Case Study on Hypertension

High blood pressure is a prevalent and potentially deadly condition: 68 million adults in the U.S.
have high blood pressure (CDC Vital Signs 2011), which is associated with adverse events such
as heart attacks and stroke that carry with them serious health consequences including risk of
death. The cost of treating hypertension and its consequences is high: Hodgson and Cai (2001)
estimate the expenditures associated with hypertension and its effects to be about 12.5% of health
expenditures, or over $5,000 annually per hypertensive patient ($3,800 in 1998, inﬂated using
CPI). We use this important disease as a stylized example to illustrate implications of a model
that incorporates behavioral hazard, examining: (1) the existence of effective treatments to avoid
adverse consequences; (2) adherence and responsiveness to nudges; (3) effects of adherence on
blood pressure and health outcomes.
The Efﬁcacy of Drug Treatments and Consequences of Uncontrolled Hypertension: There
are several classes of drugs (such as beta blockers and ACE inhibitors) that aim to reduce patients’
blood pressure and thereby reduce the chance of serious downstream health events. The medical literature suggests that policies that increased compliance with anti-hypertensives would have
substantial health effects through lowering blood pressure. Use of beta-blockers post-heart attack
can reduce subsequent mortality by more than 40% (Soumerai, 1997). Hsu et al. (2006) found a
30% drop in anti-hypertensive compliance was associated with a 3% increase in hypertension and
Note that when forgetfulness is the only bias, M R (p) = M̂ (p).
More starkly (but perhaps unrealistically), consider a treatment that is overvalued at the margin (ε(s) > 0 for all
s), but which the agent may forget to consider (φ > 0). While the optimal co-pay in this case lies above cost, the
equilibrium co-pay will be below cost for sufﬁciently large φ.
47
48

59

subsequent hospital and emergency department use. Anderson et al. (1991) present a model of
how risk factors such as hypertension are associated with adverse events including heart attack and
stroke in a non-elderly population, and calculate an overall risk of mortality from cardiovascular
disease. For a 50 year old non-smoking, non-diabetic man with somewhat elevated cholesterol,
a decrease in systolic blood pressure from 160 mmHg to 140 mmHg would reduce the risk of
10-year cardiovascular disease mortality by 2.5 percentage points; a decrease in diastolic blood
pressure from 100 to 90 would reduce it by 5 percentage points. Long, Cutler et al. (2006) ﬁnd
that the advent of anti-hypertensive drugs reduced blood pressure in the population over age 40 by
10 percent or more, and averted 86,000 deaths from cardiovascular disease in 2001 and 833,000
hospitalizations for stroke and heart attack. They also note that in addition to these health improvements observed under existing use, under “guideline” use these numbers might have been twice
as high – suggesting that improved patient adherence (as well as physician prescribing practices)
might generate substantial health gains.
Adherence and Responsiveness to Nudges and Copays: Patient adherence to anti-hypertensives
is not only far from perfect, but is sensitive to both ﬁnances and nudges. Schroeder et al. (2008)
review the evidence on adherence to anti-hypertensives and efforts to improve it based on nonﬁnancial strategies, including studies that use reminder systems and innovative packaging. Overall
adherence to hypertensive therapies is around 50%-70%, but such interventions were able to increase it by around 10-20 percentage points. Several of the studies they review that focus on strategies such as reminders ﬁnd not only improvements in adherence but reductions in blood pressure.
McKenney (1992) for example ﬁnds that an intervention including electronic medicine caps and
reminders increased adherence by 20 percentage points and reduced systolic and diastolic blood
pressure by 10-20 mmHg. Several of the studies examining price-elasticity of pharmaceutical use
mentioned above look at results for anti-hypertensives in particular. Many of these estimates cluster around -0.1 to -0.2 (including Chandra, Gruber and McKnight 2010; Landsman et al. 2005;
and Chernew et al. 2008).49 The drop in use found by Hsu et al. (2006) was in response to the
imposition of a cap on drug beneﬁts (with the imposition of caps in general resulting in a decrease
of 30% in pharmaceutical use but an offsetting increase in non-elective hospital use of 13% and
emergency department use of 9%).
49

Chandra et al. (2010) ﬁnd an elasticity of -0.09 for anti-hypertensives among chronically ill HMO patients, based
on an increase in copayments of around $5 (unpublished detail). Chernew et al. (2008) estimate elasticities of -.12
for ACE inhibitors/ARBs and -.11 for beta blockers, based on copay reductions from $5 to 0 for generics and $25
to $12.50 for branded drugs. Landsman et al. (2005) ﬁnd elasticities of -.16 for ARBs and CCBs and -.14 for ACE
inhibitors, based on the introduction of tiering that raised copays by $20 or less. Lohr et al. (1986) ﬁnd a reduction in
use of beta blockers of 40% among those exposed to copayments in the RAND HIE versus those who were not, but
the ﬁnding was not statistically signiﬁcant. Similarly, Hsu et al. (2006) ﬁnd that the imposition of a cap on Medicare
beneﬁciaries’ drug beneﬁts results in an increase in anti-hypertensive non-adherence of 30%.

60

Effects on Health Outcomes: Unlike the Choudhry study examined in the main text, most of
these studies do not individually include the full set of outcomes needed to perform welfare calculations under models of moral hazard and behavioral hazard (and indeed, many do not even report
the change in total (all-payer) drug expenditures), but they can be used in combination to illustrate
the point. For example, the drop in total drug utilization in one of the policy experiments studied in
Chandra et al. is around $23 a month when copays go up to about $7.50 per drug among members
who use about 1.4 drugs per month, or to a coinsurance rate of about 22% of the $48 per month
in drug spending. Following the logic from the Choudhry example in the main text, the standard
moral hazard model would thus suggest that this copay increase generated less than about $5 per
month in health cost (with the remaining $18 reduction in utilization attributable to reduced moral
hazard) - which is clearly at odds with the observed changes in health outcomes.50 The imposition
of beneﬁt caps studied by Hsu et al. produced a similar magnitude decline in utilization, and was
associated with an increase in death rates of 0.7 percentage points, along with increased blood
pressure, cholesterol, and blood sugar - implying a cost from increased mortality alone of $7,000
using conventional valuations.51
Another way of synthesizing this stylized evidence is to calculate the likely mortality reduction
from changes in copayments or nudges that promote adherence and compare it to the cost of the intervention. Estimates suggest that interventions like a $5 reduction in copayments or a nudge with
comparable demand response applied to the 40% of people who are not adherent could increase
compliance with anti-hypertensive therapy by something like 10 percentage points, resulting in a
decrease in blood pressure of 15 mm and subsequent 3 percentage point reduction in deaths from
cardiovascular disease (and even greater gains for readily-identiﬁable subpopulations like those
with previous heart attacks, who may see a 40 percent reduction in subsequent mortality). This
reduction in mortality would be valued at $30,000. This might be compared to the cost of an adherence program. If such a program worked on ¼ of the people to whom it was applied and came
at a cost of less than $7,500, then it would be welfare improving based on this outcome alone.
Given the estimates of the total annual cost of treating hypertensive patients (around $5,000), and
that these interventions largely operate on the low-marginal-cost margin of increased adherence to
prescriptions that have already been obtained through an ofﬁce visit, this seems likely to be the case
50
Chandra et al do not measure health directly, but the increased hospitalization rate is indicative of substantially
worse outcomes. These stylized examples ignore the fact that the price of drugs is not likely an adequate proxy for
their actual marginal cost.
51
How we value reductions in mortality and improvements in health is of course a subject of major debate. Some estimates of the monetary value of life-years are derived from revealed preference arguments that are inherently grounded
in a rational agent model, but others are based on labor market earnings, social welfare arguments, etc. Commonly
used estimates cluster around $100,000 per “quality-adjusted life year” and $1 million per death averted (although this
clearly varies based on the age at which death is averted and the life expectancy gained – averting the death of a young
health worker might be valued at $5 million).

61

- and is consistent with meta-analysis suggesting that interventions to manage use of hypertension
medications were highly cost-effective (Wang 2011).
As the Cutler et al. (2007) estimates suggest, there could be around 90,000 total deaths averted
through greater compliance with optimal antihypertensive therapy, suggesting the scope of such
gains could be vast. Furthermore, this can be viewed as a lower bound, insofar as there are many
other health beneﬁts of reduced hypertension beyond just the deaths from cardiovascular disease
– including improved quality of life and lower incidence of expensive hospitalizations, etc. This
example clearly over-simpliﬁes (to the point of inaccuracy) complex medical pathways, but is
meant to be illustrative both about the steps involved in such a calculation and the rough order of
magnitude of the potential effects.

62

