                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL HETEROGENEITY OF MARGINAL EMISSIONS:
IMPLICATIONS FOR ELECTRIC CARS AND OTHER ELECTRICITY-SHIFTING POLICIES

                                         Joshua S. Graff Zivin
                                           Matthew Kotchen
                                            Erin T. Mansur

                                         Working Paper 18462
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18462


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




We thank Daniel Knudsen for excellent research assistance and seminar participants at Cornell University,
UC Berkeley, UC Energy Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, University of Tennessee at Knoxville,
Georgia Institute of Technology, National Bureau of Economic Research, Princeton University, Environmental
Protection Agency, Resources for the Future, University of Maryland, Harvard University, MIT, and
Dartmouth College for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Matthew Kotchen, and Erin T. Mansur. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity of Marginal Emissions: Implications for Electric Cars
and Other Electricity-Shifting Policies
Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Matthew Kotchen, and Erin T. Mansur
NBER Working Paper No. 18462
October 2012, Revised February 2014
JEL No. H23,L94,Q5

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper, we develop a methodology for estimating marginal emissions of electricity demand that
vary by location and time of day across the United States. The approach takes account of the generation
mix within interconnected electricity markets and shifting load profiles throughout the day. Using
data available for 2007 through 2009, with a focus on carbon dioxide (CO2), we find substantial variation
among locations and times of day. Marginal emission rates are more than three times as large in the
upper Midwest compared to the western United States, and within regions, rates for some hours of
the day are more than twice those for others. We apply our results to an evaluation of plug-in electric
vehicles (PEVs). The CO2 emissions per mile from driving PEVs are less than those from driving
a hybrid car in the western United States and Texas. In the upper Midwest, however, charging during
the recommended hours at night implies that PEVs generate more emissions per mile than the average
car currently on the road. Underlying many of our results is a fundamental tension between electricity
load management and environmental goals: the hours when electricity is the least expensive to produce
tend to be the hours with the greatest emissions. In addition to PEVs, we show how our estimates are
useful for evaluating the heterogeneous effects of other policies and initiatives, such as distributed
solar and real-time pricing.


Joshua S. Graff Zivin                               Erin T. Mansur
University of California, San Diego                 Dartmouth College
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519                          6106 Rockefeller Hall
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519                             Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                            and NBER
jgraffzivin@ucsd.edu                                erin.mansur@dartmouth.edu

Matthew Kotchen
School of Forestry & Environmental Studies,
School of Management,
and Department of Economics
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
matthew.kotchen@yale.edu
1. Introduction
Electricity generation is the primary source of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions worldwide and
accounts for more than 40 percent of domestic emissions in the United States (EPA, 2012).
Climate policies designed to reduce these emissions from electricity generation include those
that seek to change the sources of energy toward lower carbon intensities (e.g., coal to natural
gas, fossil fuels to renewables) and those that attempt to reduce demand for electrical power
(e.g., efficiency standards, building energy codes). In contrast, the recent focus on climate
policies that promote plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs) aim to increase demand for electricity, but
the claim is that electricity   used for charging PEVs will generate less CO2 emissions at power
plants than at the tailpipes of conventional gasoline-powered vehicles.
        Despite such claims, quantifying the change in emissions for any activity that affects
electricity demand is more complicated than it might first appear. There is significant variation
in the types of electric power plants across the United States, and the emission rates differ
greatly among them. Coal-fired units emit considerable CO2 compared to natural gas units, and
even these have significantly higher emission rates than units based on wind, solar, hydro, or
nuclear energy. The change in emissions due to a change in electricity demand thus depends on
which plant is providing the power—that is, the plant “on the margin.” Several factors
complicate the task of identifying the marginal plant that corresponds to a change in electricity
demand at a particular time and place. Not only is the composition of electricity generating
units highly variable both across and within regions of the United States; the utilization of many
units fluctuates with aggregate load on the electricity grid, which changes through the day
(peak versus off-peak) and times of year (seasonal differences). Importantly, the electricity grid
is also comprised of interconnected networks where electricity is traded over large distances,
and there is no definitive way of locating where the electricity demanded at a particular time
and place is actually generated.
        Attempting to overcome these challenges, the present paper makes two primary
contributions. First, we develop and implement a methodology for estimating marginal
emissions of electricity demand across the United States. The method produces estimates that
vary by location and time of day. The results, as we will discuss, are essential inputs for
understanding the environmental implications of many climate and energy policies. We focus
on CO2 emissions throughout the paper but also provide an appendix with results for sulfur
dioxide and nitrogen oxides. Second, we demonstrate the usefulness of our estimates with a
detailed application to PEVs. In particular, we evaluate the implications of PEVs on CO2
emissions and find that greater caution is warranted when considering the supposed
environmental benefits: given current technology and patterns of electricity generation, PEVs in
some regions will generate more CO2 emissions per mile traveled than the average vehicle
currently on the road.1
        Our approach for estimating the marginal emissions of electricity demand exploits
several government datasets on hourly emissions, consumption, and generation across the
United States. For each hour between January 2007 and December 2009, we aggregate CO2
emissions up to three broad regions based on grid interconnections that account for all possible
sources of emissions associated with a change in electricity demand at a particular location. We
then regress the hourly emissions of each interconnection on the hourly electricity
consumption of its sub-regions based on the North American Electric Reliability Corporation
(NERC) classifications, controlling for different combinations of fixed effects.
        The results indicate how marginal changes in electricity consumption within a NERC
region affect emissions at the interconnection level. The marginal effect, averaging across all
regions and hours of the day, is 1.21 pounds of CO2 per kilowatt hour (lbs CO2/kWh) consumed.
However, we find substantial variation among locations and times of day. For example, for the
average hour of the day, the marginal effect in the upper Midwest is 2.30 lbs CO2/kWh, which is
almost three times the magnitude of that for the Western United States. For some hours, this
spatial difference is even larger. Similarly, we see variation in emissions rates by hour of the
day. For the average American, the cleanest consumption occurs when electricity demand is at
its peak (7:00 PM). In contrast, emissions rates are about 26 percent greater during low
demand hours (3:00 AM).           These estimates have important implications for understanding
the environmental consequences of many electricity-shifting policies. If, for example, the


   1
    A complete environmental accounting would require an analysis of all power plant and tailpipe emissions that
occur in addition to CO2. This challenge is discussed in more detail later in the paper.

                                                       1
expansion of electricity generated from renewables displaces existing generation sources, the
estimates of marginal emissions can be used to quantify the avoided pollution and how it
differs by location and time of day. Similarly, to the extent that policies for energy efficiency,
smart grids, and more stringent building codes reduce demand for electricity, estimates of the
marginal emissions will help to understand the impacts and quantify the heterogeneous effects
of uniform policies. The estimates are also relevant for understanding the impacts of activities
and policies that increase electricity demand, as with PEVs, the application upon which we
focus.
         The charging of PEVs increases demand for electricity and its associated emissions while
simultaneously reducing emissions from the tailpipes of substitute vehicles. Given current
technologies, we show how the emissions of charging PEVS differ by region and time of day.
The CO2 emissions per mile from driving PEVs are less than those from driving a hybrid car in
the western United States and Texas. In the upper Midwest, however, charging during the
recommended hours at night implies that PEVs generate more emissions per mile driven than
even the average car currently on the road. Other regions have marginal emission rates that
place PEVs somewhere between a hybrid and a comparable economy car. Underlying many of
our results is a fundamental tension between electricity load management and environmental
goals, as the hours when electricity is the least expensive to produce tend to be the hours with
the greatest emissions. In addition to PEVs, we show how our estimates of marginal emissions
are useful for evaluating the heterogeneous effects of other policies and initiatives related to
residential solar and real-time pricing.



2. Background
Studies of the environmental impacts of electricity consumption have increasingly recognized
the importance of variability in the “footprint” of electricity generated at different points in
space and time. Emissions from power plants on the margin are often exceedingly different
from average emissions over the entire load-generating base. Moreover, the electricity grid’s
interconnectedness means that those sources on the margin often lie beyond the boundaries of
a particular state or political entity considering policy changes (Marriott and Matthews, 2005).

                                                  2
While no accepted methodology for addressing flows across the U.S. grid has emerged, it is
clear that different approaches yield significantly different estimates of emissions associated
with load shifting in a particular location (Weber et al., 2010). Reliable estimates of marginal
emissions are nevertheless critical for evaluating a range of climate and energy policies, some
of which we have mentioned and discuss in more detail in Section 6. At this point, however, we
focus more specifically on our application to PEVs and the policies that seek to promote them.


2.1. Plug-in Electric Vehicles
Pure PEVs are battery-driven automobiles that derive all of their energy (with the exception of
that harnessed from deceleration during driving) from an external source of electricity. They
have been promoted worldwide as a tool for reducing emissions and mitigating climate change.
In Europe, the UK Climate Change Committee has recently made electric vehicles a centerpiece
of its climate change policy (Adam, 2009). The electrification of the transportation sector has
also been identified as an important tool in battling climate change in the United States
(Lehmann, 2011). Indeed, California, which is often a pioneer of U.S. environmental policy,
recently adopted the Advanced Clean Cars Program that will require manufacturers to offer
PEVs for sale in the state as part of the effort to reach state-level goals in reducing greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions over the next twenty years.
        Significant financial incentives for consumer adoption have also accompanied the
enthusiasm for PEVs in the United States. At the federal level, there is a consumer tax credit of
$2,500 per vehicle plus an additional $417 for each kWh of battery capacity in excess of five
kWhs. The total credit allowed per vehicle is capped at $7,500, and all vehicles currently on the
market qualify for the full credit.2 A wide and varying range of additional incentives are offered
at the state level. These include rebates and tax credits for the purchase of vehicles and
charging infrastructure, as well as access to carpool lanes and free public parking in some




   2
     See IRS Notice 2009-89. The credit begins to phase out for a manufacturer’s vehicles when at least 200,000
qualifying vehicles have been sold for use in the United States. The count is determined based on a cumulative
basis for sales after December 31, 2009.

                                                        3
municipalities.3 While some states offer no incentives, at least four offer incentives of at least
$5,000, which when combined with the federal program accounts for somewhere between
one-quarter and one-third of the manufacturer’s suggested retail price of the two most popular
models on the market, the Nissan Leaf and Chevrolet Volt.4
          Conventional automobiles generate several key pollutants as a byproduct of gasoline
combustion. In addition to CO2, these include nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds,
carbon monoxide, and particulate matter. PEVs also generate pollution notwithstanding their
misleading classification as “zero-emissions vehicles.” PEVs simply trade tailpipe emissions for
emissions generated at the smokestack of electric power plants. For some pollutants, the
switch may be beneficial because the technologies and economies of scale are such that the
costs of pollution control are cheaper at power plants. Moreover, the fact that emissions for
the criteria pollutants under the Clean Air Act are more tightly regulated in the power sector
might further ensure some environmental benefits of purchasing a PEV instead of a comparable
substitute vehicle.
          The benefits of PEVs are less clear, however, when it comes to CO2 emissions, which are
currently unregulated in the U.S. electricity sector. The net effect on CO2 emissions of switching
to PEVs will depend, in part, on the carbon intensities of the power plants supplying the
electricity for charging. It follows that any emission benefits will necessarily differ across
charging locations because of the wide variability of emission intensities among power plants.
Policies that promote charging during certain hours will also have differing effects because of
the way that plants are utilized differently throughout the day during peak and off-peak times
of electricity demand.5 Our methodology for estimating marginal emissions accounts for these
features, and we will use the estimates to make explicit comparisons between PEV emissions at
different locations relative to comparable substitute vehicles. We will also make comparisons


   3
     A comprehensive listing of both state and federal incentives is available online through the Plug in America
website at http://www.pluginamerica.org/incentives (accessed January 30, 2014).
   4
     The states with subsidies are California ($2500), Colorado ($6000), Florida ($5000), Georgia ($5000), Hawaii
($5000), Illinois ($4000), Louisiana ($3000), Montana ($500), New Jersey ($4000), Oklahoma ($3000), Oregon
($5000), Pennsylvania ($3500), South Carolina ($1500), Tennessee ($2500), Utah ($750), Washington ($2000), and
West Virginia ($7500): http://www.pluginamerica.org/incentives (accessed January 30, 2014).
   5
       The same issues arise when evaluating how the expansion of renewables affects emissions (Borenstein, 2012).

                                                         4
among choices based on the electricity generation costs and the social cost of carbon. While
our analysis is not a comprehensive benefit-cost analysis, which would entail other
considerations, many of which are difficult to measure, we do discuss the broader policy
context in Section 5. At this point, we briefly review the existing literature on estimating
marginal emissions with applications to PEVs.


2.2. Literature Review
Despite the widely recognized importance of distinguishing between marginal and average
electricity generating units and electricity flows across regions, nearly all of the limited
literature on the environmental impacts of PEVs, most of which has an engineering orientation,
takes a rather narrow approach. Several studies analyze the benefits of PEVs assuming that a
particular type of power plant is generating the electricity to charge the vehicles (EPRI, 2002;
Kliesch and Langer, 2006; Stephan and Sullivan, 2008). As one might expect, these studies find
that cleaner power plants yield greater environmental benefits. While the magnitudes of the
differences are illustrative, the analyses are not especially informative for answering questions
about changes in PEV penetration at particular locations or in the timing of charging during the
day. Other studies take a less hypothetical approach, yet rely on average emissions rates across
regions to assess environmental impacts (Samaras and Meisterling, 2008; Michalek et al., 2011;
Anair and Mahmassani, 2012). While these studies conduct sensitivity analyses around the
estimates, they eschew efforts to directly assess the emissions profiles associated with the
marginal power sources that would be used to charge PEVs.
       Several studies do attend to electricity generation on the margin. McCarthy and Yang
(2010) and Blumsack et al. (2008) use engineering models to simulate merit-order dispatch (i.e.,
least cost allocation) of electricity. For example, consider a hypothetical marginal cost curve
containing plants using various fuels (Figure 1). The model assumes least-cost dispatch where
each low cost unit is run to full capacity. In this example, demand in the early morning hours is
met, on the margin, by a combined cycle unit with low emissions rates. However, in the
afternoon, these low cost baseload units are at capacity and thus a slightly dirtier natural gas
peaking unit is required to operate in order to meet the additional demand. For California,


                                                  5
McCarthy and Yang (2010) conclude that PEVs reduce CO2 emissions relative to conventional
gasoline vehicles and hybrids. Blumsack et al. (2008) conduct their analysis at the level of
regional transmission organizations (excluding the Western United States), while also
considering the life-cycle CO₂ emissions of battery manufacturing. They conclude that PEVs are
no worse, and generally better, than conventional cars in terms of GHG emissions.
       In contrast to these simulation models, a regression approach to estimating marginal
emissions can account for details of the electricity industry that might otherwise be ignored,
including market power, transmission and operating constraints, and imperfect information
about market conditions. In one study, Siler-Evans et al. (2012) use a regression approach to
estimate marginal emissions by region and time of day. They use the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA) Continuous Emission Monitoring System (CEMS) data (described in
Section 3.1 below) and regress each NERC region’s hourly change in aggregate emissions on its
hourly change in gross fossil-fuel generation. While this approach is an improvement on other
methods, it is only valid under the following assumptions: (a) all consumption in a region is met
by power plants in the same region; (b) only power plants in the CEMS data supply marginal
electricity output; (c) aggregate fossil-fuel generation is exogenous; and (d) the method’s ad
hoc corrections for line losses are constant over location and time. In contrast, the approach
that we apply in this paper is based directly on the relationship between aggregate emissions
and end-use consumption, and we allow the marginal producer to be located anywhere in the
corresponding grid interconnection.
       Finally, two other studies are worth mentioning in tandem because they comprise what
is perhaps most closely related to our analysis here. In addition to considering specific
electricity-generation technologies, Stephan and Sullivan (2008) apply the estimates of marginal
emissions from Holland and Mansur (2008) to analyze PEVs. Holland and Mansur (2008) focus
on the environmental effects of real-time pricing, and they regress daily emissions at the NERC
level on the first and second moments of the within-day distribution of consumption in the
same NERC region. While the validity of these estimates are subject to some of the same
assumptions as those in Siler-Evans et al. (2012), Stephan and Sullivan’s (2008) use of them




                                                 6
suggests that PEVs have emission rates between 50 and 75 percent that of hybrid vehicles (not
plugged in).
        In what follows, we describe our method, which differs from the existing literature in
several important ways. Unlike previous analyses, we estimate hour-of-day marginal emission
rates. Moreover, the aggregation of emissions at the level of grid interconnections means that
the estimates account for how demand shocks in some regions may affect marginal emissions
in others. Finally, we discuss how the estimates for CO2 (along with sulfur dioxide and nitrogen
oxides) can be used to evaluate a variety of policies, in addition to our primary focus on PEVs.



3. Data and Preliminaries
This section describes the various data sets used in our analysis, presents basic summary
statistics, and makes preliminary comparisons between the emission rates of electric power
plants that might charge PEVs relative to comparable vehicles currently on the road.


3.1. Data on Emissions and Electricity
Using data over the three year period of 2007 through 2009, the most recent period for which
all data are available, we combine data sets from several federal agencies: the EPA, the Energy
Information Administration (EIA), and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). The
EPA’s CEMS data is our primary source of emissions data for all fossil-fuel generating units with
at least 25 megawatts (MW) of generating capacity.6 These data include information on CO2,
sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide emissions and are available hourly for the most recent
period of January 2007 through December 2009. Also included in the CEMs data, which we use
here, is each unit’s hourly gross generation, i.e., the total amount of electrical power that a unit
produces for internal use and for sale. We obtain hourly electricity consumption data for the
same time period from FERC Form 714, which is reported at the level of 200 planning areas



   6
     Technically, a generating unit is a subset of a power plant that typically consists of a boiler, generator, and
smoke stack. EPA (2009) provides detailed information about the CEMS program and more specifics about which
units are included in the data (see http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/emissions/continuous-factsheet.html, accessed
January 31, 2014).

                                                         7
across the nation.7 We also use data from Form 714 on the Hourly System Lambda, which is an
estimate of the marginal cost of electricity generation for a given hour in each planning area. 8
Two other sources of data are useful for some basic calculations of summary statistics. One is
EIA Form 923 that includes net generation (only electricity for sale) at the power plant level by
month for 2007 through 2009.9 The other is EPA’s Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated
Database (eGRID), which contains data on the emissions rates of power plants based on net
generation for 2007 and 2009.10
          The unit of observation varies widely among these data sources. For instance, the EPA
data are available at the level of generating units, while the FERC data are reported for planning
areas that range in size from the city of St. Cloud, Minnesota to all of the Pennsylvania, Jersey,
Maryland (PJM) Power Pool, the largest control area covering 13 states from New Jersey to
Chicago. At various points of our analysis, and to different degrees, we aggregate and merge
the data sets to make them comparable and account for important institutional features about
electricity grid interconnections.11
          Figure 2 provides a general overview of the U.S. electrical grid with an illustration of
how the United States is partitioned into three interconnections (Western, ERCOT, and Eastern)
and eight NERC regions (FRCC, MRO, NPCC, RFC, SERC, SPP, TRE, WECC).12 Interconnections are


   7
    These data are available online at http://www.ferc.gov/docs-filing/forms/form-714/overview.asp (accessed
January 30, 2014).
   8
     In restructured competitive electricity markets, the lambdas are simply market prices. The system lambdas
are not available for one of the interconnection/NERC regions (ERCOT), so for this one we use reported prices as
the measure of marginal generation costs, available at http://www.ercot.com/mktinfo/prices/mcpea (accessed
January 30, 2014).
   9
       These data are available online at http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia923/ (accessed January 30, 2014).
   10
      Data is not available for 2008, and information about eGrid and the data sets are available online at
http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/energy-resources/egrid/ (accessed January 30, 2014).
   11
     All of the emissions and consumption data are for the United States only. Canada (and Mexico to a much
smaller degree) does trade power with the United States (see Figure 2). But most of the power coming from
Canada is hydroelectric and sold over large direct current lines that are at capacity most hours. This suggests that
changes in consumption in the United States would have a small effect on production decisions in Canada, and any
changes in production would have negligible effects on short-run CO2 emissions, which is the focus of our analysis.
   12
      The acronyms correspond with the following full names: Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT), Florida
Reliability Coordinating Council (FRCC), Midwest Reliability Organization (MRO), Northeast Power Coordinating
Council (NPCC), ReliabilityFirst Corporation (RFC), SERC Reliability Corporation (SERC), Southwest Power Pool (SPP),
Texas Regional Entity (TRE), and Western Electricity Coordinating Council (WECC).

                                                          8
important because they identify the entire regions over which electricity is traded, so changes
in demand at any location—from, for example, a new PEV—could affect the generation of a
marginal plant anywhere within the corresponding interconnection. Note that the Western and
ERCOT interconnections each have only one NERC region, and we will follow convention and
refer to the different designations interchangeably as WECC and ERCOT, respectively. In
contract, the Eastern interconnection encompasses six NERC regions, and we will decompose
parts of our analysis accordingly to obtain greater spatial resolution in our results.
        Table 1 provides summary statistics at the level of interconnections and NERC regions,
and looking across them gives a sense of the regional heterogeneity. The first three columns
report average hourly CO2 emissions, electricity consumption, and net electricity generation.
Looking first at the three interconnections, we see that the Eastern interconnection is more
than four times the size of WECC, which is approximately twice the size of ERCOT. It is also the
case that consumption tends to be lower than generation, and the difference can be explained
by line losses due to the transport of electricity over power lines. The similarity of consumption
and net generation for the Eastern interconnection is because it imports from Canada roughly
three gigawatts on average.
        Among the NERC regions of the Eastern interconnection, the differences between
consumption and net generation indicate which regions are importers or exporters of electric
power. The pattern is such that Florida (FRCC), the upper Midwest (MRO) and NPCC are
importers, the Mid-Atlantic region (RFC) and the Southeast (SERC) are exporters, and the
Oklahoma region (SPP) is close to neutral. In addition to this variation across regions, there
exists variation within regions.13
        Table 1 also reports several measures of the CO2 emissions rate for each region. The
consumption-based emission rate is CO2 emissions (first column) divided by electricity
consumption (second column). The ERCOT and Eastern interconnections have similar rates, just
under 1.3 lbs CO2/kWh, while WECC is substantially lower at 0.85. Within the Eastern
interconnection NERC regions, the rates range from a high of 1.64 in SPP to a low of 0.57 in
NPCC. These rates are somewhat misleading, however, because they do not account for
13
  The EIA (2011) display net power flows across sub-NERC region (see
http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=4270, accessed January 29, 2014).

                                                     9
electricity being traded across regions: a region that imports power will have an artificially low
rate, while an exporter’s rate will be too high. The generation-based emissions rates are CO2
emissions (first column) divided by electricity generation (third column). These rates take trade
into account, and for this reason, they are the ones typically used when evaluating electricity
emissions. We now see that the generation-based emissions rate in MRO is quite close to that
of SPP, as the rates in importing (exporting) regions have risen (fallen). As a simple point of
comparison, we report in the last column of Table 1 eGRID’s emissions rates by region based on
net generation. While the time period differs because 2008 is missing, the numbers are quite
similar to our generation-based estimates. In both cases, the rates are informative, but they are
not especially useful for understanding how changes in electricity demand will affect
emissions—as they both represent average rather than marginal emission rates.


3.2. Preliminary Comparisons Among Vehicles
When plugging in a PEV, or engaging in other activities that increases demand for electricity,
any power plant in the same interconnection could, in principle, provide the marginal power.
Yet, as mentioned previously, the CO₂ emissions rates associated with power plants differ
greatly, ranging from zero for hydropower and nuclear plants to substantial for many coal-fired
plants. To determine how the heterogeneity of emissions affects the environmental
implications of PEVs, we consider the emission rates of particular plants and make preliminary
comparisons between the potential emissions from charging PEVs and driving substitute
vehicles.
       We begin with the EPA CEMS data on hourly CO2 emissions and gross generation for the
fossil-fired units over the entire sample period 2007-2009. Because we are interested in the
marginal emissions of consumption (rather than generation), we make two adjustments to
gross generation to derive consumption-based emission rates. First, we convert gross to net
generation based on the reported difference between the two for units in the EIA Form 923
data of 2008, a year for which both numbers are available. We find that approximately 4.59
percent of the gross generation is consumed on-site, and we make this constant adjustment to
all units and hours to obtain an estimate of hourly net generation. Second, to focus on


                                                10
consumption, we must also account for electricity that is lost through transmission and
distribution, and we use Stephan and Sullivan’s (2008) estimate of 9.6 percent to make this
conversion. Hence, the emissions rate of interest for our analysis is a unit’s hourly CO 2
emissions divided by its net transmitted generation, defined as (gross
generation)/(1.04591.096).
        Figure 3 plots the cumulative distribution and probability density functions for the
hourly net transmitted (i.e., consumption-based) emissions rates for all of the fossil-fired units
in the CEMS data. The mean emissions rate is 2.10 lbs CO2/kWh with upper and lower quartiles
of 1.42 and 2.40. The peaks of the probability density function illustrate the different emissions
rates among the three primary technologies of fossil units, which, from low to high emissions
rates, are combined-cycle gas turbines, single-cycle gas turbines, and coal-fired boilers.
        We now consider how this distribution of emission rates can be used to compare the
CO2 emissions of electric cars against those of substitute vehicles currently in use. The two most
popular PEVs on the market are the Chevrolet Volt and the Nissan Leaf, and these vehicles use
approximately 36 kWh and 34 kWh per 100 miles, respectively.14 Taking the midpoint and
normalizing per mile, we summarize the current PEV technology as requiring 0.35 kWh/mile.
This number multiplied by any one of the emission rates illustrated in Figure 3 yields the
emission rates of PEVs in terms of lbs CO2/mile if charging occurred with electricity from that
particular unit in a given hour. For the purposes of comparison with other vehicles, however,
we use the 0.35 kWh/mile as a conversion to report all vehicle emissions in terms of lbs
CO2/kwh, as this make makes comparisons straightforward using Figure 3.
        The average fuel economy of the U.S. fleet of light-duty, gasoline-powered vehicles is
21.7 miles per gallon (mpg) (Department of Transportation, 2009). Because combusting a gallon
of gasoline releases 19.6 lbs CO2 (EPA, 2011), the average light-duty gasoline vehicle emits 0.90
lbs CO2/mile. To make this number comparable with the emission rates of PEVs in Figure 3, we
simply divide by 0.35 miles/kWh to obtain 2.58 lbs CO2/kWh. This number is shown as the right-

   14
      The U.S. Department of Energy reports fuel economy statistics for both conventional and electric cars, and
these statistics are available online at www.fueleconomy.gov. It is also worth noting that a range of driver
behaviors -- such as heating and cooling usage, acceleration rates, and deceleration rates -- can lead to realized
fuel economy that differs from those published by the EPA (Green et al., 2006). The degree to which these factors
impact the efficiency of PEVs relative to gasoline vehicles is not well understood at present.

                                                        11
most vertical reference line in Figure 3, and it represents the average emissions rate of light-
duty gasoline vehicles in the 2009 U.S. fleet. One way to interpret the cumulative distribution
function in Panel A is that a PEV will emit less CO2 than the average light-duty vehicle assuming
the PEV’s charge comes from a fossil-fired unit that is below the 87th percentile in emissions. In
contrast, and more importantly, a PEV could emit more CO2 if its charge comes from a fossil-
fired unit above that percentile in emissions—roughly 13 percent of all electricity-generating
units. While these numbers illustrate how PEVs might compare with other vehicles in terms of
their emissions, the comparisons are potentially misleading for several reasons. First, they are
not informative about the probability of which units might be on the margin. Second, they do
not distinguish among hours of the day, over which there is substantial variation in emissions
rates. Third, they imply that only one unit could be on the margin, when in fact several could be
on the margin simultaneously or over the course of a PEV’s charge of several hours. Finally, the
numbers assume that the substitute for a PEV is a random draw from the population of all light-
duty vehicles. While we address the first three of these concerns in our subsequent empirical
analysis, we first make comparisons with vehicles that are more likely to be substitutes for
PEVs.
         We consider the alternatives of a comparable economy car and a hybrid. Using
characteristics of the Nissan Leaf, a set of comparable gasoline vehicles is the Toyota Corolla,
Honda Civic, Chevrolet Cruze, and Ford Fiesta, and this set has a 2012 fuel economy average of
31 mpg.15 Converting these units, as described above, implies an emissions rate of 1.79 lbs
CO2/kWh, corresponding to the middle reference line in Figure 3, and the interpretation is that
approximately 41 percent of the fossil units that might charge PEVs over any hour have higher
emission rates. Turning to the hybrids, we consider the leading seller of a Toyota Prius, which
for 2012 has a combined fuel economy rating of 50 mpg, or for purposes of comparison an
emissions rate of 1.13 lbs CO2/kWh. As shown by the left-most reference line in Figure 3, only
12 percent of the fossil-fired units over all hours have emission rates lower than this, implying


   15
      The six characteristics of the Leaf are head room (41.2 inches front/ 37.3 inches rear), hip room (51.5 in. front
/ 50 in. rear), leg room (42.1 in. front / 31.1 in. rear), shoulder room (54.4 in. front / 52.5 in. rear), 5 seating
capacity, and 14.5 cubic feet of cargo volume. The combined fuel economy is 30 mpg for the Corolla and Cruze, 32
mpg for the Civic, and 33 mpg for the Fiesta.

                                                          12
much scope for PEVs to have higher emission rates than hybrid vehicles. In sum, these
comparisons demonstrate the importance of identifying the marginal power plant for
evaluating the environmental implications of PEVs, as well as the choice of substitute vehicles.16


4. Estimating Marginal Emissions
We begin with models to estimate the marginal rate of CO2 emissions from electricity
consumption within each of the three interconnections (WECC, ERCOT, Eastern).17 Considering
each interconnection separately, ct denotes an interconnection’s aggregate hourly CO2

emissions in hour t . The contemporaneous quantity of electricity demanded in the
interconnection is qt .18 Our general approach is to regress each interconnection’s hourly

emissions on its hourly consumption. While in most markets that one might study, quantity
demanded and thereby emissions would depend on price, we can treat qt as exogenous in this

case because wholesale electricity prices are not borne by consumers. Hence, the derived
demand for wholesale electricity is perfectly inelastic, with few minor exceptions that pose no
difficulty for our analysis.
        The specific models that we estimate, one for each of the three interconnections, have
the form
                                24                   24 36
                 (1)      ct    h HOURh qt   hm HOURh MONTH m   t ,
                                h 1                h 1 m 1


where HOURh is an indicator variable for hour h of the day and MONTHm is an indicator

variable for month m of the sample. Therefore, the α hm coefficient is a fixed-effect for each




   16
      Here we have simply chosen likely alternatives to PEVs, but a more formal empirical approach could be used
to identify the most likely substitutes. While we leave these estimates to future research, it is worth remarking
that the value of such an exercise will increase with more data if and when electric vehicles become more
common.
   17
     While we focus on CO2 emissions throughout the paper, the approach generalizes to sulfur dioxide, nitrogen
oxides, and gross generation as well. We estimate these results and report them in appendix tables A1, A2, and A3.
   18
     Prior to aggregating emissions and demand for all econometric models, we convert all data into eastern
standard time for the Eastern interconnection, central standard time for ERCOT, and western standard time for
WECC.

                                                       13
hour of day by month of sample.19 We estimate equation (1) using ordinary least squares, and
we report Newey-West standard errors based on a 24-hour lag to account for serial correlation.
The coefficients of interest are 1 ,...,  24 , which provide estimates of the marginal emissions of
consumption for each hour of the day within an interconnection. When estimating equation (1),
along with others reported here, we include data for only weekdays. We exclude weekends for
two reasons. First, patterns of electricity demand and therefore generation differ between
weekends and days of the week, meaning that hourly coefficients may systematically differ.
Second, our primary application to PEVs is more suited to days of the week, when commuting
patterns are more regular.20
         We also provide a decomposition analysis for the Eastern interconnection, as it consists
of six distinct NERC regions that we denote with subscripts i . Specifically, we estimate more
spatially explicit relationships between where consumption takes place and its associated
marginal emissions. Accordingly, for the Eastern interconnection only, we estimate the
following model:
                                  24    6                            24 36
                  (2)       ct    jh HOURh REG j q jt   hm HOURh MONTH m   t ,
                                  h 1 j 1                         h 1 m 1


where REG j is an indicator for region j of the Eastern interconnection. The only difference is

that we include right-hand-side variables for electricity demand separately for each NERC
region, while keeping the aggregate Eastern interconnection emissions on the left-hand-side. As
a result, within the same model, we estimate marginal emissions for each hour of the day
separately for each of the six NERC regions in the Eastern interconnection. A useful feature of
the model is that marginal emissions are calculated for each NERC region while controlling for
electricity consumption in other regions. The reason for keeping emissions aggregated at the




   19
     We also estimated models with different sets of fixed effects to test robustness of our results. Specifically,
we estimated models with fixed effects based on day of sample, day of sample by hour of day, day of sample by
seasonal hour of day, and hour of day by week of sample. In general, the results display qualitatively similar
patterns across hours of the day and regions. In cases where they differ, the results are statistically insignificant.
   20
    We did estimate parallel models that include data for all days of the week, and the results do not differ in
meaningful ways. These other results are available upon request.

                                                           14
interconnection level is to account for the trading of electricity that occurs between NERC
regions within the interconnection.21
         Table 2 reports the results of all regression models for marginal CO2 emissions.                   The
first three columns are the estimates of specification (1) for each interconnection. To facilitate
interpretation and comparison, we also illustrate results of these three models in Figure 4,
which plots the marginal emissions (with 95-percent confidence intervals) against the hour of
day for the WECC, ERCOT, and Eastern interconnections. Figure 4 shows substantial variation in
the marginal emissions rates over both location and time of day. Within interconnections, the
unweighted average across hours of the day are 0.80 for WECC, 0.96 for ERCOT, and 1.29 for
Eastern. The largest difference is that Eastern has a CO2 emissions rate more than 60 percent
larger than WECC, reflecting a greater reliance on coal in the East. The variation in marginal
emissions throughout the day tends to follow a familiar pattern in all interconnections: high
during off-peak hours and low during on-peak hours. This pattern occurs because coal-fired
units, which have higher emission rates, are most commonly used to meet base-level and off-
peak electricity demand; whereas, natural gas units, which have relatively low emissions rates,
are often brought online to meet peak demand. This pattern of fuel shifting explains why
emission rates tend to be higher at night (midday for WECC) and lower during periods of peak
demand in the morning and evening.
         Returning to Table 2, the next six columns report the coefficient estimates of
specification (2) for each of the NERC regions within the Eastern interconnection. These
estimates indicate even greater variability in marginal emissions by location. The highest rates
occur in MRO (the upper Midwest), which at 2.3 lbs CO2/kWh is nearly three times the
emissions rate of WECC. Among the Eastern NERC regions, the variation over time of day also
tends to follow the general pattern of high (low) emissions rates during off-peak (on-peak)



   21
      In terms of other disaggregated analyses, one could explore how hourly demand shocks in each planning
area affect hourly emissions at each generating unit, but such an approach would suffer from omitted variable
biases or multicollinearity. For example, if one were to regress a power plant’s emissions on the local planning area
demand alone, this would ignore the fact that neighboring region’s consumption is correlated with the local
demand. The bias could be in either direction, depending on the region’s net importing status. At the other
extreme, a regression of U.S. aggregate emissions on consumption in each of the planning areas may be noisy
given the high correlation among consumption variables.

                                                         15
hours. The last column of Table 2 reports an average of the coefficients across all NERC regions
weighted by the hourly electricity consumption in each region. These numbers provide a sense
for the variation in marginal emissions among hours of the day for the entire United States.
The appendix examines the robustness of these results to different sets of fixed effects.22
        In Section 5, with our application to electric cars, we will take advantage of all the hourly
estimates of marginal emissions rates for each NERC region. We will also discuss how they are
useful for other applications. At this point, however, we turn to some more general
observations about the importance of considering the marginal emissions of electricity
consumption rather than the average emissions of electricity generation.
        Panel A of Figure 5 illustrates the unweighted daily average of marginal emissions for all
eight NERC regions. We also report a weighted average of these estimates of 1.21 lbs CO2/kWh,
where the weights are hourly consumption in each region. This “total” column is not an
estimate and is for comparison purposes only. We also show 95-percent confidence intervals
for our estimates. Here again we see that the marginal rates are low in WECC and high in MRO.
For the purposes of comparison, Panel A also includes the generation-based average emissions
rates from Table 1, along with confidence intervals. Because generation-based, average
emissions rates are the most readily available, they are the ones most commonly used to
evaluate the environmental impacts of changes in electricity demand. Yet they are conceptually
incorrect because the real measure that matters is the marginal (rather than average) emission
rate for consumption (rather than generation). The comparisons in Panel A of Figure 5 show the
bias associated with using the average, generation-based emission rates. An important finding
is that the bias is not always in the same direction. While, over the course of the entire day,
marginal emissions are greater than average emissions (with statistical significance) in FRCC,




22
   A supplementary appendix in Graff Zivin et al. (2014) includes additional material. We find the results robust to
including lagged consumption. Using sharp bounds, we do not find evidence that hydropower biases our
estimates. Estimates using fossil-fired plants’ gross generation as the dependent variable suggest that other plants
are marginal some of the time. We decompose the variance of the main variables and find that half of the variation
in hourly prices remains once we control for the fixed effects in our main specification. Finally, we compare our
results with average emissions rates for each hour of the day and find less temporal variation and a notable
increase in emissions in ERCOT (which has little low-carbon inframarginal technology like nuclear power and run-
of-river hydropower).

                                                        16
MRO, and NPCC, the opposite result holds in SERC and SPP. The magnitude of the differences is
also quite substantial in MRO, NPCC, and SPP.
           In Panel B of Figure 5, we summarize Siler-Evans et al.’s (2012) results as a further point
of comparison. Recall that their approach differs from ours; for each NERC region, they regress
the hourly change in aggregate emissions on the hourly change in gross generation measured
by the CEMS data. Hence, their estimates focus on how local changes in generation affect local
emissions, and thereby do not account for how electricity is traded with the Eastern
interconnection. In general, we find greater differences between marginal and average
emission rates, and the levels themselves differ by meaningful amounts in some cases.
           There are also several reasons why the emission rate estimates based on CEMS gross
generation may be biased for consumption-based applications. First, gross generation by a
power plant includes power used by the plant that is not sold, so the emissions rate of pounds
of pollutant per MWh produced will understate the rate based on what is sold. Second,
generation does not account for transmission line losses that are approximately nine percent of
total generation. This implies that the gross-generation-based rate will further understate the
consumption-based rate. Third, small fossil-fired power plants are not included in CEMS,
implying that the true effect will be larger still. Note that this potential bias is present in our
results as well. Fourth, non-fossil generation could be on the margin and is not captured by
either analysis.23


5. Electric Vehicles
We now use our estimates of the marginal emissions rates for a more careful analysis of the
CO2 emissions associated with electric cars. Automobile manufacturers and electric utilities
suggest charging PEVs between midnight and 5 AM.24 Calculating the average marginal
emissions over this time period for all NERC regions using the coefficient estimates in Table 2

   23
      Some technologies—nuclear, solar, run-of-river hydro, and wind—are unlikely to be on the margin as they
have low marginal costs. Yet, hydroelectric reservoirs (the largest renewable) are used to follow load (i.e., are
marginal), but they have a constraint on cumulative production during a dry season. In the West, for example,
precipitation is stored over the winter, spring, and early summer to be used when prices are highest in the late
summer.
   24
        For example, see http://sdge.com/clean-energy/electric-vehicles/ev-rates (accessed January 30, 2014).

                                                         17
yields rates of 0.82 for WECC, 1.10 for ERCOT, 1.21 for SPP, 1.24 for FRCC, 1.25 for NPCC, 1.38
for SERC, 1.47 for RFC, and 2.64 for MRO. The overall mean based on the Total column is 1.35
lbs CO2/kWh. For purposes of comparison, recall that the emissions rates of the potential
substitute vehicles are 1.13 for the hybrid, 1.79 for the economy car, and 2.58 for the light-duty
fleet average. These numbers imply that a PEV charging in MRO between midnight and 5 AM
will generate more CO2 emissions than driving a comparable distance with a car representing
the light-duty fleet average. Moreover, for all regions with the exceptions of WECC and
ERCOT—that is, the entire Eastern interconnection—charging a PEV at the recommended time
will generate greater emissions than driving a comparable hybrid car.
       Figure 6 enables a broader set of comparisons with the total CO2 emissions of charging a
PEV at different times of the day in each region. The figure is based on the assumption that the
PEV charges for four hours and draws 13 kWh to drive 35 miles, as these are the specifications
for the Chevrolet Volt. The figure illustrates, for example, that charging a PEV in the WECC
between midnight and 4 AM would emit an average of just over 10 lbs of CO 2. While we
consider non-overlapping 4-hour intervals throughout the day for illustrative purposes, other
intervals and durations are straightforward to derive using the results in Table 2. Figure 6
illustrates the heterogeneity of emissions that PEVs will have both among regions and within a
region over times of the day. WECC and MRO are on opposite ends of the range with the low
and high emissions, respectively. While emissions tend to be higher with charging at night in
most regions, this pattern does not always hold, as in NPCC where there are many oil-fired units
used to meet peak demand. Importantly, the figure shows that the recommended charging in
the hours after midnight, which are those when electricity demand is the lowest, tend to be the
hours with the greatest emissions in most NERC regions. Also shown in Figure 6 are the
reference lines for the emissions associated with driving the substitute vehicles 35 miles. WECC
is the only region where PEVS have lower emissions than a hybrid for charging over all hours of
the day. The national average numbers imply that hybrids emit less CO2 than a PEV for charging
over all hours expect for 5 – 8 PM (Figure 6), which is a time of peak demand.
       Beyond accounting for the CO2 emissions of PEVs are economic considerations about
the costs of electricity generation and emissions. Knowing these costs is essential for setting


                                                18
optimal policy about where to deploy PEVs and when to charge them. As part of a more
comprehensive analysis, we consider two components of the social costs of charging PEVs. First
is the marginal external cost of the CO2 emissions itself. We value these costs using the
marginal damage estimates of $21 per metric ton of CO2 as recommended by the Interagency
Working Group on the Social Cost of Carbon (2010) for regulatory impact analysis (see also
Greenstone et al., 2013). Second are the marginal generation costs of producing the electricity.
We estimate these costs with the Hourly System Lambdas (or prices in the case of ERCOT)
described in Section 3.1. These marginal generation costs are reported for each hour of the day
and NERC region in Appendix Table A3. Note that we are not including residential retail prices
for electricity in these partial social cost calculations, as they represent transfers rather than
economy-wide opportunity costs. We nevertheless make some simple comparisons below
based on residential prices for electricity, as they do matter for individuals deciding whether to
purchase a PEV. Moreover, we refer to these as partial social cost calculations because not
included are the costs of other pollutants, which would matter in ways that we also discuss in
Section 5.
       Figure 7 shows the social costs of daily electricity generation and CO2 emissions of
different charging times and NERC regions. The bottom part of each bar represents the costs of
generation (13 kWh multiplied by the average marginal costs over that period). The top part of
each bar is the social cost of carbon (SCC) ($21 per metric ton converted to lbs and multiplied
by the emissions for the corresponding times and regions in Figure 6). Several things are worth
noting. First, the generation costs of charging a PEV are substantially larger than the social costs
of carbon (at least at $21 per metric ton) for all time periods and regions with the exception of
MRO, where generation costs are relatively low in addition to emissions being relatively high.
Second, within regions, the time profile of generation costs for charging a PEV tends to be the
opposite of that for emissions: it is substantially more costly to generate electricity for charging
during the day and peak times when demand is high and emissions are low. Third, the time
periods that minimize generation costs are generally those that minimize the sum of generation
and CO2 damage costs, emphasizing again the relatively small magnitudes of the costs of CO2
emissions.


                                                 19
         The preceding analysis underscores the fundamental tradeoff of PEVs as a cost-effective
approach to reducing GHG emissions. The regions and times of day when electricity generation
is relatively less expensive—and therefore more favorable for charging PEVs—are also the
regions and times of day with the greatest CO2 emissions. What is more, even accounting for
the environmental damage, the estimate of the SCC is not enough to change the fact that
minimizing costs tends to mean maximizing CO2 emissions. This does, however, raise the
question of how high the SCC would need to be in order to align the objectives of minimizing
both costs and emissions. To make this comparison, we consider results for the national
average. While minimizing costs implies a recommended charging time of midnight to 4 AM
(Figure 7), minimizing emissions implies a recommended charging time of 4 to 8 PM. Only if the
SCC were at least $250 per metric ton would the recommended charging time be 4 to 8 PM for
both objectives. This number is indeed quite high.
         It is important to emphasize that while these calculations focus on CO2 emissions, they
do not account for other externalities (positive and negative) of driving an electric car. These
would include the reduction of local pollutants generated on roadways, which themselves
exhibit substantial regional heterogeneity (Muller and Mendelsohn, 2009). While power plants
also contribute pollutants like sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, these pollutants are regulated
under a cap-and-trade system, meaning that any change in emissions at one location would be
offset by a change in emissions elsewhere. The environmental effects would thus depend on
the spatial distribution of the marginal costs and benefits of abatement (Burtraw and Mansur,
1999). A further factor to consider is that driving behavior may change if the marginal cost of
driving falls (i.e., the rebound effect). The per gallon equivalent cost of driving an electric car is
estimated at approximately $2/gallon.25 It follows that, as with the Corporate Average Fuel
Economy Standards, the rebound effect may occur and cause increased congestion, local
emissions, and accidents (Portney et al., 2003).26 While a comprehensive benefit-cost analysis


   25
      EIA (2011) reports an average residential electricity rate of $0.12/kWh. For the average electric car, this is
$0.042 per mile. For a gasoline car to pay this rate, gasoline prices would need to be $0.86/gallon for an average
car, $1.38 for a commuter car, or $2.10 for a Prius.
   26
     A careful life-cycle analysis that tends to the embodied carbon in both PEVs and their substitutes is also
needed to ensure comprehensiveness.

                                                          20
of electric cars would need to take account of these different effects, they are beyond the
scope of our analysis here, which is to demonstrate how our estimates of marginal emissions
provide a novel and important input to the process.


6. Other Applications
The basic framework that we developed in Section 4 allows empirical estimation of the
marginal emission rates of electricity consumption at different times of day and geographic
locations across the United States. We have shown how these estimates are critical for
understanding the environmental and economic implications of PEVs. We now consider how
the same estimates can be used to examine the impacts of other policies and technologies that
shift electricity demand: distributed solar and real-time pricing. In each case, we apply the
empirical estimates of marginal emissions to provide illustrative calculations. While the
approach is “back-of-the-envelope” and therefore abstracts from many important features and
nuances of each case, our primary purpose is not to offer comprehensive analyses of each
policy or technology. Instead, our aim is to show how one might apply our methodology more
generally to a range of research questions.


6.1. Distributed Solar
Much like PEVs, renewable sources of energy are promoted as an important tool for addressing
climate change and other environmental problems associated with the combustion of fossil
fuels. Among the different alternatives, solar photovoltaic systems convert solar energy into
electricity with virtually no emissions, ignoring those associated with the production and
installation of the hardware. Distributed solar installations are those of smaller scale located at
or near the site of primary consumption, such as arrays placed on residential or commercial
rooftops. Of particular interest here are the “behind-the-meter” installations because they
serve on-site electricity consumption rather than production that is fed directly onto the grid.
The aggregate capacity of these installations has grown significantly in recent years, increasing
1,400 percent between 2000 and 2010 (Barbose et al., 2011).




                                                21
         The environmental and economic implications of reducing electricity demand—from
PEVs as well as solar installations—depends on where and when the shifts occur. In the case of
photovoltaics, the timing of these reductions will follow the trajectory of the sun, ramping up in
the morning, peaking by mid-afternoon, and tapering off in the evening. Thus, the benefits of
distributed solar deployment will depend importantly on the marginal emissions and costs of
electricity generation in the relevant electricity market during daylight hours, and our
methodological approach is well suited for quantifying these effects.
         Consider a simple, illustrative example of a residential solar system that produces 1 kWh
of electricity each hour from 7 AM to 7 PM. Using the hourly coefficients from Table 2, we can
readily estimate the reduction in CO2 emissions that would occur because of displaced
electricity demand in various parts of the country. By simply summing coefficients over the
relevant hours, we find, for example, that the solar installation would avert 9.8 lbs of CO 2/day
for a household in the WECC, while the comparable number is 14.7 lbs of CO2/day for the
Eastern interconnection. Scaling emissions to the annual level, this yields 3,359 and 5,347 lbs
for the two regions, respectively.27 While in both regions the solar generated electricity occurs
during hours when marginal emissions are relatively low, the differences indicate that the
environmental benefits of distributed solar (assuming comparable generation) are significantly
higher in the East, where the marginal emissions are greater from electricity on the grid.
Monetizing these benefits, using the social cost of carbon estimate of $21 per metric ton
(discussed previously), we value the emission reductions at $34 and $51 per year in the WECC
and Eastern interconnections, respectively. These benefits are, however, lower than the
additional benefits of avoided generation costs, which can be derived in similar fashion using
the hourly marginal generation costs in Table A3. Interestingly, the cost savings in the Eastern




   27
      Recall that our estimates of marginal emissions are based on data for weekdays only. It is, however,
straightforward to replicate our analysis using all days of the week or by estimating separate coefficients for
weekdays and weekends and taking a weighted average. This might be a more reasonable approach for
understanding the implications of distributed solar and other possible applications. While the full set of these
results is available upon request, it is worth mentioning that pooling all days of the week has little affect on the
results. For example, with estimates based on all seven day per week, comparable numbers for the emission
reductions are 3,173 and 5,252 for the WECC and Eastern interconnections, respectively.

                                                          22
interconnection are also larger than those in the WECC, with magnitudes of $251 versus $227
per household per year.28
           Thus, this simple example shows how our methodology can be used to estimate regional
differences in the benefits of distributed solar installations. While our comparisons suggest that
the benefits may be significantly larger in the East compared to the West, more detailed
analyses would also need to account for regional differences in generation based on the
amount of sunshine.29




6.2. Real-Time Pricing
Real-time electricity pricing has long been a focus of economists and electric utilities as an
effective market-based tool for smoothing generation by shifting demand from peak to off-
peak hours.30 Our previous analysis shows, however, that reducing generation costs with a shift
from peak to off-peak times of the day leads to increased CO2 emissions in many parts of the
country.31 Indeed, incorporating our estimates of marginal emissions and generation costs into
the design of price schedules would facilitate the use of real-time pricing to balance reductions
in generation costs with environmental externalities, and thus promote overall social welfare.
           While a complete analysis of real-time pricing is beyond the scope of our paper, we
illustrate the core tradeoffs with another simple comparison between the WECC and Eastern
interconnections. Consider a simple scenario in which real-time pricing moves 1 kWh of a
household’s electricity demand from 6 PM to 4 AM. That is, the pricing is such that demand
moves from one of the peak hours with the highest generation costs to one of the off-peak


   28
     These estimates of the cost savings are also based on weekdays only, but using estimates based on all seven
days of the week make little to no difference ($251 and $227 for Eastern and WECC, respectively).
   29
      Though we do not discuss it explicitly, the steps outlined here can apply to wind power that is used for
behind the meter consumption as well. Recent analyses consider wind power, but with very different
methodologies and for generation that connects directly to the grid. See Callaway and Fowlie (2009), et al. (2013),
Cullen (2013), and Novan (2011).
   30
        See, for example, Borenstein (2005), Borenstein and Holland (2005), and Wolak (2010).
   31
      This point has been made in other studies with more specialized contexts. See, for example, Kotchen et al.
(2006) for a study of how the differences between peak and off-peak emissions affect the environmental benefits
of converting hydroelectric dams from peaking to run-of-river flows.

                                                         23
hours with the lowest generation costs. Using our estimates in Table A3, we find that the cost
savings per household on an annual basis would be $5.68 for the WECC and $9.97 in the East.
But along with these changes in generation costs are changes in CO2 emissions. For the WECC,
emissions remain virtually unchanged, increasing 3.65 lbs/year, with an estimated social cost of
3.5 cents; whereas, for the East, emissions increase more substantially by 105.85 lbs/year, with
an estimated social cost of approximately 1 dollar.
       The design of optimal real-time pricing from a social welfare perspective should thus
account for such different effects across all hours of the day and within each region. Only in this
way can price signals be sent that balance the real-time social costs and benefits. This is
important because, as we have shown, increases in demand in the off-peak hours at night
generally increase emissions outside of the West, where dirtier electricity sources tend to be on
the margin at those times of day. Despite the differences across the illustrative policies and
technologies that we have considered, each serves to highlight some of the fundamental
tensions between the objectives of load management on the electrical grid, minimizing
generation costs, and minimizing environmental externalities.


7. Conclusion
Electricity generation is responsible for more CO2 emissions and other air pollutants than any
other sector in the U.S. economy. Accordingly, a primary focus of existing and proposed
environmental policy is to change patterns of electricity supply and demand in ways that
reduce emissions. There is, however, substantial geographic and temporal variation in the
emission rates of power plants. This heterogeneity combined with the electricity grid’s
interconnected networks for trading and distributing electricity pose difficult challenges for
quantifying the environmental and economic implications of electricity-shifting policies. The
difficulty arises because there is no definitive way to identify which power plants are generating
electricity on the margin to meet demand at a particular location and time.
       Our primary contribution in this paper is the development of a methodology to estimate
marginal emissions of electricity demand that vary by location and time of day across the
United States. The basic approach is to regress hourly emissions at the grid interconnection


                                                24
level on hourly electricity consumption for subsets of the corresponding NERC sub-regions. This
level of aggregation takes into account the generation mix within interconnected electricity
markets and the shifting load profiles throughout the day. Applying the methodology to
emissions and consumption data for 2007 through 2009 (the most recent available), we find
substantial variation among locations and times of day. For example, marginal CO2 emission
rates are more than three times as large in the upper Midwest compared to the western United
States. Moreover, within regions, marginal emission rates for some hours of the day are more
than twice those for other hours. While we focus our analysis on CO2, which is a uniformly
mixing GHG, we report the results for sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxides as well.
       Estimates of the spatially and temporally heterogeneous marginal emission rates are
critical for evaluating a range of energy and environmental policies and initiatives. We apply our
results to an evaluation of PEVs in particular. The charging of PEVs increases demand for
electricity and its consequent emissions, while simultaneously reducing emissions from the
tailpipes of substitute vehicles that otherwise would have been driven. Our results show how
the emissions of charging PEVS differs by region and hours of the day. In some regions (the
west and Texas), the CO2 emissions from driving PEVs are less than those from driving a hybrid.
However, in other regions (the upper Midwest), charging during the recommended hours of
midnight to 4 AM implies that PEVs generate more emissions than even the average car
currently on the road. Underlying this result is a fundamental tension between load
management of electricity and achieving environmental goals. The hours when electricity is the
least expensive to produce tend to be the hours with the greatest emissions. In addition to
PEVs, we show how our estimates of marginal emissions are useful for evaluating other polices
and initiatives related to distributed solar and real-time pricing. It would be relatively
straightforward to extend this analysis to other energy shifting policies, such as those targeting
energy efficiency or the deployment of large-scale energy storage. The latter may be
particularly important, as storage will likely facilitate additional ‘dirty’ generation during off-
peak hours to be dispatched during peak ones.
       Finally, while our estimates and applications provide new insight, there are caveats and
limitations that should be recognized. The general methodology holds the fuel mix for


                                                  25
electricity generation constant and as such should be used for short- to medium-run analyses.
While it is straightforward to replicate our approach as new data becomes available, a long run
analysis should also attend to the endogenous changes in fuel mix as well as upgrades and
replacements of existing electricity generating units. Each year, about one to two percent of
capacity retires and is replaced. Some of this replacement may be induced by policy changes
intended to alter current energy consumption patterns. For example, natural gas prices have
fallen substantially over the past few years due to the recession and the increased production
of natural gas from hydrofracturing and horizontal drilling techniques. This has resulted in more
production from natural gas power plants. In spring 2012, natural gas and coal plants each
produced about one-third of U.S. electricity (compared to their historic averages of 20% and
50%, respectively). In general, the relative prices of coal and natural gas affect the dispatch of
power plants and thus marginal emissions rates (see Cullen and Mansur, 2013).
       In terms of our application to PEVs and other electricity-shifting policies, the analyses
are admittedly incomplete for full policy evaluations. We focus on CO2 emissions, their social
costs, and comparisons with electricity generation costs. But other pollutants, along with
important features and nuances in each case, should be taken into account to make these
analyses more comprehensive. Doing so will require careful attention to the heterogeneity of
marginal damages and locations of other pollutants across space and time, as well as a clear
understanding of the institutional structures and constraints under which those pollutants are
regulated (e.g., under a cap-and-trade regime). These concerns comprise a future research
agenda.




                                                 26
References
Adam, D., 2009. “Climate Change Committee Puts Electric Cars at the Heart of New Transport
      Policy,” The Guardian, October 11.

Anair, D., Mahmassani, A., 2012. “State of Charge: Electric Vehicles’ Global Warming Emissions
        and Fuel-Cost Savings across the United States,” Union of Concerned Scientists Report.
        www.ucsusa.org/assets/documents/clean_vehicles/electric-car-global-warming-
        emissions-report.pdf (accessed January 30, 2014).

Barbose, G., Darghouth, N., Wiser, R., Seel, J., 2011. “Tracking the Sin IV: An Historical Summery
      of the Installed Cost of Photovoltaics in the United States from 1998 to 2010,” Lawrence
      Berkeley National Laboratory, LBNL-5047E.

Blumsack, S., Samaras, C., Hines, P., 2008. “Long-Term Electric System Investments to Support
      Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles,” Power and Energy Society General Meeting -
      Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century.
      ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=4596906&isnumber=4595968
      (accessed January 30, 2014).

Borenstein, S., Holland, S., 2005. “On the Efficiency of Competitive Electricity
      Markets With Time-Invariant Retail Prices,” RAND Journal of Economics, 36(3): 469-493.

Borenstein, S., 2005. “The Long-Run Efficiency of Real-Time Electricity Pricing,” Energy
      Journal, 26(3): 93-116.

Borenstein, S., 2012. “The Private and Public Economics of Renewable Electricity Generation,”
      Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 67-92.

Burtraw, D., Mansur, E., 1999. “The Environmental Effects of SO₂ Trading and Banking,”
       Environmental Science and Technology, 33(20): 3489-3494.

Callaway, D., Fowlie, M., 2009. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions from Wind Energy:
       Location, Location, Location?” Working Paper.
       http://www.aere.org/meetings/documents/FOWLIE.pdf (accessed January 30, 2014).

Cullen, J., 2013. “Measuring the Environmental Benefits of Wind Generated Electricity,”
        American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5 (4): 107-133.

Cullen, J., Mansur, E.T., 2014. “Will Carbon Prices Reduce Emissions in the US Electricity
        Industry? Evidence from the Shale Gas Experience,” Working Paper.
        http://www.dartmouth.edu/~mansur/papers/cullen_mansur_gasprices.pdf (accessed
        January 30, 2014).


                                               27
Department of Transportation, 2009. “Highway Statistics 2009,”
      www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics/2009/vm1.cfm (accessed January 30,
      2014).

Energy Information Administration(EIA), 2011. Table 5a. www.eia.gov/electricity/data.cfm
       (accessed January 30, 2014).

EIA, 2011. “Electricity Tends to Flow South in North America,” Today in Energy, December 12,
       2011, http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=4270 (accessed January 29,
       2014).

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 2009. “Continuous Emissions Monitoring Fact Sheet,”
       http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/emissions/continuous-factsheet.html (accessed
       January 31, 2014).

EPA, 2011. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions from a Typical Passenger Vehicle,”
       www.epa.gov/oms/climate/documents/420f11041.pdf (accessed January 30, 2014).

EPA, 2012. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990 – 2010. Report EPA 430-
       R-12-001. Washington, DC.

EPRI, 2002. “Comparing the Benefits and Impacts of Hybrid Electric Vehicle Options for
       Compact Sedan and Sport Utility Vehicles,” EPRI Technical Report 1006892, Palo Alto,
       CA. www.evworld.com/library/EPRI_sedan_options.pdf (accessed January 29, 2014).

Graff Zivin, J., Kotchen, M.J., Mansur, E.T., 2014. “Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity of
        Marginal Emissions: Implications for Electric Cars and Other Electricity-Shifting Policies,”
        NBER Working Paper 18462.

Green, D.L., Goeltz, R., Hopson, R., Tworek, E., 2006. “Analysis of In-Use Fuel Economy Shortfall
       by Means of Voluntarily Reported Fuel Economy Estimates,” Transportation Research
       Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1983, Transportation
       Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C., pp. 99–105.

Greenstone, M., Kopits, E., Wolverton, A., 2013. “Estimating the Social Cost of Carbon for Use in
      U.S. Federal Rulemakings: A Summary and Interpretation,” Review of Environmental
      Economics and Policy, 7(1): 23-46.

Holland, S.P., Mansur, E.T., 2008. “Is Real-Time Pricing Green? The Environmental Impacts of
       Electricity Demand Variance,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 550-561.

Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government, 2010.
       Technical Support Document: Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis
       Under Executive Order 12866.

                                                 28
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 2009. “New Qualified Plug-in Electric Drive Motor Vehicle
       Credit,” Notice 2009-89, http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/n-09-89.pdf

Kotchen, M., Moore, M., Lupi, F., Rutherford, E., 2006. “Environmental Constraints on
      Hydropower: An Ex Post Benefit Cost Analysis of Dam Relicensing in Michigan,” Land
      Economics, 82(3): 384-403.

Kaffine, D.T., McBee, B.J., Lieskovsky, J., 2013. “Emissions Savings from Wind Power Generation
        in Texas,” Energy Journal, 34(1): 155-175.

Kliesch, J., Langer, T., 2006. “Plug-in Hybrids: An Environmental and Economic Performance
        Outlook,” American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy Report T061.

Lehmann, E., 2011. “Republican Sees Electric Car Bill as a Climate ‘Step’,” The New York Times,
      May 26.


Marriott, J., Matthews, H.S., 2005. “Environmental Effects of Interstate Power Trading on
       Electricity Consumption Mixes,” Environmental Science and Technology, 39: 8584-8590.

McCarthy, R., Yang, C., 2010. “Determining Marginal Electricity for Near-Term Plug-in and Fuel
      Cell Vehicle Demands in California: Impacts on Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emissions,”
      Journal of Power Sources, 195: 2099-2109.

Michalek, J.J., Chester, M., Jaramillo, P., Samara, C., Shiau, C., Lave, L.B., 2011. “Valuation of
       Plug-in Vehicle Life-Cycle Air Emissions and Oil Displacement Benefits,” Proceedings of
       the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(40): 16554-
       16558.

Muller, N.Z., Mendelsohn, R.O., 2009. “Efficient Pollution Regulation: Getting the Prices Right,”
       American Economic Review, 99(5): 1714 - 1739.

Novan, K., 2011. “Valuing the Wind: Renewable Energy Policies and Air Pollution Avoided,”
       Working Paper. http://uce3.berkeley.edu/WP_027.pdf (accessed January 29, 2014).

Plug in America , “State & Federal Incentives”, http://www.pluginamerica.org/incentives
        (accessed January 30, 2014).

Portney, P., Parry, I., Gruenspecht, H., Harrington, W., 2003. “Policy Watch: The Economics of
       Fuel Economy Standards,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(4): 203--217.




                                                 29
Samaras, C., Meisterling, K., 2008. “Life Cycle Assessment of Greenhouse Gas Emissions from
      Plug-in Hybrid Vehicles: Implications for Policy,” Environmental Science and Technology,
      42: 3170-3176.

Siler-Evans, K., Azevedo, I.L., Morgan, M.G., 2012. “Marginal Emissions Factors for the U.S.
        Electricity System,” Environmental Science & Technology, 46 (9): 4742-4748.

Stephan, C.H., Sullivan, J., 2008. “Environmental and Energy Implications of Plug-in Hybrid-
      Electric Vehicles,” Environmental Science and Technology, 42(4): 1185--1190.

Weber, C.L., Jaramillo, P., Marriott, J., Samaras, C., 2010. “Life Cycle Assessment and Grid
      Electricity: What Do We Know and What Can We Know?” Environmental Science and
      Technology, 44: 1895-1901.

Wolak, F., 2010. “Residential Customer Response to Real-Time Pricing: The Anaheim Critical-
       Peak Pricing Experiment,” Working Paper, Stanford University.




                                               30
Figure 1: Hypothetical marginal cost curve for electricity supply.
       (Source: http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=7590, accessed January 30,
       2014)




                                            31
Figure 2: Grid interconnections and NERC regions, acronyms defined in Section 3.1
      (Source: NERC website at www.nerc.com, accessed January 30, 2014)




                                       32
                                             Panel A
                                   Hybrid    Economy      Light-duty
                                   (Prius)      car     fleet average




                    Probability




                                    CO2 emissions rate (lbs/kWh)


                                             Panel B
                                   Hybrid    Economy      Light-duty
                                   (Prius)      car     fleet average
                Probability




                                      CO2 emissions rate (lbs/kWh)


  Figure 3: Cumulative distribution function (Panel A) and kernel probability density function
   (Panel B) of fossil-fired power, net transmitted generation (i.e., consumption-based) CO2
emission rates, in comparison with light-duty average, economy, and hybrid vehicle alternatives




                                                33
                                                                                                  WECC           ERCOT            Eastern
Marginal CO2 emissions (lbs/kWh)-------



                                          1.6


                                          1.4

                                          1.2


                                           1

                                          0.8

                                          0.6

                                          0.4
                                                                                             AM

                                                                                                    AM

                                                                                                           PM




                                                                                                                                                                  PM

                                                                                                                                                                  PM

                                                                                                                                                                  PM
                                             M

                                                   M

                                                         M

                                                               M

                                                                     M

                                                                           M

                                                                                 M

                                                                                       M

                                                                                              M




                                                                                                                  M

                                                                                                                        M

                                                                                                                              M

                                                                                                                                    M

                                                                                                                                          M

                                                                                                                                                M

                                                                                                                                                      M

                                                                                                                                                            M

                                                                                                                                                                   M
                                           1A

                                                 2A

                                                       3A

                                                             4A

                                                                   5A

                                                                         6A

                                                                               7A

                                                                                     8A

                                                                                            9A




                                                                                                                1P

                                                                                                                      2P

                                                                                                                            3P

                                                                                                                                  4P

                                                                                                                                        5P

                                                                                                                                              6P

                                                                                                                                                    7P

                                                                                                                                                          8P

                                                                                                                                                                 9P
                                                                                           10

                                                                                                  11

                                                                                                         12




                                                                                                                                                                10

                                                                                                                                                                11

                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                            Hour of day



                                           Figure 4: Marginal CO2 emissions (lbs/kWh) and 95-percent confidence intervals, by
                                                                    interconnection and hour of day




                                                                                                           34
Panel A: Marginal estimates for NERC regions based on unweighted average of hourly coefficients in Table 2 (and
   95-percent confidence intervals), marginal estimate for the total derived using weighted average by hourly
           regional electricity consumption, average generation-based estimates taken from Table 1
                      Marginal consumption-based CO2 emissions                 Average generation-based CO2 emissions

  2.5
                                                   2.30



  2.0

                                                          1.63                                                         1.61

  1.5
                                                                                                         1.33
                                   1.29                          1.28               1.29
                                                                                           1.23                               1.21 1.17
                            1.18                                                                  1.15
                                          1.10                                                                  1.09
                     0.96
  1.0
         0.80 0.83
                                                                        0.63

  0.5



  0.0
          WECC        ERCOT         FRCC            MRO           NPCC                RFC          SERC           SPP          Total




  Panel B: Generation-based estimates from Siler-Evans et al. (2012) and total category derived from authors’
                    calculation using weighed average by regional electricity consumption
                                             Marginal CO2 emissions        Average CO2 emissions

  2.5



  2.0
                                                   1.73 1.76
                                                                                                                       1.68
                                                                                    1.60
                                                                                           1.43   1.45
  1.5                                                                                                    1.37                 1.35
                                   1.27                                                                                              1.30
                            1.25          1.22                                                                  1.24
                     1.12
         1.02 1.02                                               1.05
  1.0
                                                                        0.79



  0.5



  0.0
          WECC        ERCOT         FRCC            MRO           NPCC                RFC          SERC           SPP          Total


        Figure 5: Comparison of marginal and average CO2 emission rates by NERC regions




                                                                 35
                                                     1 AM - 4 AM       5 AM - 8 AM   9 AM - 12PM    1 PM - 4 PM   5 PM - 8 PM     9 PM - 12 AM

                                   40

                                   35
                                            Light-duty fleet average
                                   30
  Daily CO2 emissions (lbs)




                                   25
                                            Economy car
                                   20
                                         Hybrid (Prius)
                                   15

                                   10

                                   5

                                   0
                                           WECC           ERCOT          FRCC         MRO           NPCC          RFC           SERC        SPP        Total



Figure 6: Daily CO2 emissions of different charging times and NERC regions for a PEV to drive 35
                      miles, with comparisons to possible substitute cars




                                            1 AM - 4 AM     5 AM - 8 AM      9 AM - 12PM    1 PM - 4 PM    5 PM - 8 PM   9 PM - 12 AM      CO2 damage costs

                                   1.2



                                   1.0
               Cost per day ($s)




                                   0.8


                                   0.6


                                   0.4



                                   0.2


                                   0.0
                                         1 WECC
                                           3 5       7    9 ERCOT      FRCC
                                                             11 13 15 17 19 21 23 MRO       NPCC
                                                                                  25 27 29 31          RFC41 43 45SERC
                                                                                              33 35 37 39           47 49 51 SPP
                                                                                                                             53 55 57 59Total
                                                                                                                                          61 63


  Figure 7: Social costs of daily electricity generation and CO2 emissions of different charging
                       times and NERC regions for a PEV to drive 35 miles




                                                                                               36
               Table 1: Summary statistics by interconnection and NERC regions

                                 Electricity    Net Electricity           Emissions Rate (lbs/kWh)
           CO2 Emissions        Consumption      Generation       Consumption- Generation-         eGRID
Region    (million lbs/hour)   (million kWhs)   (million kWhs)       Based          Based       (2007, 2009)
WECC            70.5               82.7              84.7             0.852         0.832          0.974
               (10.4)              (13.2)            (6.6)           (0.071)        (0.103)
ERCOT           45.0               35.3              38.3             1.278         1.176          1.217
                (8.6)              (8.2)             (5.3)           (0.065)        (0.164)
Eastern         427.4              339.4            339.5             1.261         1.257          1.329
               (71.7)              (58.0)           (30.3)           (0.063)        (0.163)
FRCC            26.4               25.9              24.0             1.016         1.097          1.199
                (7.0)              (6.7)             (3.3)           (0.043)        (0.231)
MRO             40.0               33.8              24.5             1.204         1.632          1.671
                (5.5)              (6.8)             (1.9)           (0.168)        (0.187)
NPCC            19.2               33.6              30.4             0.568         0.627          0.724
                (5.3)              (6.2)             (2.7)           (0.062)        (0.147)
RFC             138.0              109.9            112.3             1.256         1.227          1.400
               (24.0)              (18.8)           (10.3)           (0.079)        (0.170)
SERC            163.9              111.8            123.3             1.472         1.327          1.308
               (28.9)              (23.7)           (12.2)           (0.059)        (0.180)
SPP             39.8               24.4              24.8             1.640         1.606          1.675
                (6.8)              (5.1)             (3.2)           (0.123)        (0.190)
Total           542.9              457.4            462.5             1.190         1.172          1.255
                 (86.1)             (76.4)           (40.4)           (0.063)         (0.142)
Notes: Reported numbers are means and standard deviations (in parentheses), with the exception of the last
column. Rows above the first dotted line are interconnections, and those below are the separate NERC regions
for the Eastern interconnection. CO2 emissions are hourly from EPA’s CEMS data; electricity consumption is
hourly from FERC Form 714; and net electricity generation is average hourly generation based on monthly
reports from EIA Form 923. The consumption- and generation-based emissions rates are simply the ratio of the
first column over the other respective column. The eGrid emissions rate is based on simply aggregating the
data set’s emissions and net generation over both 2007 and 2009.




                                                    37
 Table 2: Regression results of marginal CO2 emissions (lbs/kWh), by interconnection, NERC
                                  regions, and time of day
                     Interconnection                                             Eastern NERC region                                    Total
 Hour         WECC         ERCOT     Eastern            FRCC           MRO           NPCC          RFC         SERC         SPP          U.S.
 1 AM            0.83          1.08       1.45              1.33          1.91          0.73          1.73        1.28         1.35       1.31
                (0.07)        (0.04)     (0.02)            (0.18)        (0.58)        (0.31)        (0.18)      (0.09)       (0.47)
  2 AM           0.84          1.11       1.47              1.22          2.83          1.32          1.40        1.44         0.92       1.36
                (0.08)        (0.04)     (0.02)            (0.16)        (0.24)        (0.25)        (0.11)      (0.06)       (0.27)
  3 AM           0.84          1.13       1.47              1.19          2.82          1.41          1.37        1.45         1.11       1.37
                (0.08)        (0.04)     (0.02)            (0.15)        (0.24)        (0.26)        (0.11)      (0.06)       (0.28)
  4 AM           0.80          1.12       1.47              1.21          2.81          1.46          1.38        1.43         1.24       1.36
                (0.08)        (0.04)     (0.02)            (0.15)        (0.25)        (0.27)        (0.11)      (0.06)       (0.29)
  5 AM           0.77          1.07       1.44              1.26          2.81          1.35          1.47        1.30         1.44       1.35
                (0.08)        (0.04)     (0.02)            (0.15)        (0.28)        (0.35)        (0.13)      (0.07)       (0.33)
  6 AM           0.71          1.00       1.37              1.44          2.67          1.18          1.58        1.05         1.75       1.30
                (0.07)        (0.03)     (0.03)            (0.16)        (0.31)        (0.45)        (0.16)      (0.08)       (0.36)
  7 AM           0.66          0.95       1.26              1.48          2.80          1.36          1.41        0.87         1.74       1.22
                (0.06)        (0.03)     (0.03)            (0.17)        (0.39)        (0.45)        (0.18)      (0.09)       (0.39)
  8 AM           0.68          0.94       1.21              1.52          2.35          1.24          1.46        0.76         1.74       1.17
                (0.06)        (0.03)     (0.03)            (0.16)        (0.37)        (0.35)        (0.16)      (0.09)       (0.40)
  9 AM           0.77          0.94       1.23              1.75          2.15          1.21          1.46        0.79         1.41       1.18
                (0.07)        (0.03)     (0.03)            (0.18)        (0.31)        (0.28)        (0.12)      (0.09)       (0.37)
 10 AM           0.85          0.92       1.26              1.81          2.37          1.42          1.25        0.99         1.16       1.21
                (0.07)        (0.03)     (0.02)            (0.21)        (0.29)        (0.23)        (0.10)      (0.07)       (0.34)
 11 AM           0.88          0.92       1.28              1.65          2.49          1.50          1.08        1.20         0.97       1.22
                (0.05)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.22)        (0.24)        (0.20)        (0.08)      (0.06)       (0.29)
 12 PM           0.88          0.91       1.27              1.33          2.43          1.52          0.99        1.32         0.91       1.20
                (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.20)        (0.21)        (0.16)        (0.07)      (0.06)       (0.27)
  1 PM           0.86          0.92       1.25              1.12          2.38          1.45          0.99        1.32         0.86       1.18
                (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.18)        (0.18)        (0.16)        (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.25)
  2 PM           0.83          0.92       1.22              0.97          2.28          1.41          1.01        1.27         0.87       1.15
                (0.03)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.17)        (0.17)        (0.17)        (0.06)      (0.07)       (0.23)
  3 PM           0.82          0.92       1.20              0.89          2.17          1.45          1.01        1.21         0.95       1.12
                (0.03)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.16)        (0.17)        (0.18)        (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.21)
  4 PM           0.80          0.92       1.19              0.89          2.18          1.40          1.03        1.18         0.92       1.11
                (0.03)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.15)        (0.17)        (0.18)        (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.20)
  5 PM           0.79          0.91       1.18              0.93          1.99          1.33          1.09        1.16         0.89       1.10
                (0.03)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.15)        (0.16)        (0.17)        (0.07)      (0.07)       (0.19)
  6 PM           0.79          0.90       1.18              1.04          1.78          1.31          1.14        1.11         0.96       1.09
                (0.03)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.14)        (0.14)        (0.17)        (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.18)
  7 PM           0.80          0.90       1.18              1.15          1.69          1.16          1.22        1.07         0.92       1.09
                (0.03)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.14)        (0.15)        (0.17)        (0.06)      (0.05)       (0.19)
  8 PM           0.81          0.89       1.18              1.23          1.64          1.11          1.27        1.04         0.90       1.09
                (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.15)        (0.18)        (0.21)        (0.07)      (0.05)       (0.22)
  9 PM           0.80          0.89       1.19              1.28          1.81          1.28          1.21        1.07         0.87       1.11
                (0.05)        (0.02)     (0.02)            (0.15)        (0.17)        (0.20)        (0.07)      (0.05)       (0.21)
 10 PM           0.81          0.91       1.23              1.35          2.03          1.05          1.35        1.05         0.77       1.14
                (0.05)        (0.03)     (0.02)            (0.15)        (0.18)        (0.20)        (0.07)      (0.05)       (0.24)
 11 PM           0.82          0.95       1.30              1.46          2.27          1.06          1.43        1.12         0.72       1.21
                (0.07)        (0.03)     (0.02)            (0.16)        (0.19)        (0.23)        (0.08)      (0.06)       (0.26)
 12 AM           0.84          1.02       1.39              1.34          2.59          1.06          1.51        1.23         0.75       1.28
                (0.08)        (0.03)     (0.02)            (0.17)        (0.21)        (0.25)        (0.09)      (0.06)       (0.26)
    R2           0.95          0.97       0.99              0.99            --            --           --           --          --
Notes: The dependent variable in all models is hourly CO2 emissions. The three interconnection models are estimates of specification (1).
The Eastern NREC region columns are coefficient estimates from the same model, specification (2). All models include hour-of-day by
month-of-sample fixed effects. The sample has 18,792 hourly observations which is the number of hours in 261 weekdays per year over
the three-year period we analyze. Newey-West standard errors with a 24-hour lag are reported in parentheses, and all coefficients are
statistically significant at the 99-percent level. The total U.S. column is an average of the coefficients across all sub-regions weighted by
the region’s hourly electricity demand.

                                                                      38
Appendix

       This appendix examines several extensions to the main results. Appendix tables A1 and
A2 examine sulfur dioxide (lbs/MWh) and nitrogen oxides (lbs/MWh), respectively. Table A3
reports the hourly average marginal private costs of electricity generation ($/MWh) for each
NERC region and hour of day.

       Figure A1 summarizes several tests for the robustness of our main findings to the choice
of month-of-sample by hour-of-day fixed effects. We report results from a week-of-sample by
hour-of-day fixed effects model, a season-of-sample by hour-of-day fixed effects model, and
day-of-sample fixed effects and seasonal hour-of-day fixed effects model. The first two models
are identified off of across-day within hour variation (like the main results) and have similar
estimates of marginal emissions. The third model uses within day variation suggesting that
dynamics do matter if a model uses this variation. Finally, we include results from a regression
without fixed effects. Table A6 reports the amount of variation that each set of fixed effects
absorbs. For each interconnection, we see that about 13-16 percent of the carbon dioxide
emissions’ variation remains after controlling for our main set of fixed effects (namely, month-
of-sample by hour-of-day). We also show how these fixed effects fit variables more directly
related to the market equilibrium: aggregate consumption (load) and market price for a single
market within each interconnection.




                                               39
                                         Appendix Figures and Tables




Figure A1: Robustness of Fixed Effects




                                                     40
Table 1A: Regression results of marginal sulfur dioxide emissions (lbs/MWh), by
          interconnection, NERC regions, and time of day
                        Interconnection                                              Eastern NERC region
     Hour        WECC         ERCOT     Eastern              FRCC          MRO         NPCC         RFC         SERC          SPP
     1 AM           0.53         1.46       6.11               4.62          3.73         0.69       10.22       4.78          1.18
                   (0.08)       (0.19)     (0.17)             (1.30)        (2.42)       (1.61)      (0.83)     (0.62)        (1.99)
      2 AM          0.58         1.71       6.19               4.47          5.11         2.75        9.40       5.22          0.68
                   (0.09)       (0.20)     (0.18)             (1.18)        (1.66)       (1.47)      (0.71)     (0.55)        (1.62)
      3 AM          0.63         1.83       6.17               4.38          4.25         3.08        9.34       5.12          2.32
                   (0.09)       (0.21)     (0.19)             (1.24)        (1.89)       (1.53)      (0.74)     (0.51)        (1.73)
      4 AM          0.52         1.77       6.11               4.73          3.73         3.76        9.24       4.91          3.22
                   (0.08)       (0.20)     (0.19)             (1.20)        (2.12)       (1.66)      (0.78)     (0.49)        (1.82)
      5 AM          0.47         1.44       5.96               5.30          4.33         4.79        8.74       4.57          4.29
                   (0.08)       (0.18)     (0.18)             (1.17)        (2.17)       (1.77)      (0.77)     (0.42)        (1.89)
      6 AM          0.36         1.11       5.45               6.24          3.93         6.12        8.09       3.49          5.65
                   (0.07)       (0.15)     (0.17)             (1.18)        (2.24)       (1.98)      (0.76)     (0.43)        (2.01)
      7 AM          0.34         0.84       4.73               6.71          4.35         5.59        7.77       1.92          5.89
                   (0.06)       (0.12)     (0.18)             (1.19)        (2.55)       (2.48)      (1.02)     (0.49)        (2.06)
      8 AM          0.26         0.68       4.36               6.23          5.30         6.09        7.41       1.16          5.55
                   (0.07)       (0.13)     (0.17)             (1.04)        (2.33)       (2.45)      (0.98)     (0.46)        (2.14)
      9 AM          0.22         0.55       4.35               6.79          7.59         5.52        6.64       1.64          1.89
                   (0.07)       (0.13)     (0.17)             (1.21)        (2.02)       (2.06)      (0.75)     (0.48)        (2.01)
     10 AM          0.27         0.46       4.43               6.99         10.73         5.75        4.97       2.83         -0.60
                   (0.08)       (0.13)     (0.16)             (1.32)        (1.99)       (1.88)      (0.74)     (0.54)        (1.88)
     11 AM          0.23         0.40       4.31               6.27         12.38         5.20        3.56       3.95         -1.97
                   (0.06)       (0.12)     (0.17)             (1.33)        (1.89)       (1.90)      (0.82)     (0.57)        (1.78)
     12 PM          0.23         0.35       4.04               4.79         11.99         4.58        2.76       4.49         -2.07
                   (0.07)       (0.11)     (0.20)             (1.24)        (1.80)       (1.76)      (0.82)     (0.62)        (1.83)
      1 PM          0.20         0.33       3.81               3.96         10.85         4.47        2.57       4.29         -1.10
                   (0.06)       (0.10)     (0.21)             (1.17)        (1.71)       (1.68)      (0.77)     (0.70)        (1.96)
      2 PM          0.15         0.32       3.64               3.45          9.65         4.42        2.71       3.80          0.11
                   (0.06)       (0.09)     (0.22)             (1.10)        (1.70)       (1.52)      (0.73)     (0.73)        (1.86)
      3 PM          0.14         0.34       3.56               3.17          9.03         4.72        2.71       3.48          1.30
                   (0.05)       (0.10)     (0.23)             (1.08)        (1.68)       (1.37)      (0.67)     (0.70)        (1.71)
      4 PM          0.14         0.31       3.52               3.10          8.78         4.40        2.76       3.45          1.28
                   (0.05)       (0.10)     (0.23)             (1.03)        (1.61)       (1.31)      (0.67)     (0.67)        (1.50)
      5 PM          0.16         0.29       3.52               3.35          7.81         3.95        3.08       3.41          1.08
                   (0.05)       (0.09)     (0.23)             (1.00)        (1.60)       (1.29)      (0.68)     (0.66)        (1.39)
      6 PM          0.19         0.26       3.56               4.04          6.84         3.96        3.55       3.10          1.25
                   (0.05)       (0.09)     (0.20)             (0.99)        (1.47)       (1.23)      (0.65)     (0.60)        (1.30)
      7 PM          0.17         0.26       3.62               4.88          6.97         4.08        3.92       2.80          0.65
                   (0.05)       (0.10)     (0.17)             (0.99)        (1.33)       (1.21)      (0.58)     (0.51)        (1.26)
      8 PM          0.17         0.24       3.69               5.34          6.83         2.76        4.58       2.74          0.00
                   (0.06)       (0.11)     (0.16)             (1.06)        (1.37)       (1.26)      (0.61)     (0.51)        (1.30)
      9 PM          0.20         0.29       3.85               5.69          7.28         2.21        5.11       2.74         -0.82
                   (0.06)       (0.12)     (0.16)             (1.18)        (1.53)       (1.36)      (0.72)     (0.56)        (1.35)
     10 PM          0.29         0.39       4.22               5.67          7.53         0.88        6.39       2.88         -1.28
                   (0.08)       (0.13)     (0.16)             (1.20)        (1.48)       (1.38)      (0.70)     (0.54)        (1.49)
     11 PM          0.37         0.61       4.93               5.51          8.00         1.65        7.36       3.74         -1.95
                   (0.09)       (0.15)     (0.15)             (1.27)        (1.52)       (1.48)      (0.76)     (0.56)        (1.51)
     12 AM          0.43         0.92       5.65               4.74          7.31         2.03        8.50       4.64         -1.56
                   (0.10)       (0.16)     (0.15)             (1.29)        (1.69)       (1.48)      (0.73)     (0.54)        (1.55)
        R2          0.81         0.67       0.98               0.98           --           --          --         --            --
    Notes: The dependent variable in all models is hourly sulfur dioxide emissions. The three interconnection models are estimates of
    specification (1). The Eastern NREC region columns are coefficient estimates from the same model, specification (2). All models
    include 18,792 hourly observations and hour-of-day by month-of-sample fixed effects. Newey-West standard errors with a 24-
    hour lag are reported in parentheses.




                                                                    41
Table A2: Regression results of marginal nitrogen oxides emissions (lbs/MWh), by
          interconnection, NERC regions, and time of day
                        Interconnection                                               Eastern NERC region
     Hour        WECC         ERCOT     Eastern              FRCC           MRO         NPCC         RFC         SERC          SPP
     1 AM           0.71          0.56       1.87              0.48           2.29       -1.27        2.80       1.95           0.04
                   (0.08)        (0.03)     (0.10)            (0.43)         (0.55)      (0.66)      (0.43)     (0.29)         (0.61)
      2 AM          0.78          0.58       1.93              0.29           2.12       -0.79        2.76       2.08           0.33
                   (0.10)        (0.03)     (0.11)            (0.41)         (0.75)      (0.70)      (0.42)     (0.26)         (0.70)
      3 AM          0.79          0.59       1.95              0.24           1.90       -0.68        2.72       2.12           0.77
                   (0.11)        (0.03)     (0.11)            (0.42)         (0.82)      (0.71)      (0.39)     (0.25)         (0.74)
      4 AM          0.73          0.60       1.97              0.32           1.86       -0.51        2.67       2.11           1.29
                   (0.10)        (0.03)     (0.11)            (0.41)         (0.88)      (0.69)      (0.35)     (0.23)         (0.81)
      5 AM          0.64          0.57       1.95              0.43           2.13        0.10        2.40       2.08           1.90
                   (0.10)        (0.04)     (0.11)            (0.41)         (0.97)      (0.78)      (0.30)     (0.21)         (0.86)
      6 AM          0.55          0.55       1.83              0.98           2.15        0.85        2.07       1.79           3.06
                   (0.09)        (0.04)     (0.09)            (0.39)         (0.95)      (0.70)      (0.25)     (0.17)         (0.82)
      7 AM          0.44          0.63       1.65              1.40           1.99        1.11        1.80       1.48           3.48
                   (0.08)        (0.03)     (0.07)            (0.44)         (0.97)      (0.64)      (0.27)     (0.16)         (0.82)
      8 AM          0.39          0.63       1.59              1.66           2.10        1.50        1.49       1.42           3.51
                   (0.07)        (0.03)     (0.06)            (0.45)         (0.85)      (0.56)      (0.26)     (0.15)         (0.80)
      9 AM          0.40          0.55       1.57              1.67           2.56        2.09        1.09       1.55           2.92
                   (0.07)        (0.03)     (0.06)            (0.46)         (0.73)      (0.56)      (0.25)     (0.16)         (0.79)
     10 AM          0.41          0.52       1.53              1.44           3.17        2.40        0.67       1.82           2.14
                   (0.07)        (0.03)     (0.07)            (0.43)         (0.68)      (0.53)      (0.25)     (0.17)         (0.77)
     11 AM          0.41          0.55       1.46              1.21           3.68        2.42        0.44       1.93           1.35
                   (0.06)        (0.03)     (0.07)            (0.45)         (0.67)      (0.52)      (0.26)     (0.17)         (0.67)
     12 PM          0.43          0.60       1.38              0.89           3.64        2.26        0.45       1.86           1.02
                   (0.05)        (0.04)     (0.07)            (0.44)         (0.62)      (0.45)      (0.23)     (0.19)         (0.60)
      1 PM          0.43          0.72       1.32              0.91           3.19        2.13        0.56       1.66           1.30
                   (0.04)        (0.05)     (0.07)            (0.43)         (0.58)      (0.42)      (0.20)     (0.21)         (0.58)
      2 PM          0.43          0.85       1.28              0.98           2.87        2.16        0.71       1.38           1.50
                   (0.04)        (0.06)     (0.07)            (0.42)         (0.57)      (0.37)      (0.20)     (0.22)         (0.56)
      3 PM          0.43          0.92       1.26              1.09           2.68        2.24        0.79       1.19           1.75
                   (0.04)        (0.07)     (0.07)            (0.42)         (0.55)      (0.34)      (0.20)     (0.24)         (0.54)
      4 PM          0.41          0.94       1.24              1.06           2.70        2.21        0.82       1.12           1.49
                   (0.04)        (0.07)     (0.07)            (0.41)         (0.55)      (0.33)      (0.20)     (0.25)         (0.53)
      5 PM          0.40          0.91       1.24              1.11           2.23        1.96        1.01       1.07           1.46
                   (0.04)        (0.06)     (0.07)            (0.39)         (0.51)      (0.32)      (0.21)     (0.26)         (0.50)
      6 PM          0.40          0.81       1.25              1.29           2.01        1.91        1.12       1.03           1.37
                   (0.04)        (0.05)     (0.07)            (0.37)         (0.49)      (0.35)      (0.22)     (0.26)         (0.46)
      7 PM          0.40          0.72       1.28              1.50           1.95        1.82        1.28       1.02           1.10
                   (0.04)        (0.04)     (0.06)            (0.37)         (0.47)      (0.38)      (0.27)     (0.26)         (0.47)
      8 PM          0.39          0.66       1.32              1.53           2.28        1.90        1.20       1.17           0.67
                   (0.05)        (0.04)     (0.06)            (0.39)         (0.49)      (0.38)      (0.24)     (0.24)         (0.48)
      9 PM          0.40          0.60       1.34              1.33           2.49        1.42        1.25       1.30           0.44
                   (0.06)        (0.04)     (0.06)            (0.42)         (0.57)      (0.38)      (0.29)     (0.26)         (0.49)
     10 PM          0.47          0.53       1.40              1.06           2.05       -0.01        1.94       1.23           0.56
                   (0.07)        (0.03)     (0.06)            (0.43)         (0.59)      (0.52)      (0.40)     (0.27)         (0.53)
     11 PM          0.55          0.51       1.54              0.80           2.11       -0.37        2.27       1.45           0.07
                   (0.08)        (0.03)     (0.07)            (0.44)         (0.61)      (0.62)      (0.48)     (0.29)         (0.55)
     12 AM          0.64          0.51       1.73              0.33           2.29       -0.52        2.48       1.81          -0.15
                   (0.09)        (0.03)     (0.08)            (0.46)         (0.67)      (0.66)      (0.51)     (0.31)         (0.61)
        R2          0.90          0.90       0.99              0.99            --          --          --         --             --
    Notes: The dependent variable in all models is hourly nitrogen oxides emissions. The three interconnection models are estimates
    of specification (1). The Eastern NREC region columns are coefficient estimates from the same model, specification (2). All models
    include 18,792 hourly observations and hour-of-day by month-of-sample fixed effects. Newey-West standard errors with a 24-
    hour lag are reported in parentheses.




                                                                    42
Table A3: Marginal generation costs of electricity ($/MWh), by NERC region and hour of day

                     Interconnection                                         Eastern NERC region                                   Total
  Hour        WECC         ERCOT     Eastern          FRCC        MRO         NPCC        RFC         SERC         SPP             U.S.
  1 AM       39.88        41.08      37.15           42.18       19.01        47.31      35.54       40.27        37.28           37.92
  2 AM       38.81        32.22      35.39           40.00       17.11        43.97      33.20       40.07        33.84           35.76
  3 AM       38.25        28.30      33.56           37.82       16.22        41.73      31.37       38.19        31.90           34.01
  4 AM       38.60        27.08      33.38           36.97       15.95        40.22      32.65       37.42        30.49           33.85
  5 AM       39.88        29.22      35.33           39.55       17.24        42.01      37.42       37.17        30.00           35.70
  6 AM       42.19        37.01      41.54           44.62       21.42        46.84      48.86       40.10        31.44           41.31
  7 AM       44.97        40.94      48.90           48.07       27.66        60.31      58.49       44.94        35.44           47.55
  8 AM       46.58        50.00      51.94           54.19       33.87        63.45      57.48       49.83        42.11           50.81
  9 AM       48.33        42.63      52.32           56.55       36.80        63.39      55.98       50.71        44.20           50.85
  10 AM      49.90        49.31      55.19           61.93       38.25        65.49      61.25       51.37        46.12           53.77
  11 AM      51.28        50.86      56.94           65.44       40.63        68.13      62.88       52.13        48.57           55.44
  12 PM      52.55        50.37      57.49           69.18       41.77        67.17      62.44       52.97        50.19           56.04
  1 PM       52.54        52.00      58.31           72.47       42.07        66.10      63.39       53.75        51.03           56.76
  2 PM       53.24        63.57      58.92           74.41       41.43        67.03      63.83       54.60        51.08           58.26
  3 PM       53.57        74.12      58.23           74.81       39.84        64.19      62.53       54.96        51.35           58.66
  4 PM       53.62        77.32      58.37           75.15       38.67        64.08      63.07       55.00        51.96           59.03
  5 PM       53.99        85.85      58.59           73.49       37.76        68.64      62.66       55.39        51.71           59.92
  6 PM       54.18        77.64      60.71           71.95       38.61        73.04      66.62       56.78        51.62           60.84
  7 PM       53.27        68.99      61.36           71.72       41.23        70.51      67.50       57.88        52.64           60.48
  8 PM       51.74        54.55      61.15           72.55       42.25        69.55      67.37       57.24        52.65           58.93
  9 PM       49.55        51.15      58.18           68.73       41.12        68.03      61.04       56.33        52.11           56.10
  10 PM      47.27        43.44      51.36           62.46       35.86        59.47      48.06       54.18        51.14           50.05
  11 PM      45.24        56.27      45.62           53.72       28.31        51.99      41.69       50.10        48.98           46.34
  12 AM      42.50        41.90      41.71           46.32       23.19        49.03      37.99       47.29        43.72           41.86
 Notes: The system lambda data are from FERC Form 714, with the exception of those for ERCOT, which are market clearing prices (which are
 available: http://www.ercot.com/mktinfo/prices/mcpea accessed January 30, 2014). The eastern and total columns are an average across all
 of the corresponding sub-regions weighted by the hourly electricity demand.




                                                                   43
Supplementary Appendix to Working Paper 18462
        This supplementary appendix examines several extensions to our main results. Table S1
reports hourly marginal gross generation (GWh) from fossil-fired power plants measured by
CEMS. If these units were always marginal, then the coefficient should be approximately 1.1 to
1.2, reflecting the fact that gross generation includes electricity used by each power plant
(about five to ten percent of total production usually) as well as line losses. As the table shows,
many other units are marginal some of the time. These other units could be small fossil units,
hydropower, or potentially nuclear.

        Table S2 examines whether there are dynamic effects that would influence the main
results. Namely, we examine whether excluding the lagged load measures has biased our
estimates of the simultaneous marginal emissions. This is done by including the change in load
from last hour to the current hour and using a Chow test to examine whether the coefficients
on hourly load are statistically different from those in the main model. The variable, Delta Q, is
significant at the 5% level in the eastern interconnection but not in the other interconnections.
The Chow tests are insignificant at the 10% level.

        Table S3 reports the variance decomposition. We find that, even with fixed effects,
there is substantial variation remaining to identify the variables of interest. The table reports
the percent of the variation explained by several sets of fixed effects (namely the R-squared
from a regression) for three variables: load, price, and carbon emissions. The variable that firms
most care about, price, shows about half of the variation remains after accounting for our
preferred set of fixed effects (month of sample for each hour of the day).

        Figure S1 illustrates graphically and in more detail the pattern of how electricity tends to
flow around the United States. Although the graph is based on 2010 data and finer NERC sub-
regions, a similar energy import-export pattern is evident. The important point of the figure for
the purposes of our analysis is to recognize how electric power flows substantially within the
grid interconnections, as this is critical for estimating the marginal emissions of changes in
electricity demand at a particular location.

        Figure S2 tests for omitted variable bias. Specifically, we consider whether unobserved,
non-fossil generation that can be dispatched (in particular, hydropower dams) is correlated
with load. Firms allocate water across those hours with the highest prices (or marginal revenue
when firms have market power). While dams can be marginal in a given hour, there are
constraints on the total amount of water that can be dispatched in a season. This correlation
will attenuate the marginal emission estimates. To test for this omitted variable bias, we
develop sharp bounds on these estimates akin to those of Lee (2009). For each hour of the day,
we exclude the 10 percent of the sample with the highest (lowest) levels of load to set the
upper (lower) bound. This 10 percent level approximates the share of electricity coming from
hydropower. During our sample time period, this share was 22.7%, 0.2%, and 2.7% in the
WECC, ERCOT, and the East, respectively.




                                                44
        Figure S3 compares the main marginal effects with average rates. We decompose the
consumption-based emissions rates shown in Table 1 into hourly averages. Notably, the
marginal rates display greater temporal variation within a day than do the average rates. As
previously shown in Table 1 and Figure 5, the daily mean of the average rates are similar to the
daily mean of the marginal rates in the East and WECC (-2% and 6% different respectively).
However, in ERCOT, the averages are about 33% greater than the marginal rates. This reflects
the fact that Texas has limited low-carbon baseload generation, like hydropower and nuclear
power, compared with the rest of the U.S.

References

Lee, D. S., 2009. “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on
        Treatment Effects”, Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): 1071-1102.




Figure S1: Annual 2010 net power flows for across NERC sub-regions
       (Source: EIA figure based on FERC Form 714 data,
http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=4270 accessed January 30, 2014)




                                               45
Figure S2: Sharp Bounds Tests




Figure S3: Comparison of Average and Marginal Emissions




                                            46
Table S1: Regression results of gross generation (GWh), by interconnection, NERC regions,
           and time of day
                        Interconnection                                               Eastern NERC region
     Hour        WECC         ERCOT     Eastern              FRCC           MRO         NPCC         RFC         SERC          SPP
     1 AM           0.66          0.81       0.86              0.84           0.81        0.44        1.03       0.79           0.95
                   (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.09)         (0.34)      (0.17)      (0.11)     (0.05)         (0.26)
      2 AM          0.66          0.81       0.86              0.78           1.34        0.74        0.84       0.87           0.63
                   (0.05)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.14)      (0.11)      (0.06)     (0.04)         (0.14)
      3 AM          0.65          0.81       0.86              0.78           1.36        0.79        0.81       0.88           0.69
                   (0.05)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.07)         (0.14)      (0.12)      (0.06)     (0.04)         (0.15)
      4 AM          0.64          0.81       0.86              0.81           1.34        0.79        0.82       0.87           0.76
                   (0.05)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.07)         (0.14)      (0.13)      (0.06)     (0.04)         (0.15)
      5 AM          0.64          0.80       0.86              0.85           1.28        0.65        0.92       0.80           0.88
                   (0.05)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.07)         (0.15)      (0.18)      (0.07)     (0.04)         (0.17)
      6 AM          0.63          0.78       0.85              0.97           1.19        0.46        1.06       0.67           1.04
                   (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.07)         (0.17)      (0.26)      (0.09)     (0.04)         (0.17)
      7 AM          0.60          0.79       0.82              1.00           1.35        0.70        0.93       0.64           1.06
                   (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.07)         (0.19)      (0.24)      (0.10)     (0.05)         (0.18)
      8 AM          0.62          0.78       0.81              1.05           1.21        0.80        0.89       0.63           1.17
                   (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.18)      (0.15)      (0.08)     (0.04)         (0.19)
      9 AM          0.68          0.78       0.83              1.15           1.10        0.69        0.97       0.62           1.10
                   (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.09)         (0.16)      (0.14)      (0.06)     (0.04)         (0.18)
     10 AM          0.74          0.78       0.86              1.19           1.18        0.70        0.95       0.70           0.98
                   (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.10)         (0.14)      (0.11)      (0.05)     (0.04)         (0.16)
     11 AM          0.76          0.78       0.88              1.11           1.23        0.79        0.88       0.82           0.86
                   (0.03)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.09)         (0.12)      (0.09)      (0.04)     (0.03)         (0.13)
     12 PM          0.76          0.78       0.88              0.97           1.22        0.83        0.82       0.90           0.79
                   (0.03)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.10)      (0.07)      (0.03)     (0.03)         (0.11)
      1 PM          0.74          0.79       0.87              0.86           1.19        0.81        0.82       0.90           0.74
                   (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.03)     (0.03)         (0.10)
      2 PM          0.71          0.80       0.86              0.82           1.16        0.82        0.83       0.87           0.68
                   (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.08)      (0.06)      (0.03)     (0.03)         (0.10)
      3 PM          0.70          0.80       0.84              0.79           1.11        0.87        0.82       0.84           0.66
                   (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.09)      (0.06)      (0.03)     (0.03)         (0.10)
      4 PM          0.68          0.80       0.84              0.80           1.08        0.86        0.84       0.81           0.66
                   (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.04)     (0.03)         (0.10)
      5 PM          0.68          0.80       0.83              0.81           1.00        0.85        0.86       0.80           0.62
                   (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.04)     (0.03)         (0.10)
      6 PM          0.68          0.80       0.83              0.85           0.87        0.84        0.89       0.77           0.68
                   (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.08)      (0.07)      (0.03)     (0.03)         (0.09)
      7 PM          0.68          0.79       0.83              0.90           0.76        0.73        0.96       0.76           0.68
                   (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.08)      (0.08)      (0.03)     (0.03)         (0.09)
      8 PM          0.70          0.79       0.83              0.95           0.74        0.75        0.96       0.76           0.68
                   (0.02)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.07)         (0.09)      (0.11)      (0.04)     (0.03)         (0.11)
      9 PM          0.69          0.78       0.84              0.96           0.89        0.90        0.88       0.79           0.67
                   (0.03)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.07)         (0.08)      (0.09)      (0.03)     (0.03)         (0.10)
     10 PM          0.68          0.79       0.84              0.94           0.97        0.77        0.93       0.76           0.69
                   (0.03)        (0.01)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.08)      (0.09)      (0.03)     (0.03)         (0.11)
     11 PM          0.67          0.78       0.85              0.96           1.10        0.70        0.94       0.77           0.66
                   (0.04)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.08)         (0.10)      (0.10)      (0.04)     (0.03)         (0.12)
     12 AM          0.69          0.79       0.86              0.87           1.24        0.62        0.94       0.80           0.67
                   (0.05)        (0.02)     (0.01)            (0.09)         (0.12)      (0.10)      (0.04)     (0.04)         (0.13)
        R2          0.90          0.90       0.99              0.99            --          --          --         --             --
    Notes: The dependent variable in all models is hourly nitrogen oxides emissions. The three interconnection models are estimates
    of specification (1). The Eastern NREC region columns are coefficient estimates from the same model, specification (2). All models
    include 18,792 hourly observations and hour-of-day by month-of-sample fixed effects. Newey-West standard errors with a 24-
    hour lag are reported in parentheses.




                                                                    47
Table S2: Test of a dynamic model by interconnection and hour of day

                    WECC Interconnection                       ERCOT Interconnection                       East Interconnection
     Hour           Main           Lagged                      Main            Lagged                     Main             Lagged
     1 AM       0.83     (0.07)    0.82     (0.07)         1.08     (0.04)      1.08   (0.04)         1.45     (0.02)    1.43    (0.02)
     2 AM       0.84     (0.08)    0.85     (0.08)         1.11     (0.04)      1.11   (0.04)         1.47     (0.02)    1.47    (0.02)
     3 AM       0.84     (0.08)    0.84     (0.08)         1.13     (0.04)      1.13   (0.04)         1.47     (0.02)    1.47    (0.02)
     4 AM       0.80     (0.08)    0.80     (0.08)         1.12     (0.04)      1.12   (0.04)         1.47     (0.02)    1.46    (0.02)
     5 AM       0.77     (0.08)    0.77     (0.08)         1.07     (0.04)      1.07   (0.04)         1.44     (0.02)    1.44    (0.02)
     6 AM       0.71     (0.07)    0.71     (0.07)         1.00     (0.03)      1.00   (0.03)         1.37     (0.03)    1.36    (0.03)
     7 AM       0.66     (0.06)    0.66     (0.06)         0.95     (0.03)      0.95   (0.03)         1.26     (0.03)    1.25    (0.03)
     8 AM       0.68     (0.06)    0.68     (0.06)         0.94     (0.03)      0.94   (0.03)         1.21     (0.03)    1.21    (0.03)
     9 AM       0.77     (0.07)    0.77     (0.07)         0.94     (0.03)      0.94   (0.03)         1.23     (0.03)    1.23    (0.03)
    10 AM       0.85     (0.07)    0.84     (0.07)         0.92     (0.03)      0.92   (0.03)         1.26     (0.02)    1.27    (0.02)
    11 AM       0.88     (0.05)    0.88     (0.05)         0.92     (0.02)      0.92   (0.02)         1.28     (0.02)    1.28    (0.02)
    12 PM       0.88     (0.04)    0.88     (0.04)         0.91     (0.02)      0.91   (0.02)         1.27     (0.02)    1.26    (0.02)
     1 PM       0.86     (0.04)    0.86     (0.04)         0.92     (0.02)      0.91   (0.02)         1.25     (0.02)    1.24    (0.02)
     2 PM       0.83     (0.03)    0.83     (0.03)         0.92     (0.02)      0.92   (0.02)         1.22     (0.02)    1.21    (0.02)
     3 PM       0.82     (0.03)    0.82     (0.03)         0.92     (0.02)      0.92   (0.02)         1.20     (0.02)    1.19    (0.02)
     4 PM       0.80     (0.03)    0.80     (0.03)         0.92     (0.02)      0.92   (0.02)         1.19     (0.02)    1.19    (0.02)
     5 PM       0.79     (0.03)    0.79     (0.03)         0.91     (0.02)      0.91   (0.02)         1.18     (0.02)    1.18    (0.02)
     6 PM       0.79     (0.03)    0.79     (0.03)         0.90     (0.02)      0.90   (0.02)         1.18     (0.02)    1.18    (0.02)
     7 PM       0.80     (0.03)    0.80     (0.03)         0.90     (0.02)      0.90   (0.02)         1.18     (0.02)    1.18    (0.02)
     8 PM       0.81     (0.04)    0.81     (0.04)         0.89     (0.02)      0.89   (0.02)         1.18     (0.02)    1.18    (0.02)
     9 PM       0.80     (0.05)    0.80     (0.05)         0.89     (0.02)      0.89   (0.02)         1.19     (0.02)    1.20    (0.02)
    10 PM       0.81     (0.05)    0.81     (0.05)         0.91     (0.03)      0.91   (0.03)         1.23     (0.02)    1.23    (0.02)
    11 PM       0.82     (0.07)    0.82     (0.07)         0.95     (0.03)      0.95   (0.03)         1.30     (0.02)    1.31    (0.02)
    12 AM       0.84     (0.08)    0.84     (0.01)         1.02     (0.03)      1.02   (0.03)         1.39     (0.02)    1.40    (0.02)
    Delta Q                        0.01     (0.06)                              0.02   (0.03)                            0.05    (0.02)
   Chow Test (p-value)                 0.04     (1.00)                           29.98 (0.19)                             1.07   (1.00)
   Notes: Delta Q is the change in load from last hour to this hour. We use a Chow test to determine whether the hourly load
   coefficients are significantly different between the main and lagged results.




                                                                   48
Table S3: Variance Decomposition using Fixed Effects

Panel A: East (price is for PJM)
Fixed Effects                                 Load                 Price              Carbon
YEAR*MONTH*HOD                                0.86                 0.44                 0.84
YEAR*WEEK*HOD                                 0.93                 0.59                 0.93
YEAR*SEASON*HOD                               0.70                 0.37                 0.65
YEAR*DAY, SEASON*HOD                          0.95                 0.59                 0.96

Panel B: ERCOT
Fixed Effects                                 Load                 Price              Carbon
YEAR*MONTH*HOD                                0.86                 0.44                 0.84
YEAR*WEEK*HOD                                 0.93                 0.59                 0.93
YEAR*SEASON*HOD                               0.70                 0.37                 0.65
YEAR*DAY, SEASON*HOD                          0.95                 0.59                 0.96

Panel C: WECC (price is for LADWP)
Fixed Effects                                 Load                 Price              Carbon
YEAR*MONTH*HOD                                0.92                 0.65                 0.87
YEAR*WEEK*HOD                                 0.97                 0.74                 0.95
YEAR*SEASON*HOD                               0.83                 0.58                 0.77
YEAR*DAY, SEASON*HOD                          0.96                 0.68                 0.97

Notes: This table reports the R2 of regressions of load, price or carbon dioxide emissions on
various sets of fixed effects, where HOD is an hour-of-day indicator and
YEAR/SEASON/MONTH/WEEK/DAY each indicate their respective time period. This table shows
the fraction of the variation explained by each regression.




                                             49
