                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TRUST, VALUES AND FALSE CONSENSUS

                                             Jeffrey Butler
                                             Paola Giuliano
                                              Luigi Guiso

                                         Working Paper 18460
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18460


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2012




We are grateful to seminar participants at the Bank of Spain, the California Center for Population Research
at UCLA, the Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance, the Kaler Meeting at UCLA, the FEEM
conference on the Economics of Culture, Institutions and Crime, the EALE/SOLE joint conference
in London, the 9th IZA/SOLE Transatlantic Meeting of Labor Economists, the seventh International
Meeting on Behavioral and Experimental Economics, the Higher School of Economics in Moscow,
the London School of Economics, the University of California Davis, the NBER Political Economy
Meeting, University of Mannheim, Universidad Pompeu Fabra, University of San Diego, University
of Siena, Stanford University and Toulouse University for helpful comments. Luigi Guiso thanks EIEF
for financial support and LUISS University for making the LUISS lab available. Paola Giuliano thanks
the UCLA-CIBER grant for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Jeffrey Butler, Paola Giuliano, and Luigi Guiso. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trust, Values and False Consensus
Jeffrey Butler, Paola Giuliano, and Luigi Guiso
NBER Working Paper No. 18460
October 2012
JEL No. A1,A12,D01,Z1

                                             ABSTRACT

Trust beliefs are heterogeneous across individuals and, at the same time, persistent across generations.
We investigate one mechanism yielding these dual patterns: false consensus. In the context of a trust
game experiment, we show that individuals extrapolate from their own type when forming trust beliefs
about the same pool of potential partners - i.e., more (less) trustworthy individuals form more optimistic
(pessimistic) trust beliefs - and that this tendency continues to color trust beliefs after several rounds
of game-play. Moreover, we show that one’s own type/trustworthiness can be traced back to the values
parents transmit to their children during their upbringing. In a second closely-related experiment, we
show the economic impact of mis-calibrated trust beliefs stemming from false consensus. Miscalibrated
beliefs lower participants’ experimental trust game earnings by about 20 percent on average.


Jeffrey Butler                                      Luigi Guiso
Einaudi Institute for Economic and Finance          Axa Professor of Household Finance
Rome, Italy                                         Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance
jeff.butler@eief.it                                 Via Sallustiana 62 - 00187
                                                    Rome, Italy
Paola Giuliano                                      luigi.guiso@eief.it
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu
1    Introduction

A large strand of literature has shown the persistence of trust beliefs across
generations, using evidence from di¤erent datasets and a variety of coun-
tries.1 Trust beliefs are at the same time also quite heterogeneous across
individuals2 . In this paper we provide evidence suggesting that false con-
sensus, the tendency of individuals to extrapolate the behavior of others
from their own type (Ross, Green and House,1977), may be able to explain
these dual patterns.
    Persistent heterogeneity in trust beliefs, even in the same community,
has been explained in literature in various ways. According to one view,
individuals’beliefs are initially acquired through cultural transmission and
then slowly updated through experience from one generation to the next.
This line of argument has been pursued by Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales
(2008b) who build an overlapping-generations model in which children ab-
sorb their trust priors from their parents and then, after experiencing the
real world, transmit their (updated) beliefs to their own children. Dohmen
et. al (2012) provide evidence consistent with this view. Heterogeneity is the
result of family speci…c shocks. Within a generation, correlation between
current beliefs and received priors is diluted as people age and learn. Yet
this dilution needs not to be complete and a high degree of persistence may
still obtain.
    On the other hand, a slightly di¤erent explanation is that parents instill
values, such as trustworthiness, rather than beliefs. Cultural transmission of
values of cooperation and trustworthiness is the focus of Bisin and Verdier
(2000), Bisin, Topa, and Verdier (2004) and Tabellini (2008). They show
how norms of behavior are optimally passed down from parents to children
   1
     See Algan and Cahuc (2010), Butler, Giuliano and Guiso (2012), Dohmen et al.
(2012), Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2008a).
   2
     Butler et al. (2012) and Dohmen et al. (2012)


                                       1
and persist from generation to generation. Heterogeneity in parents’ pref-
erences and experiences may then result in heterogeneity in instilled trust-
worthiness. Even if parents do not teach beliefs directly, individuals may
extrapolate from their own type when forming beliefs about others’ trust-
worthiness. As Thomas Schelling once wrote “you can sit in your armchair
and try to predict how people behave by asking yourself how you would be-
have if you had your wits about you. You get free of charge a lot of vicarious
empirical behavior” (1966, p. 150).
   In this paper we show that false consensus is a mechanisms that could
help to explain how heterogeneity in values could translate into heterogen-
eity in beliefs. We view false consensus as a source of initial prior. In the
absence of a history of information about the reliability of a pool of people,
those interacting with an unknown pool form a prior by asking themselves
how they would behave in similar circumstances. Since they would behave
di¤erently, they start with di¤erent priors. If values (or priors) persist over
time and false consensus does not vanish with learning, then wrong beliefs
will also persist. In our context false consensus implies that highly trust-
worthy individuals will tend to think that others are like them and form
overly optimistic trust beliefs, while highly untrustworthy people will extra-
polate from their own type and form excessively pessimistic beliefs. Both
highly trustworthy and highly untrustworthy individuals will tend to sys-
tematically form more extreme trust beliefs than are warranted by their
experiences. A long history of research on false consensus has indeed shown
it to be a persistent phenomenon (Krueger and Clement (1994)) that need
not drowned out by monetary incentives for accurate predictions (e.g. Mas-
sey and Thaler (2006)).
   To show the relevance of false consensus we conduct two experiments.
The …rst experiment implements a repeated version of the standard trust



                                      2
game in the laboratory (Berg, Dickhaut and McCabe, 1995). The experi-
ment allows us to obtain a measure of participants’own (initial) trustwor-
thiness and also to elicit participants’beliefs after each round of game play.
We …rst document a strikingly high correlation between participants’trust
beliefs and their own trustworthiness, suggesting that beliefs are formed by
extrapolating from one’s own type. Moreover, we show that this correlation
remains strong and signi…cant even after several rounds of game play. In
addition, we also investigate where individual priors are coming from, show-
ing that initial trustworthiness can be traced back to the values instilled by
our participants’parents during their upbringing.
    In a second experiment, we investigate the economic consequences of false
consensus. We show that it is indeed the case that the most (least) trust-
worthy participants tend to form overly-optimistic (overly-pessimistic) trust
beliefs and, consequently, trust more (less) than they should. Participants
with miscalibrated beliefs earn in the process 18% less than participants
with properly-calibrated beliefs.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe
the experiment aimed at showing the relevance of false consensus and its
persistence. In Section 3, we present the design of Experiment 2 and show
the results about the economic costs of false consensus. In section 4, we
summarize our …ndings and present concluding remarks.


2     False consensus, values and persistence
2.1   Experiment 1: design and procedures

Participants were recruited from a pre-existing list of students who had
previously expressed willingness to take part in experiments, in general,
at LUISS Guido Carli University in Rome, Italy. All laboratory sessions
were conducted at CESARE, the lab facility at LUISS. The experiment


                                      3
was programmed and implemented using the software z-Tree (Fischbacher,
2007). In total, 124 students participated in Experiment 1.
   After showing up to the lab at pre-scheduled session times, participants
were seated at individual desks in the lab each equipped with its own com-
puter. Participants were separated from one another by opaque dividers.
Once all participants were seated, instructions were read aloud and parti-
cipants’questions, if any, were answered by the experimenters.
   After instructions were read and questions were answered, subjects pro-
ceeded to the game-playing phase. This phase consisted of up to twelve
rounds of the trust game, as described below. Participants were not in-
formed how many rounds of game-play there would be, but rather only
instructed that there would be “several”rounds. This was meant to minim-
ize end-game e¤ects possible when the number of rounds is known. Because
sessions were scheduled to last (up to) two hours, and because most parti-
cipants had never participated in any experiment before (CESARE is a new
facility) the number of rounds per session varied widely. Sessions consisted
of anywhere from 3 to 12 rounds, with the majority consisting of 12 rounds.
   Before each round, each participant was randomly and anonymously (re-
) matched with a co-player, and within each resulting pairing roles were
randomly (re-)assigned.   These design features allow for learning about
the population’s traits and preferences but not about any speci…c person’s
traits/preferences. They also serve to ameliorate many repeated-game ef-
fects that are possible when partners are uniquely identi…able or persist
over rounds, such as reputation building or directly punishing/rewarding
speci…c partners for past behavior, as such e¤ects are not the focus of this
experiment.
   The trust game is a two-player sequential-moves game of perfect inform-
ation. The …rst-mover (“sender”) is endowed with 10:50 euros. The second-



                                     4
mover— the “receiver”— is given no endowment. The sender chooses to send
some, all or none of his or her endowment to the receiver. Any amount sent
is tripled by the experimenter before being allocated to the receiver. The
receiver then chooses to return some, all or none of this tripled amount back
to the sender, ending the game. Sending a positive amount entailed a small
fee— 0:50 euros.
   Feasible actions for the sender in our implementation were to send any
whole-euro amount: 0; 1; 2; : : : ; 10. Receivers’decisions were collected using
the strategy method. Before receivers discovered how much their sender
sent, they speci…ed how much they would return for any amount of money
they could receive. One critique of the strategy method is that it is “cold”
and does not elicit the same reaction as if participants are faced with an
actual decision. To (partially) address this critique, and make receivers’
decisions feel as real as possible, receivers were faced with a series of ten
separate screens. Each screen asked only one question: “if you receive m
euros, how much will you return?”For each separate screen, m was replaced
with exactly one value, m 2 f3; : : : ; 30g = f3    1; : : : ; 3   10g. The order
of possible amounts, m, was randomized in order to avoid inducing any
arti…cial consistency in receivers’ strategies. This random order was the
same for all receivers within each round, and was re-randomized between
rounds. Obviously, no information about receivers’ decisions was shared
with senders in any way before the end of each round.
   At the end of each round, each sender and receiver pair was informed of
the outcome of their interaction— i.e., how much the sender sent, and, if this
was a positive amount, how much the receiver returned as determined by
the relevant element of the receiver’s strategy vector. No other element of
the receiver’s strategy vector was revealed, nor was any information about
the outcome in any other participant pair.



                                       5
       To collect beliefs, within each round every participant— regardless of the
role they had been assigned— was asked to estimate the amounts receivers
would return, on average, for each possible amount receivers could receive.
Speci…cally, participants answered ten questions: “How much will receivers
return, on average, if they receive m euros?”, m 2 f3; : : : ; 30g. Participants
who were currently receivers were told to exclude their own actions from this
estimate and that they would be remunerated on this basis. That is to say,
they were asked to estimate how much other receivers would return. This
serves to rule out any mechanical— real or imagined— connection between
participants’own actions and their estimates.
       Incentives to report beliefs truthfully were given by paying subjects ac-
cording to a quadratic scoring rule3 . Beliefs were elicited either before or
after participants submitted their actions, with this order being randomly
re-determined for each participant before each round.
       When all rounds were completed, one round was selected at random and
participants were paid in accordance with their actions and the accuracy of
their estimates in that round. This procedure is meant to eliminate wealth
e¤ects from accumulated earnings over rounds and is standard in the literat-
   3
    It is well-known that this rule gives (risk-neutral) individuals incentives compatible
with reporting truthfully the mean of their subjective distribution of beliefs. Speci…cally,
for each of the ten belief questions participants earned an amount of money given by
the function below, where rcm is receivers estimated return amount, rm is receivers actual
(average) return amount, and as above m 2 f3; : : : ; 30g:

                                                     rc
                                                      mrm 2
                               Earnings = 1      (        )
                                                    m
  For example, if a subject’s estimate of receivers’ average return amount, conditional
on receiving 9 euros, was 6 euros–i.e., rb9 = 6— and receivers’ strategy vectors entailed
returning (on average) 2 euros conditional on receiving 9, then that participant’s estimate
would earn the participant (in euros)
                                      62 2        16
                              1   (      ) =1           0:80                          (1)
                                     9            81
   A perfect estimate paid 1 euro, so that subjects could earn up to 10 euros each round
from their estimates.




                                             6
ure. All of these design elements were (commonly) known by all participants.



2.2    Our uni-dimensional measures of trust beliefs and trust-
       worthiness

To construct a unidimensional measure of trust beliefs for each participant,
we converted each of the 10 elements of his or her belief vector into per-
centage terms (0 to 1) and then took the average of these ten percentages.
For example, suppose a participant’s belief vector is (1; 2; : : : ; 10)— i.e., they
believe that receivers will on average return 1 if they receive 3               1 = 3, 2
if they receive 3     2 = 6, etc. We divide the …rst element by 3, the second
by 6 and so on, to get the modi…ed belief vector ( 31 ; 26 ; : : : ; 10
                                                                     30 ) and then av-
erage over the elements of this vector to get 13 , or 0:33, as the participant’s
uni-dimensional trust belief. To get a unidimensional measure of trustwor-
thiness, for each receiver we apply the same procedure to their willingness-
to-return vector. Consequently, we obtain a uni-dimensional trust belief
measure for all participants, and a unidimensional trustworthiness measure
for half of the participants for each round of game-play - those assigned the
role of receiver.
    As a measure of “initial” trustworthiness largely untainted by learning,
we assign to each individual their unidimensional trustworthiness measure
from the …rst time they played receiver, provided this occurred in one of
the …rst two rounds.4 Since roles are randomly re-assigned each round, this
measure is de…ned for a large majority of participants, but not all of them
(92 of 124).
   4
     The choice of the …rst two rounds balances two concerns: i) contamination by learning
which suggests only including those who were receivers in the …rst round— and leaving the
measure unde…ned for half of the participants; ii) concerns about sample size which suggest
extending the de…nition to include as many rounds as possible. In the end, we believe our
de…nition is reasonable.




                                            7
2.3     Parentally-instilled values

Finally, all participants …lled out a brief survey. The survey was sent (e-
mailed) several days removed from laboratory sessions— a week before or
after the participant’s session— to mitigate concerns that participants’sur-
vey responses could systematically a¤ect their decisions in the lab. One part
of the survey asked respondents to report, on a scale from 0 to 10, how much
emphasis their parents placed on a number of principles and behavioral rules
during their upbringing (frugality, prudence, loyalty, etc.).5 We use answers
from a subset of these questions to construct a measure of the strength of
received cultural values and norms of trustworthiness for each participant.

2.4     Results

Figure 1 shows the distribution of (uni-dimensional) trust beliefs in the …rst
round of the trust game, when no learning about the trustworthiness of the
pool of participants had yet been possible (panel A) and of our behavioral
measure of own initial trustworthiness (panel B). Since trust beliefs and
trustworthiness are measured by the average share that participants expect
receivers will send back, and by the average share that receivers are willing to
send back, respectively, these variables take values between 0 and 1. As these
measures are continuous variables we report kernel density estimates. The
…gure documents considerable heterogeneity in trust priors. Since beliefs
in the experiment refer to a common pool of people, heterogeneity in trust
beliefs cannot be automatically ascribed to variation in the pools of people
whose trustworthiness is being estimated.6 Furthermore, since beliefs are
   5
      A wide array of questions was asked, some completely irrelevant to trust and trust-
worthiness, in order to mitigate experimenter/demand e¤ect in the survey answers and in
the experiment.
    6
      It is true that Figure 1, panel A, reports beliefs for all sessions pooled, so some people
might still question the source of heterogeneity. However, plotting the trust belief densities
for each session separately (not reported, but available upon request) also yields quite a
lot of heterogeneity.


                                               8
measured independently of behavior, the heterogeneity in Figure 1, panel
A, cannot re‡ect di¤erences in risk attitudes.7 In the sample the average
level of trust beliefs is 0.27 and the sample standard deviation is 0.16.8
    The …gure also documents substantial heterogeneity in behavioral trust-
worthiness, whose sample mean and standard deviation are 0.32 and 0.16,
respectively. In the next section we test whether heterogeneity in trustwor-
thiness is re‡ected in heterogeneous beliefs.
    Table 2, panel A, shows regressions of trust beliefs in various rounds
on own initial trustworthiness. To isolate, as best as possible, trustwor-
thiness as an individual trait, we use initial trustworthiness as a regressor.
To reduce sampling variation due to small sample size we aggregate obser-
vations over blocks of three rounds. As the …rst column shows, in early
rounds initial trustworthiness is strongly positively correlated with trust be-
liefs, lending support to the idea that individuals form beliefs about others’
trustworthiness by extrapolating from their own types. Quite remarkably,
own trustworthiness explains about 60% of the initial heterogeneity in be-
liefs. As the second column shows, this tendency does not vanish when the
game is repeated and people are thus given the opportunity to learn about
the pool of participants. The correlation weakens, and the e¤ect is some-
what smaller, in later rounds but both remain sizable and signi…cant. Thus,
initial trustworthiness still a¤ects trust beliefs even after the game has been
played several times, always drawing from an invariant pool of individuals,
which we take as evidence that false consensus persists. However, the decline
in the strength of the link also suggests that given enough opportunities to
   7
     Unless the elicitation procedure is biased by risk preferences as well. We cannot
rule this out completely, as how to do so is a still-unsettled debate within experimental
economics. We use a very standard quadratic scoring rule. There is experimental evid-
ence suggesting that this mechanism elicits beliefs reasonably accurately regardless of risk
preferences (see, e.g., Huck and Weiszäcker, 2002).
   8
     Since every dollar sent is tripled, 0.33 would imply senders believe that receivers will
return as much as is sent.



                                             9
learn about a stable pool of people, the tendency to attribute to others one’s
own trustworthiness may vanish.9
    This evidence is consistent with the idea that priors are driven, through
false consensus, by norms of behavior that shape individual’s own trustwor-
thiness. To make this link even more clear and show the ultimate relation-
ship between cultural values and beliefs we use information on the moral
values emphasized by participants’parents. For our purposes, we use par-
ents’emphasis on two values: the …rst is how much emphasis an individual’s
parents placed on teaching to always behave as good citizens; the second is
the emphasis parents placed on loyalty to groups or organizations. We aver-
age the responses to these two questions and divide the result by 10 to put
it on a scale— 0 to 1— comparable with beliefs. We use this measure as a
proxy for individuals’intrinsic trustworthiness, an individual-speci…c trait.
    Table 2, Panel B shows that this measure of parents’ e¤ort spent on
teaching good values is correlated with individuals’initial trustworthiness,
which is consistent with behavioral types re‡ecting heterogeneous cultural
values.10 Of course, it is imperfectly correlated, partly because the measure
of values that we have is only a proxy for the true trait, and partly because
own traits are also shaped by interactions in the social sphere (i.e. through
socialization). Panel C shows direct regressions of trust beliefs on our sur-
    9
      An interesting question is whether the false consensus e¤ect reappears any time an
individual faces a new pool of people or the pool she is interacting with changes.
   10
      One might worry that this correlation simply re‡ects priming participants to think
about morality by the mere fact of answering the survey. If so, one would expect the
correlation to be particularly strong for participants who took the survey before their
experimental session. We check for this by splitting the sample into those who took
the survey before their session and those who took the survey after their session. The
correlation between good values and initial trustworthiness is positive in both subsamples,
but is larger in the subsample of those who took the survey after the experiment. As a
second check, we inserted a dummy into the simple univariate regression of trustworthiness
on values (not reported, but available upon request) that takes the value of one if a
participant took the survey after the experiment. The coe¢ cient on this dummy is non-
signi…cant, there is very little change in the coe¢ cient on good values (it falls slightly to
0.159) and there is no change in the signi…cance level of this coe¢ cient.


                                             10
vey measure of cultural values: at all repetitions the cultural measure of
trustworthiness predicts trust beliefs.
    In sum, the evidence from Experiment 1 shows three things. First, when
no information is available about a group, individuals form beliefs about
the trustworthiness of others extrapolating from their own types, which are
quite heterogeneous. Second, this tendency is highly persistent, though at-
tenuated through learning. Third, heterogeneity in own trustworthiness can
be traced back to heterogeneous cultural norms instilled by parents imply-
ing that measures of the latter can provide valuable instruments for trust
beliefs, an implication which could prove useful in empirical investigations
of trust beliefs.


3     The economic costs of false consensus
3.1    Experiment 2: design and procedures

Participants were recruited from the same pre-existing list of potential ex-
perimental student participants at LUISS in Rome, Italy. All sessions were
conducted on-line. This experiment was conducted on four separate days,
each day constituting a session. In total, 122 students participated in the
on-line experiment. We excluded from the list of invitees anybody who had
taken part in the laboratory experiment, so that no individual took part in
both the in-lab and the on-line experiment.
    The on-line experiment implemented one round of the trust game in the
same manner as above with three exceptions. The …rst exception is that the
function used to transform money sent into money received was no longer
linear, but rather quadratic. This function was presented to participants in
table form (below). Using a quadratic “trust production function”will aid us
in the investigation of the intensive margin of trust as it provides an internal
optimal send amount for a wide array of trust beliefs and preferences where


                                      11
a linear function would yield corner solutions. Secondly, a full strategy
method was used: participants submitted their decisions in both possible
roles before learning which role they would be assigned. Finally, participants
did not know their beliefs would be elicited until after they submitted their
decisions. This weakens concerns that belief elicitation itself could a¤ect
decisions.

                             If the sender sends (euros):
      1       2        3      4       5        6       7       8     9       10
                         Then the receiver will receive (euros):
     8.05    11.30   13.85 16.05 17.90 19.60 21.20 22.65           24.05   25.30


   In terms of earnings, two features are notable. First, belief accuracy was
remunerated using a slightly di¤erent procedure: a randomized quadratic
scoring rule. Schlag and van der Weele (2009), among others, have shown
that this procedure is theoretically robust to individual risk preferences.
Speci…cally, each estimate is converted into a number, z 2 [0; 1], precisely
as above. At the same time, the computer chooses at random a number,
y 2 [0; 1]. If y     z, the participant earns 5 euros, otherwise the estimate
pays nothing. At the end of the session, one estimate is randomly chosen to
count towards a participants potential earnings. This latter feature should
allay concerns about hedging across belief estimates that would be possible
if, as in Experiment 1, all ten estimates were remunerated with certainty.
The second feature of note is that only 10 percent of participant pairs were
(randomly) chosen to be paid according to their decisions and estimates.
Since the on-line experiment required much less of participants’ time, this
kept hourly earnings comparable to earnings in the laboratory experiment.
   For our analysis we make use of a uni-dimensional measure of trust beliefs
and trustworthiness obtained using the same procedure as in Experiment 1
(described above). Since we here use a full strategy method, however, we


                                      12
have both measures for all participants.
       Next, for each participant, i, we construct a measure of performance
by randomly choosing another participant, j, from the same experimental
session and computing i’s earnings using i’s sender strategy and j’s receiver
strategy.11
       Finally, we use willingness-to-return amounts— excluding each participant’s
own actions— and beliefs about these return amounts within each session to
construct a unidimensional measure of belief errors for each participant.
Speci…cally, for each participant we …rst compute a separate belief error
in percentage terms for each amount a receiver could have received. This
yields ten separate belief error measures for each participant, each ranging
from      1 to 1, where negative values indicate under-estimating. We use the
average of these ten measures for each participant as our uni-dimensional
belief errors measure, which again ranges from             1 to 1.

3.2      Results

Figure 2 presents a scatter plot of the relationship between our belief errors
measure and performance in Experiment 2. We …nd evidence for false con-
sensus again: belief errors are positively correlated with own trustworthiness
( = 0:39; p < 0:01;a scatter plot of belief errors and own trustworthiness
is presented in Figure 2.). We also …nd that earnings are hump-shaped in
belief errors. Both those who hold overly pessimistic trust beliefs (negative
belief errors) and those who hold overly-optimistic trust beliefs (positive be-
lief errors) earn less than those whose belief errors are approximately zero.
This humped shape is con…rmed by the regression presented in Table 3: the
  11
    That is, performance for participant i is measured as the earnings they would have
made if they had been assigned the role of sender: Yi = 10:5 Si + j 8Si0:5 0:5I(Si ),
where j denotes the proportion of the amount received, 8Si0:5 , what the receiver j paired
with i returns and I(Si ) is an indicator function equal to 1 if i sends a positive amount.




                                            13
coe¢ cient on the squared belief errors is both negative and signi…cant.12
Furthermore, the coe¢ cient on the linear term, regardless of signi…cance,
implies that performance attains its maximum for belief errors close to zero.
The estimated relationships suggest that senders earn between 11.00 and
11.45 euros on average when belief errors are zero, constituting a 5 to 9
percent increase over the safe return (10.50 euros) from sending nothing.13
       To get another measure of the magnitude of income di¤erences implied by
belief errors we divided the data into three categories: “under-estimators,”
“over-estimators,” and “accurate-estimators.” Accurate-estimators had be-
lief errors within a small interval around zero, [ 0:1; 0:1]; under-estimators
had belief errors below this interval; over-estimators had belief errors above
this interval. Table 4 shows that accurate-estimators earned about 18 per-
cent more on average than under-estimators, who, in turn, earned about the
same as over-estimators.14
       Summing up, Experiment 2 allows us to investigate the economic con-
sequences of false consensus. Consistent with false consensus, we …nd that
own trustworthiness colors trust beliefs and that this has a signi…cant pecu-
  12
      This continues to be true when we add dummies for each session to control for session
…xed e¤ects and when standard errors are clustered by session, where each separate day
the experiment was conducted constitutes a session.
   13
      One potential concern common to most experimental research relates to stake size. It
could be that participants rely on heuristics such as extrapolating from their own types
only when stake sizes are small. Although we cannot directly address that concern here
since we did not vary the payo¤s for correct beliefs in this experiment, we have a related
paper which uses the same “quadratic trust game”in which we vary payo¤s for correct be-
liefs across sessions (Butler, Giuliano and Guiso, 2012). There, in some treatments exactly
correct beliefs pay 5 euros— as they do here— while, in other treatments, exactly correct
beliefs earn the paricipant four times as much— 20 euros. We …nd that the correlation
between own trustworthiness and beliefs increases when the payment for correct beliefs
increases.
   14
      As rough robustness checks (not reported, but available on request) we also ran the
regressions in Table 4 using a wider interval— [ 0:15; 0:15]— or a narrower interval—
[ 0:05; 0:05]— to de…ne accurate-estimators, as well as using a de…nition of over- and
under-estimators de…ned by the 33rd and 66th percentiles of the observed belief errors.
None of these modi…cations change the results qualitatively: accurate-estimators consist-
ently earned more, on average, than others.



                                            14
niary impact as the resulting mis-calibrated trust beliefs reduce earnings in
our experiment by roughly 20 percent, on average.


4    Conclusions

Large-scale survey evidence suggests that trust beliefs are both extremely
heterogeneous across individuals and persistent over age and across gener-
ations. In this paper we present the results of two experiments aimed at
investigating one prevalent phenomenon that can explain both of these pat-
terns: false consensus. We show that individuals extrapolate from their own
type when forming trust beliefs about a novel population (false consensus)
and that one’s own type continues to have a substantial impact on trust
beliefs even after considerable opportunities for learning about the popula-
tion. In our second experiment we use a trust game slightly modi…ed to allow
behavioral trust to more smoothly vary with trust beliefs than in the canon-
ical game. This permits us to investigate how false consensus may hinder
earnings. In this one-shot setting, we again …nd evidence for a substantial
impact of false consensus: mis-calibrated trust beliefs stemming from false
consensus lower participants’earnings by 20 percent, on average.




                                     15
References

[1] Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc (2010), "Inherited Trust and Growth,"
   American Economic Review, 100(5): 2060-92.

[2] Berg, J., Dickhaut, J. and K. McCabe (1995), "Trust, Reciprocity and
   Social History," Games and Economic Behavior, 10, 122-142.

[3] Bisin, Alberto, Giorgio Topa, and Thierry Verdier (2004). “Cooperation
   as a Transmitted Cultural Trait,” Rationality and Society, 16 (4), 477-
   507.

[4] Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier (2000). “Beyond the Melting Pot:
   Cultural Transmission, Marriage, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Re-
   ligious Traits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (3), 955–988.

[5] Butler, Je¤rey V., Paola Giuliano and Luigi Guiso (2012), “The Right
   Amount of Trust,” EIEF Working Paper.

[6] Butler, Je¤rey V., Paola Giuliano and Luigi Guiso (2012), “Cheating
   in the Trust Game,” EIEF Working Paper.

[7] Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Hu¤man, and Uwe Sunde (2012).
   “The Intergenerational Transmission of Risk and Trust Attitudes,”The
   Review of Economic Studies, 79(2), 645-677.

[8] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2008a), "Long Term
   Persistence," NBER WP 14278.

[9] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales (2008b), “Social Cap-
   ital as Good Culture,”Journal of the European Economic Association,
   6(2–3), 295–320.




                                   16
[10] Krueger, Joachim and Russel W. Clement (1994), “The Truly False
    Consensus E¤ect: An Ineradicable and Egocentric Bias in Social Per-
    ception”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology of Addictive
    Behaviors, 67 (4):596-610.

[11] Massey, Cade and Richard H. Thaler (2006), “The Loser’s Curse: Over-
    con…dence vs. Market E¢ ciency in the National Football League Draft,”
    University of Chicago, mimeo.

[12] Ross, Lee, Greene, D., and House, P. (1977), “The False Consensus
    Phenomenon: An Attributional Bias in Self-Perception and Social Per-
    ception Processes,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 13(3),
    279-301.

[13] Tabellini, Guido (2008). “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and In-
    centives,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (3), 905–950.




                                    17
                                            Table 1
                                      Descriptive statistics

                                     A. Experiment 1
                    Variable                                    mean        St dev
                    Good Values                                 0.637       0.199
                    Initial own trustworthiness                  0.32       0.162
                    Expected trustworthiness (trust belief)     0.265       0.158
                    Return Proportion                           0.211        0.18
                    Invest Amount                               5.258       3.107
                    Invest Propensity                           0.676       0.469

                                     B. On-line experiment
                    Variable                                    mean        St dev
                    Invest Propensity                            0.730      0.446
                    Invest Amount                                3.934      3.315
                    Estimates of Return Proportion               1.287      0.578
                    Return Proportion                           1.312       0.669
                    Trust Belief Error                          -0.007      0.145
                    Sender Earnings                             10.950      3.077




                                           Table 2
                      The effect of own trustworthiness on trust beliefs

           A. OLS estimates of expected trustworthiness on own initial trustworthiness
                               Rounds 1-3       Rounds 4-6       Rounds 7-9        Rounds 10-12
                                Expected         Expected         Expected           Expected
                             trustworthiness trustworthiness trustworthiness trustworthiness

Own initial trustworthiness      0.744***            0.542***            0.475***    0.452***
                                  (0.0419)           (0.0652)             (0.0748)   (0.0766)
Constant                         0.0848***           0.106***            0.0763***   0.0653**
                                  (0.0161)           (0.0232)             (0.0264)   (0.0246)
Observations                        276                 208                 171         171
R-squared                          0.586               0.312               0.261       0.249




                                                18
                         B. OLS estimate of initial trustworthiness on “good values”
                                                               Initial
                                                          trustworthiness

                                      Good Values                   0.169*
                                                                   (0.0928)
                                      Constant                     0.211***
                                                                   (0.0597)
                                      Observations                     83
                                      R-squared                      0.039


                        C. OLS estimates of expected trustworthiness on good values
                             Rounds 1-3         Rounds 4-6          Rounds 7-9       Rounds 10-12
                              Expected           Expected            Expected          Expected
                           trustworthiness    trustworthiness     trustworthiness   trustworthiness
  Good Values                  0.122**             0.125*              0.122*            0.0515
                               (0.0588)           (0.0662)            (0.0725)          (0.0824)
  Constant                    0.246***            0.197***           0.143***          0.171***
                               (0.0376)           (0.0434)            (0.0448)          (0.0531)
  Observations                   339                 262                216               216
  R-squared                     0.025               0.027              0.027             0.004
Notes: [1] Robust standard errors, clustered by participant, are reported in parentheses, ** significant at 5%, *
significant at 10%. [2] Clustering by subject is appropriate because there are multiple observations for each subject
due to the multiple-round experimental design. [3] Clustering by session does not change any of the significance levels
in panels A and B. In panel C, clustering by session reduces the significance of the coefficient on good values in
column 1 to the 10% level (p=0.061), and increases the p-values of the “good values” in columns 2 and 3 to p=0.198
and 0.125, respectively. [4] The numbers of observations falls in later rounds because some sessions, due to time
constraints, contained fewer than 12 rounds. [5] The number of observations falls when including our “good values”
measure, because some participants did not complete the survey. [6] Initial own trustworthiness is the average proportion
of money received that a subject would return---averaged over each possible amount that could be received---
measured the first time the subject was assigned the role of receiver. To minimize contamination of this measure of
trustworthiness by learning, while still maintaining a reasonable number of observations, all regressions using this
measure only include subjects who were an entrepreneur for the first time in one of the first two rounds. [7] Good
Values is the average of two measures obtained from a survey that subjects completed either a week prior or a week
after their experimental session occurred: i) the emphasis, on a scale from 0 to 10, that the subject’s parents placed on
being a model citizen as a value during their upbringing; and, ii) on the same scale, the emphasis their parents placed
on group loyalty. We then divide the resulting average by 10 to put this measure on a scale comparable to beliefs (0 to
1). [8] Expected Trustworthiness is the average proportion each subject expected entrepreneurs to return within a
particular round. Beliefs were elicited in an incentive-compatible manner for each possible investment level; the
variable used is the average of these beliefs, for each subject, over each possible amount a receiver could receive.
Beliefs were elicited regardless of the role the subject played in a particular round; if the subject was currently a
receiver, they were instructed to exclude their own action from the calculation, and remunerated on this basis as well.




                                                          19
                                               Table 3
              Trust belief errors and economic performance in the on-line experiment
                       OLS estimates of sender’s earnings on errors in trust beliefs
                                                            (1)             (2)              (3)

                   Belief Errors                          1.898            2.196          2.196**
                                                         (1.595)          (1.577)         (0.742)
                   Belief Errors Squared               -24.061***       -23.360***       -23.360**
                                                         (7.353)          (7.945)         (4.798)
                   Constant                            11.465***        10.995***        10.995***
                                                         (0.356)          (0.639)         (0.118)

                   Session Fixed Effects?                  No              Yes              Yes

                   Session-Clustered Std Errors?           No              No               Yes

                  Observations                            122             122             122
                  R-squared                               0.05            0.07            0.07
               Notes: [1] Robust standard errors are in parentheses, *** significant at 1%, **
               significant at 5%, * significant at 10%. [2] Belief errors are defined by the difference
               between a participant’s estimate of the proportion of money received that a receiver
               will return and the actual average return proportion within each session, averaged over
               each possible amount a receiver could receive. This value excludes the participant’s
               own action in the role of receiver. This yields a number that ranges from -1 to 1 for
               each participant.




                                                 Table 4
                    Earnings by trust belief categories in the on-line experiment
                 OLS estimates of sender’s earnings on dummies for trust beliefs categories
                                                                  (1)             (2)              (3)

               Accurate Estimators                           1.860***       1.773***         1.773**
                                                              (0.663)        (0.657)          (0.500)
               Over-estimator                                  0.311          0.324            0.324
                                                              (0.706)        (0.681)          (0.352)
               Constant                                      9.930***       9.554***         9.554***
                                                              (0.525)        (0.603)          (0.135)

               Session Fixed Effects?                             No              Yes              Yes

               Session-Clustered Std Errors?                      No              No               Yes

                Observations                                   122             122             122
                R-squared                                      0.07           0.09             0.09
Notes: [1] Robust standard errors are in parentheses, *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%.
[2] Dependent variable is sender’s earnings in euros. [3] The excluded category is “under-estimators.” [4] Belief error
categories are defined as follows: “Accurate Estimators” had an average belief error within the interval [-0.1, 0.1];
“Over-estimators” had an average belief error in the interval (0.1,1]; “Under-estimators” had an average belief error in
the interval [-1,-0.1). [5] We also considered wider and narrower intervals separating the three categories, using [-0.15,
0.15] and [-.05, 0.05] to define accurate estimators. This did not change anything qualitatively; [6] Another
specification used the 33rd and 66th percentiles of the error distribution in the data to separate the three categories.
This did not change the results.

                                                           20
                        Figure 1
 Heterogeneity in trust beliefs and own trustworthiness

A. Trust beliefs
                  Beliefs About Trustworthiness (Kernel density estimate)




            3
            2
  Density
            1
            0
                     0                .2            .4             .6            .8   1
                                           Estimate of Others' Trustworthiness
                  kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0408




B. Own initial trustworthiness
                           Initial Trustworthiness (kernel density estimate)
      1.5   2.5
            2
  Density
            1
            .5
            0




                       0              .2               .4            .6          .8   1
                                                   Initial Trustworthiness
                  kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0570




                                                          21
                            Figure 2
Trust belief errors and performance in the on-line experiment




                             22
   Appendix: Trust Experiment Design

   Laboratory Experiment


    Participants were recruited from a pre-existing list of students who had previously
expressed willingness to take part in experiments, in general, at LUISS Guido Carli
University in Rome, Italy. All laboratory sessions were conducted at CESARE, the
lab facility at LUISS. The experiment was programmed and implemented using the
software z-Tree (Fischbacher, 2007).
    After showing up to the lab at pre-scheduled session times, instructions were seated
at individual desks in the lab, each separated by opaque dividers, and each equipped
with its own computer. Instructions were then read aloud by the experimenters,
and participants’questions, if any, were answered by the experimenters. This initial
phase— instructions and seating— typically took from 15-30 minutes.
    After questions were answered, subjects proceeded to the game-playing phase.
This phase consisted of up to twelve rounds of the trust game, as described below.
Participants were not informed how many rounds of game-play there would be, but
rather only instructed that there would be “several” rounds. This was meant to
mimimize end-game e¤ects possible when the number of rounds is known. Because
sessions were scheduled to last (up to) two hours, and because most participants had
never participated in any experiment before (CESARE is a new facility) the number
of rounds per session varied widely. Sessions consisted of anywhere from 3 to 12
rounds, with the majority consisting of 12 rounds.
    Even though the experiment involved repeating the same game for multiple rounds,
participants were randomly re-matched with an anonymous partner each round, and
within each pairing roles were randomly reassigned. These design features allow for
learning about the population’s preferences but not about any speci…c person’s pref-
erences, as desired. It also ameliorates many repeated-game e¤ects that are possible
when partners are uniquely identi…able, or persist over rounds— such as reputation
builiding or punishing/rewarding speci…c partners for past behavior— that, while im-
portant in the real world, are not the focus of this experiment.
    The trust game is a two-player sequential-moves game of perfect information. The
…rst-mover, called the “sender,”is endowed with 10:50 euros. The second-mover— the
“receiver”— has no endowment. The sender chooses to send some, all or none of his
or her endowment to the receiver. Any amount sent is tripled by the experimenter
before being given to the receiver. The receiver then chooses to return some, all or
none of this tripled amount back to the sender, ending the game. Sending a positive
amount entailed a small fee— 0:50 euros.
    Senders were allowed to send either 0 (euros), and retain 10:50, or send any positive
whole-euro amount: 1; 2; : : : ; 10. Receivers’decisions were collected using the strategy
method. Before receivers discovered how much their sender sent, they speci…ed how
much they would return for any amount of money they could receive. Speci…cally,
receivers were faced with a series of ten separate screens, each asking only one ques-

                                            1
tion: “if you receive m euros, how much will you return?” For each separate screeen,
m was replaced with exactly one value, m 2 f3; : : : ; 30g = f3 1; : : : ; 3 10g. The
order of possible amounts, m, was randomized in order to avoid inducing any arti…cial
consistency in receivers’strategies and to make each decision feel as real as possible
to receivers. This random order was the same for all receivers within each round,
and was re-randomized between rounds. Obviously, no information about receivers’
decisions was shared with senders in any way before the end of each round.
    At the end of each round, each sender and receiver pair was informed of the
outcome of their interaction only— i.e., how much the sender sent, and, if this was
a positive amount, how much the receiver returned as determined by the relevant
element of the receiver’s strategy vector. No other elements of the receiver’s strategy
vector was revealed.
    To collect beliefs, within each round every participant, regardless of the role they
had been assigned, was asked to estimate the amounts receivers would return, on
average, for each possible amount receivers could receive. Speci…cally, participants
answered ten questions: “How much would receivers return, on average, if they were
to receive m euros?”, m 2 f3; : : : ; 30g. Participants who were currently receivers were
told to exclude their own actions from this estimate, and estimate how much other
receivers would return, to rule out any mechanical— real or imagined— connection
between own-actions and estimates.
    Incentives to report beliefs truthfully were given by paying subjects according to
a quadratic scoring rule. It is well-known that this rule gives (risk-neutral) indi-
viduals incentives compatible with reporting truthfully the mean of their subjective
distribution of beliefs. Speci…cally, for each of the ten belief questions participants
earned an amount of money given by the function below, where rc        m is receivers es-
timated return amount, rm is receivers actual (average) return amount, and as above
m 2 f3; : : : ; 30g:
                                                             rc
                                                              m       rm
                             Earnings = 1                (                 )2
                                                                  m

    For example, if a subject’s estimate of receivers’ average return amount, condi-
tional on receiving 9 euros, was 6 euros–i.e., rb9 = 6— and receivers’strategy vectors
entailed returning (on average) 2 euros conditional on receiving 9, then that parti-
cipant’s estimate would earn the participant (in euros)
                                    6       2                16
                            1   (               )2 = 1                0:80           (1)
                                        9                    81

    A perfect estimate paid 1 euro, so that subjects could earn up to 10 euros each
round from their estimates. Beliefs were elicited either before or after participants
submitted their actions, with this order being randomly re-determined for each par-
ticipant before each round.
    When all rounds were completed, one round was selected at random and parti-
cipants were paid in accordance with their actions and the accuracy of their estimates


                                                   2
in that round. This procedure is meant to eliminate wealth e¤ects from accumulated
earnings over rounds and is standard in the literature. All of these design elements
were (commonly) known by all participants.


   On-line Experiment


    Participants were recruited from the same pre-existing list of potential experi-
mental student participants at LUISS in Rome, Italy. We excluded from the list of
invitees anybody who had taken part in the laboratory experiment, so that no in-
dividual took part in both the in-lab and the on-line experiment. This experiment
was conducted on four separate days, each day constituting a session. In total, 122
students participated in the on-line experiment.
    The on-line experiment implemented one round of the trust game in the same
manner as above with three exceptions. The …rst exception is that the function used to
transform money sent into money received was no longer linear, but rather quadratic.
This function was presented to participants in table form (below). Secondly, a full
strategy method was used: participants submitted their decisions in both possible
roles before learning which role they would be assigned. Finally, participants did not
know their beliefs would be elicited until after they submitted their decisions. This
weakens concerns that belief elicitation itself could a¤ect decisions.

                      If the sender sends (euros):
      1      2   3     4       5       6        7      8  9 10
                  Then the receiver will receive (euros):
    8.05 11.30 13.85 16.05 17.90 19.60 21.20 22.65 24.05 25.30

    In terms of earnings, two features are notable. First, belief accuracy was remu-
nerated using a slightly di¤erent procedure: a randomized quadratic scoring scoring
rule. Schlag and van der Weele (2009), among others, have proven that this proced-
ure is theoretically robust to indvidual risk preferences. Speci…cally, each estimate
is converted into a number, z 2 [0; 1], precisely as above. At the same time, the
computer chooses at random a number, y 2 [0; 1]. If y z, the participant earns 5
euros, otherwise the estimate pays nothing. At the end of the session, one estimate
is randomly chosen to count towards a participants potential earnings. The second
feature of note is that only 10 percent of participant pairs were (randomly) chosen
to be paid according to their decisions and estimates. Since the on-line experiment
required much less of participants’ time, this kept hourly earnings comparable to
earnings in the laboratory experiment.

References
[1] Fischbacher, Urs (2007), "z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic Ex-
   periments," Experimental Economics, 10(2), 171-178.

                                          3
[2] Schlag, Karl and J. van der Weele (2009). "Eliciting Probabilities, Means, Medians,
   Variances and Covariances without assuming Risk Neutrality," mimeo




                                          4
