NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AGRICULTURAL DECISIONS AFTER RELAXING CREDIT AND RISK CONSTRAINTS
Dean Karlan
Robert Darko Osei
Isaac Osei-Akoto
Christopher Udry
Working Paper 18463
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18463
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2012

The authors thank the International Growth Centre, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation via the
University of Chicago Consortium on Financial Systems and Poverty, the National Science Foundation,
and the ILO for funding. Any opinions contained herein are those of the authors and not the funders.
The authors thank Ceren Baysan, Will Coggins, Ruth Damten, Emanuel Feld, Rob Fuller, Elana Safran,
Lindsey Shaughnessy and Rachel Strohm, for incredible research support throughout this project, and
Kelly Bidwell and Jessica Kiessel for their leadership on this project as IPAGhana Country Directors.
Any opinions contained herein are those of the authors and not the funders. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2012 by Dean Karlan, Robert Darko Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Agricultural Decisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints
Dean Karlan, Robert Darko Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry
NBER Working Paper No. 18463
October 2012, Revised July 2013
JEL No. C93,D24,D92,G22,O12,O13,O16,Q12,Q14
ABSTRACT
The investment decisions of smallscale farmers in developing countries are conditioned by their financial
environment. Binding credit market constraints and incomplete insurance can reduce investment in
activities with high expected profits. We conducted several experiments in northern Ghana in which
farmers were randomly assigned to receive cash grants, grants of or opportunities to purchase rainfall
index insurance, or a combination of the two. Demand for index insurance is strong, and insurance
leads to significantly larger agricultural investment and riskier production choices in agriculture. The
binding constraint to farmer investment is uninsured risk: when provided with insurance against the
primary catastrophic risk they face, farmers are able to find resources to increase expenditure on their
farms. Demand for insurance in subsequent years is strongly increasing with farmer's own receipt
of insurance payouts, with the receipt of payouts by others in the farmer’s social network, as well as
with recent poor rain in their village. Both investment patterns and the demand for index insurance
are consistent with the presence of important basis risk associated with the index insurance, with imperfect
trust that promised payouts will be delivered, as well as with overweighting recent events.
Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu
Robert Darko Osei
ISSER
rdosei@isser.edu.gh

Isaac Osei-Akoto
ISSER
ioseiak@ug.edu.gh
Christopher Udry
Economic Growth Center
Yale University
Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
udry@yale.edu

1. Introduction
Incomplete markets shape the investments of firms. In the rural areas of developing countries, financial
market imperfections are pervasive, and there are broad regions in which almost every household
manages farmland, effectively a firm. In these contexts, households facing constrained access to credit
or insurance may choose to invest less, or differently, on their farms than they would under perfect
markets. Agricultural policy, particularly in Africa, focuses on increasing investment levels by farmers.
Policies have commonly focused on reducing risk or increasing access to capital, with implicit
assumptions of market failures in one or more such domains.
Before this study began, we asked smallholder farmers in northern Ghana about their farming practices
in a series of qualitative focus groups. Discussions were guided toward identifying constraints to further
investment. Farmers most often cited lack of capital as the reason they had not intensified farm
investment—but also farmers understood the risk of unpredictable rainfall, and claimed to reduce their
farm investment because of it. Thus, we seek to test the importance of capital constraints and uninsured
risk, separately and together, as financial market imperfections hindering optimal investment by
smallholder farmers. We do this with a multi‐year, multi‐arm randomized trial with cash grants, rainfall
insurance grants and rainfall insurance sales in northern Ghana.
The welfare gains from improving financial markets could be large, for three reasons. First, if either risk
or limited access to credit is discouraging investment, the marginal return on investments may be high.
Existing evidence from fertilizer in northern Ghana suggests that these returns are indeed high.1 Yet the
median farmer in northern Ghana uses no chemical inputs.2 Second, agriculture in northern Ghana is
almost exclusively rain‐fed. Thus weather risk is significant and index insurance on rainfall has promise.
Third, we have strong evidence in the region that rainfall shocks translate directly to consumption
fluctuations (Kazianga and Udry 2006). Thus mitigating the risks from rainfall should lead to not just
higher yields but also smoother consumption.
To understand how capital and risk interact, and under what circumstances underinvestment occurs, we
experimentally manipulate the financial environment in which farmers in northern Ghana make
investment decisions. We do so by providing farmers with cash grants, grants or access to purchase
rainfall index insurance or both. Using rainfall index insurance rather than crop insurance eliminates
1

Experiments on farmers’ plots across 12 districts of northern Ghana in 2010 with inorganic fertilizer in northern
Ghana showed for an additional expenditure of $60 per acre (inclusive of the additional cost of labor), fertilizer use
generates $215 of additional output per acre (Fosu and Dittoh 2011).
2
This fact is derived from the control group of farmers in the first year of our survey, described in section 3 below.

2

moral hazard and adverse selection because payouts depend only on observable rainfall realizations.
This is beneficial for theoretical and research reasons, in that it allows us to isolate the impact of risk on
investment decisions, and is relevant for policy reasons, given the historical challenges of crop insurance
(Hazell, Pomareda, and Valdés 1986) and recent policy attention to index insurance.
The experiments are motivated by a simple model which starts with perfect capital and perfect
insurance markets, and then shuts down each. Farm investment is lower than in the fully efficient
allocation if either market is missing (and land markets are also shut down, given the restrictions of the
land tenure system in northern Ghana (Yaro and Abraham 2009)). If credit constraints are binding, then
provision of cash grants increases investment, but the provision of grants of insurance reduces
investment. In contrast, when insurance markets are incomplete, provision of cash grants has a minimal
impact on investment, but investment responds positively to the receipt of an insurance grant.
To test these predictions, we turn to a three‐year multi‐arm randomized trial.3 In year one, we
conducted a 2x2 experiment: maize farmers received (a) a cash grant of $85 per acre or no cash grant
(average grant of $420 per farmer), and (b) a rainfall insurance grant with an actuarially fair value of $47
per acre or no rainfall insurance grant. In year two, we conducted another cash grant experiment, but
only offered rainfall insurance for sale at randomly‐varied prices ranging from one eighth of actuarially
fair to market price (i.e., actuarially far plus a market premium to cover servicing costs) rather than
giving some out for free as in year one. In year three, we did not conduct another cash grant
experiment, but the insurance pricing experiment continued.
Four elements distinguish our data and experiments: (1) the cash grant experiment to measure the
effect of capital constraints on investment and agricultural income (most of the existing complementary
research is on the insurance component), (2) the provision of free insurance, in order to observe
investment effects on a full population rather than just those willing to buy (Cole et al (2011) is a notable
complementary study), who provide grants of free insurance to farmers in India), (3) the multi‐year
setup, and (4) a demand curve from barely positive prices (1/8 of actuarially fair) all the way to
approximate market prices (i.e., actuarially fair plus a 50% premium to cover servicing costs). In the
Discussion section of this paper we relate our results to the complementary literature on risk and capital
capitals for agriculture.

3

Conducted as a “natural field experiment” in the sense that all grants and insurance were offered through an
NGO, and although after the first year individuals obviously knew that researchers were conducting surveys, the
grants and insurance were presented as those of an NGO, not researchers.

3

We find strong responses of agricultural investment to the rainfall insurance grant, but relatively small
effects of the cash grants. We consider both of these results striking. Our main result is that uninsured
risk is a binding constraint on farmer investment: when provided with insurance against the primary
catastrophic risk they face, farmers are able to find resources to increase expenditure on their farms.
This result is important in two dimensions: first, it demonstrates the direct importance of risk in
hindering investment; second, the fact that farmers came up with cash to increase investment merely as
a consequence of getting rainfall insurance shows that liquidity constraints are not as binding as
typically thought.4 Thus, the strongest evidence on capital constraints comes not from the capital grant
treatment estimate, but rather from the insurance‐only results compared to control. Furthermore, as
we will discuss later, the treatments are not directly comparable, as one needs assumptions of perfect
markets in order to compare the intensity of the two, and obviously a key lesson from this and similar
research is that there are not perfect capital and insurance markets in this type of setting. This second
fact, combined with the lack of a large response to cash grants, suggests that agricultural credit market
policy alone will not suffice to generate higher farm investment. This is an important result, given the
large emphasis throughout the world in agricultural credit policy.
We also show that there is sufficient demand to support a market, and will discuss in more length in the
Discussion section the ensuing policy and market issues in Ghana. Here, we find that at the actuarially
fair price, 40 to 50 percent of farmers demand index insurance, and they purchase coverage for more
than 60 percent of their cultivated acreage. Patterns of insurance demand are consistent with farmers
being conscious of the important degree of basis risk associated with the index insurance product. But,
there are important frictions, such as trust and recency bias (i.e., overweighting of recent events), in the
insurance market. Farmers do not seem to have complete trust that payouts will be made when rainfall
trigger events occur, so the demand for index insurance is quite sensitive to the experience of the
farmer and others in his social network with the insurance product. Demand increases after either the
farmer or others in his network receive an insurance payout, and demand is lower if a farmer was
previously insured and the rainfall was good, so no payout was made. The irony is unfortunate:
insurance offers its largest benefit for low‐probability high‐loss events, yet rare payouts harm demand.
This could easily lead to insurance market failures if not addressed in the design of policies. We discuss
this in section 7.

4

This does not mean that there are never liquidity constraints, since individuals could still be constrained partially
on the farm, or in other domains of their life. These farmers are very poor, and the prospect of potentially binding
liquidity constraints in the future strengthens the responsiveness of investment to insurance, as discussed in
Section 2.

4

In the next section, we provide a simple model of investment in a set of different financial
environments. Section 3 describes the empirical setting, the experimental interventions, and the data
collection process. Section 4 provides the key results on the effects of cash and insurance grants on farm
investment. Given these results, section 5 provides a model of the demand for insurance and
agricultural investment when farmers do not face binding credit constraints. Section 6 provides results
on the demand for index insurance, characterizes patterns of investment given the availability of index
insurance at randomized prices, and explores the effects of social interactions on insurance demand.
Section 7 discusses the implications of our results in the context of the academic literature and policy
issues, and Section 8 concludes.

2. Investment and the Financial Environment
In an environment with well‐functioning markets, including markets for insurance and capital, the
standard neoclassical separation between production and consumption holds and farmers’ input choices
on a particular plot are independent of their wealth and their preferences. Investment in inputs
maximize the present discounted value of the (state‐contingent) profits generated by those
investments. Where insurance markets are imperfect or absent, or credit constraints bind, separation no
longer holds, and the randomized provision of capital grants or insurance that pays off in certain states
may influence farmers’ investment choices. The purpose of this section is to provide a simple model that
permits us to use the investment response to capital grants and/or the provision of insurance to draw
conclusions about the financial environment that farmers face.
A minimal model sufficient for this purpose includes 2 periods, production, risk, and the appropriate
0

financial markets. Preferences over consumption in the first period ( c ) and in the various states of the
second period (cs ) , with probability of state s equal to  s and a discount factor b , are
1

(1)

u(c 0 ) + b åps u(cs1 ).
s S

We start with an environment with a perfect credit market and complete informal risk‐pooling. The
household (with exogenous cash on hand Y) has access to a market on which it can buy (or sell) a risk
free asset (a) which earns (or pays) interest R ( 

1



, to simplify notation later). The household is also a

member of an informal risk sharing group which permits the efficient ex‐post pooling of all risk. This

5

informal risk sharing operates such that every household consumes the expected value of its second
period consumption in any realized second period state.
The farmer has a concave production technology that provides second period output equal to f s ( x ) in
state s after a vector of inputs x are committed in the first period. To simplify some of the notation
which follows, we let S  {L , H } with f L ( x )  f H ( x ). We also assume that there are two types of
inputs, x r and x r such that the marginal product of a ‘risky’ input ( xr ) is lower in state L than in H,
while the converse is true of the ‘safe’ input x r . To simplify and sharpen the contrast between risky
and safe investments, we make the extreme assumptions that the marginal return on x r is zero in the
low state ( L ) and similarly for x~ r in the high state ( H ) , but this is not essential for any of our results.
Our empirical focus will largely be on the risky inputs, which comprise the inputs into farm production in
northern Ghana. These include field preparation, fertilizer and pesticide use, weeding and cultivation
activities, all of which have a higher return when growing conditions like rainfall are good.5 This of
course need not be the case for all agricultural investments in all parts of the world: irrigation would be
the archetypical investment with a higher payoff in state L than in H, but there is no irrigation in our
sample.
In anticipation of our two‐pronged intervention, let k denote a cash grant provided to the farmer in the
first period, and k s denote a state‐contingent payout promised if s occurs in the second period. k and k s
correspond to our experimental interventions providing grants of, respectively, capital and rainfall index
insurance. We are not concerned here with changes in the price of inputs, so we choose units so that
the price of each input is 1. Thus the household maximizes (1) subject to

c 0 = Y - x r - x ~r - a + k
(2)

cL1 = cH1 = c 1 =
x ³ 0.

å ps ( fs (x) + Ra + ks )

s ÎS

We have assumed that the risk pooling group is sufficiently diverse that there is no aggregate risk.6 This
extreme assumption serves to focus on the implications of binding credit constraints in the absence of
any risk‐based motivation for moving resources across periods. The household chooses a such that

5

The assumption that these inputs have a lower return in the low state corresponds to farmer accounts of their
practices in northern Ghana, and there is agronomic support as well. See Amujoyegbe et al. (2007).
6
Thus all the rainfall risk is fully pooled: if a farmer realizes poor rainfall he receives a transfer from the pool equal
to  H ( f H ( x )  k H )   L ( f L ( x )  k L )    f L ( x )  k L  . If the same farmer realizes good rainfall, he makes a

6

u '( c 0 )  R  u '( c1 )  u '( c1 )

(3)
and farm investment satisfies
(4) R   L

f L ( x)
f ( x)
f ( x)
f ( x)
f ( x)
f ( x)
H H
 H H
H H
 L L
; R  L L
;
xr
xr
xr
x~ r
x~ r
x~ r

for the inputs x r and x r (we assume the Inada conditions on f H ( x ) and f L ( x ) so that the non‐
negativity constraint on x never binds).
With complete credit markets and full risk‐pooling, farm investment is independent of resources (Y) and
preferences: investment is fully determined by equation (4) which depends only on R, the probabilities
of rainfall outcomes and the physical characteristics of the production function. Neither a capital grant
nor an insurance policy has any influence on farm investment:

dxr dxr dx~ r dx~ r



 0.
dk dks dk
dks

(5)

We now introduce, in turn, capital constraints and incomplete insurance markets.

2.1 Capital Constraints
Suppose that borrowing is not possible: add the constraint a  0 to the constraint set. We will consider
situations in which this constraint binds. Informal consumption pooling remains complete, so every
household consumes the expected value of its consumption in any state. With a  0 binding the first
order conditions become
(6)

u ¢(c 0 ) > u ¢(c1 )

and

transfer to the pool equal to

 f H ( x )  k H    H ( f H ( x )  kH )   L ( f L ( x )  k L ). This

is of course an

idealized representation of risk pooling, but it corresponds to one particular Pareto efficient allocation of risk, and
is akin to the moral economy described by Scott (1976).

7

(7)

u ¢(c 0 ) = bu ¢(c1)pH

¶fH (x )
¶f (x )
= bu ¢(c1)pL L .
¶xr
¶x~r

The implicit function theorem immediately implies

(8)

dx r dx ~r
dx dx
> 0 > r , ~r .
,
dk dk
dkL dkL

The capital grant reduces the shadow price of the binding borrowing constraint, raising the relative
value of consumption in the future and therefore inducing higher investment in x (i.e., both x r and x r ).
In contrast, the promise of future resources, even in the bad state L, increases that shadow price and
lowers the relative value of consumption in the future. Hence investment in any input in x falls with
promised contingent payments.

2.2 Imperfect Insurance
1
In the extreme, there is no informal risk pooling, so cs = fs (x ) + Ra + ks . The household chooses x r

such that

(9)

é p u ¢(c1 )
ù
¶f (x )
L
;
R êê L
+ 1 úú = H
1
¶x r
êë pH u ¢(cH )
úû

chooses x~ r so that

(10)

é p u ¢(c1 )
ù
¶f (x )
H
ê
;
+ 1 úú = L
Rê H
1
¶x ~r
ëê pL u ¢(cL )
ûú

and chooses a such that
(11)

u '(c0 )   Lu '(c1L )   H u '(c1H ).

First, note that when insurance is absent and f H ( x ) > f L ( x ) , then

8

H

(12)

f H ( x )
f ( x )
.
 R  L L
xr
x~ r

Relative to (4) with complete markets, there is overinvestment in the safe input and underinvestment in
the risky input.
*

*

*

Let {a , xr , x~ r } solve (9), (10) and (11) when k=0. If u(.) is CARA then investment in either the risky input

x r or the safe input x~ r is invariant with respect to the capital grant k, but the amount invested in the
risk‐free asset (a) increases with the capital grant k, i.e., a *k  a * . {a , xr , x~r } is optimal when k  0
*k

*

*

because

cH1 - cL1 = fH (x*) - kL
and thus the ratios of marginal utilities in (9) and (10) are unaffected by k. In contrast, increases in
promised payouts in the bad state reduce (increase) the LHS of (9) (the LHS of (10)). Therefore, with
CARA preferences, the absence of informal insurance implies that 0 =
CARA preferences 0 =

dx r
dx
< r . Conversely, with
dk
dkL

dx ~r
dx
dx
dx
> ~r . The extreme conclusion that r  ~ r  0 relies on the
dk
dkL
dk
dk
*k

*k

*k

CARA assumption. For the more reasonable case of decreasing absolute risk aversion, {a , x~ r , xr }
with xr  xr and x~ r  xr solves (9)‐(12) for k  0 because the absolute degree of risk aversion falls
*k

*

*k

1

*

1

as cL increases (and cL increases with a*k ). Thus, with imperfect insurance and decreasing absolute
risk aversion we have

(13)

dxr dxr
dx dx
> 0 > ~r , ~r .
,
dk dkL
dk dkL

Different mechanisms underlie the positive responses of risky investment in agriculture in response to
the cash grant and the grant of index insurance. The cash grant increases cash on hand, saving in the
safe asset and thus consumption in either state of the second period. With decreasing absolute risk
aversion, this implies more investment in the risky input. Index insurance directly increases consumption
in the low state of period 2, which implies greater investment in the risky input and less investment in
the safe input.

9

2.3 Capital Constraints and Imperfect Insurance
With a  0 binding, the marginal utility of consumption in period 0 remains strictly greater than the
expected marginal utility in period 1 and the analogue to (7) remain first order conditions for x. Since
a=0, c 0  Y  x~ r  xr  k and cs  f s ( x )  k s the implicit function theorem implies
1

(14)

dxr dx~r
dx dx
> 0  r , ~r
,
dk dk
dks dks

for the inputs x r and x ~r .
The model is stark in its simplicity. We have distinguished sharply between the risky and safe inputs x r
and x ~r , and between these inputs and the safe asset a. In fact, farmers have access to a portfolio of
input and investment choices with an array of varying payoffs in a vast set of possible states of the
world. In rainfed northern Ghana, almost all agricultural activities require investment in inputs which
have a higher return in good rainfall conditions than they do in years of drought or flood and correspond
to a greater or lesser degree to type x r . Households may in addition have access to some limited
activities (discussed below) that provide relatively good returns in poor years, corresponding to x ~r .
The restriction of the model to two periods sharpens the contrast between the implications of binding
capital constraints and those of imperfect insurance. With an extended time horizon, a farmer with no
access to insurance markets can use his access to credit markets to smooth transitory rainfall shocks. If
in addition the farmer faces an exogenous limit on his or her access to credit, he may accumulate buffer
stocks to accommodate the rainfall shocks, weakening the response of investment to improvements in
insurance when capital constraints are not currently binding (Buera and Shin 2011; Moll 2012).7 While
the two period model is obviously extreme, our decision to focus on a short time horizon is motivated by
the common observation that optimal choices follow a renewal process, resetting whenever the capital
constraint becomes binding (Deaton 1991). Our choice of a short time horizon, then, amounts to the
assumption that farmer decisions are conditioned by the possibility of binding capital constraints in the
near future. This would occur, for example, in the event of a drought (which we do not observe during
our sample period). In section 3.5 we describe the large magnitude of the rainfall risk faced by these
farmers relative to their observed wealth and thus the salience of the short horizon of the model.

7

In a dynamic model in which farmers have no safe asset (in contrast to our model), de Nicola (2012) shows that
the introduction of index insurance can reduce risky agricultural investment, because farmers have less need to
accumulate assets as a hedge against risk. This result is reversed when farmers have alternative, safe assets.

10

To summarize, our simple model implies that if farmers have access to complete risk pooling and capital
markets, investment in both the risky and the safe input is invariant to both capital grants and the
provision of free insurance. With binding credit constraints (either with or without complete insurance
markets), investment in both types of input rises with a capital grant and falls when insurance is
provided. When credit constraints are not binding but insurance is imperfect, risky investment rises and
safe investments fall with the provision of insurance or a capital grant.

3. The Setting, the Interventions and Data Collection
3.1 Year One: Sample Frame and Randomization for Grant Experiment
Appendix Figure 1 provides a timeline of all data collection activities and experimental treatments.
In order to have a rich set of background data on individuals and a representative sample frame, we
used the Ghana Living Standards Survey 5 Plus (GLSS5+) survey data to form the initial sample frame.
The GLSS5+ was conducted from April to September 2008 by the Institute of Statistical, Social and
Economic Research (ISSER) at the University of Ghana – Legon in collaboration with the Ghana Statistical
Service. The GLSS5+ was a clustered random sample, with households randomly chosen based on a
census of selected enumeration areas in the 23 Millenium Development Authority (MiDA) districts8.
From the GLSS5+ sample frame, we then selected communities in northern Ghana in which maize
farming was dominant, and then within each community, selected the households with some maize
farming, but no more than 15 acres of land. Within each household, we identified the key decisionmaker
for farming decisions on the main household plot, which was typically the male head of household
(except in the case of widows). Our sample frame is over 95% male as a result. This yielded a sample of
502 households. We refer to this as Sample Frame 1, and it is used for the Grant Experiment. (Appendix
Table 1 provides an overview of our sample frames, survey completion rates, and observations used for
each table in the analysis.)
We randomly assigned the 502 households to one of four cells: 117 to cash grant, 135 to insurance
grant, 95 to both cash grant and insurance grant, or 155 to control (neither cash grant nor insurance

8

Ghana has 170 districts in total, twenty of which are located in the Northern Region. MiDA is the Ghanaian
government entity created to lead the programs under the compact between the US Government Millennium
Challenge Corporation (MCC) and the Ghanaian government. Although the sample frame for this study was
generated from the GLSS5+, the interventions described here were independent of MiDA and MCC.

11

grant).9 The unit of randomization was the household, and the randomization was conducted privately,
stratified by community. We did not have the GLSS5+ data prior to the randomization, and thus were
not able to verify ex ante the orthogonality between assignment to treatment and other observables.
When cash and rainfall insurance grants were announced to farmers, they were presented not as part of
a randomized trial but rather as a service from a research partnership between IPA and the local
nongovernmental organization Presbyterian Agricultural Services (PAS).10
Table 1 shows summary statistics, mean comparisons of each treatment cell to the control, an F‐test
from individual regressions of each covariate on a set of three indicator variables for each treatment cell
(Column 7), and an F‐test from a regression of assignment to each treatment cell on the full set of
covariates (bottom row). No covariates show any statistically significant differences across treatment
assignment in the aggregate F‐test. In pairwise comparisons of each treatment to each other treatment
or control, out of 70 tests we only reject equality for one pairwise combination for Year 1, whereas for
Year 2 eight out of 24 reject equality. Note that the imbalance, if not merely sampling variation,
indicates a trend towards larger farms in the control group in year 2 (larger cultivated acreage, higher
total costs of investments, eg), compared to the treatment groups, particularly those sold insurance at a
price of GHC 4 per acre, thus if this introduced bias it would lead to an underestimate of our treatment
effects.

3.2 Year One: Insurance Grant Design
We designed the insurance grant in collaboration with the Ghanaian Ministry of Food and Agriculture
(MoFA), Savannah Agricultural Research Institute (SARI) and PAS, and secured permission from the
Ghana National Insurance Commission to research the effects of a non‐commercial rainfall index
insurance product. We held focus groups with farmers to learn about their perception of key risks and
about the types of rainfall outcomes likely to lead to catastrophically low yields. Whilst rainfall data for
Ghana was available from 1960 onwards from the Ghana Meteorological Service (GMet), equivalent
9

Since the budget for this research included the cost of the intervention and since the size of the sample frame
was not fixed, we optimized statistical power by increasing the size of the control group relative to the treatment
groups. However, since the exact formula for optimal power depended not just on the relative cost but also on any
change in variance, we did not solve this analytically but rather approximated.
10

The script for the field officers for the insurance grant, for example, was as follows: “I am working for NGOs
called Innovations for Poverty Action and Presbyterian Agriculture Services. We are trying to learn about maize
farmers in the Northern Region, and in (Tamale Metropolitan / Savelugu‐Nanton / West Mamprusi) district. As part
of this research, you are invited to participate in a free rainfall protection plan called TAKAYUA Rainfall Insurance,
which I would like to tell you about.” Control group households were informed that others in their community had
received grants but that limited resources did not allow everyone to receive one, and that the selection was
random and thus fair to everyone.

12

data was not available for crop yields. Given the limitations of this historical data and the differences
between Burkinabe and Ghanaian farming systems, our decision about the trigger rainfall amounts for
insurance payouts was made on the basis of our qualitative discussions with our Ghanaian partners and
farmers. The value of per acre insurance payouts in case of catastrophically low yields was set to be
equal to mean yields in the GLSS5+. We reduced product complexity to enhance farmer understanding,
and acknowledge that the simplicity came at the expense of increased basis risk (see (Hill and Robles
2011) for an analysis and innovative approach using laboratory experiments to assess farmer perception
of basis risk and insurance fit). The trigger for payouts was determined based on the number of dry or
wet days in a month (where either too much or too little rainfall triggered a payout). The payout amount
was chosen in order to approximately cover 100% of a full loss, or roughly $145 per acre of maize grown.
We used five rainfall gauges in 2009. Appendix Table 2 provides summary statistics on distance to
farmer homesteads in our sample and rainfall for each gauge, and Appendix Figure 2 provides a map of
the area and location of communities and rain gauges in the study. The timing of payouts may also be
critical, both to provide farmers needed cash to adjust their farming decisions based on rainfall
realizations (Fafchamps 1993), as well as to generate trust in the insurance institutions. The Ghana
Meteorological Association (GMet) provided rainfall data at all steps of the process: to inform
development of both the NGO and private products, and to provide close to real‐time access to rainfall
data. All rain gauges were managed by unbiased GMet employees who recorded daily rainfall
measurements on paper which were converted into electronic datasets by the main GMet office.
Electronic rainfall data arrived in ten‐day (dekad) chunks, typically 10‐20 days after it had been
recorded. IPA had systems in place to receive the incoming rainfall data and check automatically for
trigger events. In the case that a trigger event occurred, payouts were made no more than three to four
week days after the data was available. Details of the insurance policy are provided in Appendix Table 3.
Around March of 2009, we sent insurance marketers to visit individually with those farmers selected to
receive the insurance offer. Each farmer was offered a grant of insurance coverage for the number of
acres they reported farming maize in the GLSS5+ baseline. The marketers described the insurance
policy, left a copy of the policy document with each farmer and informed the farmer he would have
approximately two weeks to decide whether to take up the offer. Marketers returned to each farmer
two weeks after this visit and issued a certficate to those farmers agreeing to take up the product. In this
case, where the product was offered at no cost, 100 percent of farmers took it up.

13

A total of 230 policies were issued to farmers free of cost, covering a total of 1,159.5 acres, for an
average of about five acres per farmer. One payout was made to 171 farmers in July of 2009 at $85 per
acre. The average payout was $350 per farmer, conditional on receiving a payout.11

3.3 Year One: Cash Grant Design
For those in the cash grant treatment, we first announced the grant and explained it the same way as
the insurance grant: as a collaboration between IPA and PAS to help smallholder farmers and learn more
about farming in northern Ghana. We made three key design decisions concerning the cash grant
treatment: the amount, the timing, and whether to transfer in‐kind goods or cash. The grant was a fixed
at $85 per acre as reported in the GLSS5+ baseline (up to 15 acres), and averaged $420 per recipient. We
determined the amount with MoFA as the per acre cost of inputs and labor of the MoFA recommended
maize farming practices, to avoid any issues of possible nonconvexities in the production function at
levels of inputs lower than the recommended practice.
For the timing, we decided to individualize delivery of the grant based on the farmers’ stated
preferences and intentions about use of the grant. Thus if they reported half would go to seed and half
to labor for harvest, half the cash would be delivered before the planting period and half before harvest.
Beyond timing the cash to coincide with their stated use, we did nothing to impose compliance, i.e., we
did not tell them they must use it for what they said, nor did we verify or tell them we would verify the
purchases. Of course we cannot control what they thought, or how they thought their behaviors might
influence possible future grants. Finally, we decided to give cash rather than in‐kind. This was done in
order to allow the farmers to use the resources in what they considered their highest return activities,
regardless of what they initially said they would do with the funds. Due to budget constraints, we were
unable to randomize the implementation of the grant in order to test out the various options on
amount, timing and cash vs. in‐kind delivery.

3.4 Year Two: Expanded Sample Frame for Insurance Product Pricing Experiment
For year two, we expanded the sample frame in order to conduct a pricing experiment. The second year
insurance coverage also was redesigned and renamed to Takayua (which means “umbrella” in the local

11

In order to test an involuntary soft commitment to spend the insurance payouts on large indivisible investments,
we also randomized the size of the bills in which the cash was delivered. The options were small bills (i.e., usable in
their local community) or large bills (realistically not usable unless they travel to Tamale, the closest major city, and
also where they typically would buy farm inputs in the following season). We do not report on the results from
that sub‐experiment in this paper.

14

Dagbani language), and calibrated to trigger per‐acre payouts after seven or more consecutive “wet”
days (over 1mm of rainfall) or after twelve or more consecutive “dry” days (1mm or less rainfall).
Payouts under Takayua were promised to be delivered two weeks after the dry or wet spell had been
broken.
The pricing experiment included the grant experiment sample from Year 1, as well as two new samples:
new households drawn from the grant experiment communities (Sample Frame 2), and entirely new
communities (Sample Frame 3). The price was randomized at the community level in order to facilitate
communication and avoid confusion that would result from offering insurance at different price levels
within a single community, but every community also had control group farmers without access to the
insurance; this randomization is at the household level.
For Sample Frame 2, the expansion in communities already part of the Grant Experiment, we first
conducted a census in order to select additional households for the sample. Using our census, we
applied the same filter as in the Grant Experiment (maize farmers with fewer than 15 acres). This yielded
676 additional households. We then randomly assigned each community to be sold the insurance
product at a price of either GHC 1 or GHC 4 ($1.30 or $5.25), and then randomly drew 867 of the 1,178
in Sample Frame 1 and 2 to be sold the insurance, with the remaining 311 being in a control group of
individuals not offered the insurance.12 Both prices represent considerable subsidies, as the actuarially
fair price was about 7.65 cedis ($9.58) per acre.13 Offers were made in November 2009, and we sold 402
out of 475 offered at 1 GHC, and 261 out of 392 offered at 4 GHC.
For Sample Frame 3, we expanded to new communities, and used this sample frame to test actuarially
fair and market‐based prices for the same insurance product. First we randomly selected 12 new
communities from maps of the areas that delineated all communities within 30 kilometers of one of the
rain gauges. We then completed a census in each community and filtered the sample using the same
criteria as the grant experiment (maize farmers with fewer than 15 acres). We drew 228 households (19
per community) into the sample. We then randomly assigned each community to receive insurance
marketing at near the actuarially fair price (GHC 8 or 9.5 ($10.50 or $12.50), depending on the rain
12

Throughout the paper, we use the PPP exchange rate of 0.6953 Ghana Cedi to US$1 for 2009, 0.7574 for 2010,
and 0.7983 for 2011 (World Bank, 2011).
13
Thus the actuarially fair value of a unit of insurance decreased considerably from year one to year two. The main
benefit of lowering the actuarial value is that it provides farmers more variation to choose (since the unit of an
acre is the smallest unit sold, for marketing and simplicity purposes). However, also note that because insurance in
the 1st year grant experiment had a price of zero, the actuarially fair value of a unit of that insurance is arbitrary –
what matters is the aggregate value of what we gave, but not so much whether the policy is more generous for
fewer acres or less generous for more acres. This is a feature of index insurance, which is not tied to actual plots
(as opposed to crop insurance).

15

gauge to which the community was assigned), or the estimated price in a competitive market (GHC 12 or
14 ($15.85 or $18.50), depending on the rain gauge). Offering the insurance product at several prices,
including at the estimated actuarially fair and competitive market prices, allowed us to measure demand
for the product at different prices and to further refine a demand curve for rainfall index insurance in
the region. Offers were made in March 2010. Each farmer was visited up to four times as part of the
marketing. During the first visit, a marketer educated individual respondents about the Takayua product
and its price. If the farmer was interested in purchasing, during the second visit a marketer returned to
sign contracts and collect premiums. During the third visit, a marketer issued a physical policyholder
certificate, including details on the policyholder and acreage covered. During the fourth visit, an auditor
from IPA verified understanding of the terms and conditions of Takayua with roughly 10 percent of
farmers who had chosen to take up the product.14

3.5 Year One Followup Survey \ Year Two Baseline Survey
In January through March 2010, we attempted to survey 1,178 farmers, the union of the 502 households
in Sample 1 (the grant experiment) and 676 households in Sample 2 (the year two pricing experiment
farmers that were from existing communities).15 We completed 1,087 of 1,178 surveys, for an overall
response rate of 92 percent.16
These households are poor. For the control group, the median value of livestock holdings is about $450
and that of formal savings is zero. The value of grain stocks ranges from about $430 just after harvest to
$0 before harvesting begins. Almost seventy percent state that they have missed meals over the past
year because their family could not afford enough food.17 Median harvest value is about $950; this is the
amount at risk to crop failure in the event of a drought.

14

To better understand farmers’ comprehension of the policies and learn about their perceptions of basis risk, we
also conducted a post‐harvest survey with 672 of 729 Takayua policyholders following the year two harvest in
December 2010. 97.9 percent of the treatment group indicated willingness to purchase the product again for the
2011 farming season.
15
The product pricing experiment in new communities took place immediately after this survey was completed,
thus Sample 3 is included in the 2011 followup survey but not this one. Four farmers were dropped between years
due to administrative error.
16
The comprehensive survey was conducted using netbooks. This survey included: household socioeconomic
indicators (including education, health, waged labor, and formal employment), plot‐level farming questions
(including land tenure, seeds, chemical inputs, agricultural labor, harvest, crop sales and storage), livestock, fishing,
agricultural processing, household assets, expenditures, consumption, social networks, insurance knowledge, risk
perceptions and finance (including borrowing, lending, savings, other income, and transfers).
17
For the subset of households that were observed in the GLSS5+ we observe that mean consumption per adult
equivalent is about $2.05.

16

3.6 Year Two: Cash Grant Experiment
In the year two cash grant experiment conducted between May and June 2010, we repeated the cash
grant to a newly randomized treatment group of 363 (out of 676) farmers from Sample Frame 2 (i.e.,
thus there was no overlap with those in the year one capital grant experiment). The cash grant was $462
per household, regardless of acreage, and the entire amount was given to the farmers at a single time.

3.7 Year Two: Insurance Payouts
Two of five rainfall stations triggered payouts totaling just over $100,000 in 2010. The Tamale (Pong)
station measured eight consecutive wet days in late August triggering a payout of $26 per acre to 125
individual farmers with 785 acres. The second payout was made when the Walewale station recorded 11
consecutive wet days in late September triggering a payout of $66 per acre to 225 individual farmers
with 1,254 acres. These payouts were made within two weeks of the trigger event.

3.8 Year Two: Follow‐up Survey
In February and March 2011, we conducted a second follow‐up survey targeting 1,406 households, the
union of Sample 1 (the year one grant experiment), Sample 2 (the year one pricing experiment on
households from villages in the Grant Experiment) and Sample 3 (the year one pricing experiment on
households from new villages, i.e., no overlap with the Grant Experiment). We reached 1,252 of the
1,406 households, for an overall response rate of 89 percent.
In order to ensure data quality, the instrument was programmed to ask for confirmation of and updates
to the previous year’s data through preloading data about household members, plots, employment,
assets, livestock and loans. The survey also asked for new data on areas including harvests, crop storage
and sales, chemical use, seed sources, ploughing, livestock, income, expenditures, assets, loans,
agricultural processing, education, health, household enterprise and formal employment.

3.9 Year Three: Commercial Product and Pricing Experiment
In May 2011, we negotiated a partnership with the Ghana Agricultural Insurance Programme (GAIP) to
market GAIP’s commercial drought‐indexed insurance product, a product reinsured by Swiss Re and
endorsed officially by the National Insurance Commission. Due to the increased complexity of the
commercial product (compared to the original non‐commercial product from years one and two),
individual marketing scripts and protocols emphasized transparency about the product, named Sanzali,

17

the Dagbani word for “drought”. Sanzali was divided into three stages based on the maize plant’s
growth stage, and each stage included one or two types of drought triggers (cumulative rainfall levels
over ten day periods, or consecutive dry days). The Sanzali product was offered at an actuarially fair
price of $7.90 per acre, as well as a subsidized price of $4.00 per acre and a market price of $11.90 per
acre. The pricing assignments were randomized by community, with 23 communities (31.9 percent) in
the market price cell, 23 communities (31.9 percent) in the actuarially fair and 26 communities (36.2
percent) in the subsdized price cell. Control farmers were randomized individually.
The same farmers from the year two pricing experiment were included in this year three pricing
experiment. We offered insurance to 1,095 farmers and sold a total of 655 policies (59.8%). As with year
two, each farmer was visited up to four times. Demand was 63.9% at the subsidized $4.00 per acre
price, 55.6% at the actuarially fair GHC $7.90 per acre price, and 40.0% at the market price GHC $11.90
per acre.
As with the second year, three to seven days after the marketing visit, IPA staff conducted audit visits
with ten percent of the insurance group to test their comprehension of the product. Audit reports
confirm that farmers had a clear understanding of the product, including complex ideas such as
cumulative rainfall per dekad. IPA also conducted informal interviews to gain insight into how
smallholders financed their insurance purchase, finding that smallholders made their purchases through
informal loans, produce sales, gifts, or small ruminant sales.

3.10 Year Three: Insurance Payout
The insurance product in year three (2011) did not trigger any payouts.18

18

Although not reported in this paper, we conducted a notification experiment after the realization that there
would be no payout. We were concerned that silence may lead to longer term mistrust. Thus in December 2011,
we conducted a notification experiment and harvest survey with the 572 Sanzali policyholders. In the notification
experiment, some policyholders were notified individually and otherswere notified as part of a group about rainfall
measurements recorded at their nearest rain gauge and about insurance outcomes. The notification experiment
served two purposes: (1) to respond to requests made by policyholders during the 2010 harvest survey and 2011
insurance marketing to provide information about insurance outcomes at the end of each coverage period, and
therefore to build upon established trust between marketers and communities, and (2) to test group education
rather than individual education to ensure the same treatment effect could be generated at lower cost, and
therefore to inform planning for community‐level marketing activities in 2012.

18

4. Capital Grants, Insurance and Investment
Figures 1‐5 summarize the consequences for farm investment of the randomized grant of either capital
grants, rainfall index insurance, or both.19 The first panel of Figure 1 shows that the CDF of total
expenditures on the farms of households who received free insurance is strongly shifted to the right of
that of control group farmers.20 The strongest effects are in the left tail of the distribution of farm
expenditures: the 25th percentile increases by about $570, from a base of $875. The second panel
indicates that there may be a difference between the control group and the capital grant group in the
left tail: the 25th percentile of the grant group is about $205 higher than that of the control group, but
the difference is eliminated from the median onward and we cannot reject the hypothesis that the two
samples are drawn from the same distribution. The final panel shows that the CDF of total expenditures
for the group that received both the capital grant and insurance is also shifted to the right of that of the
control group; but there is little substantive difference between the CDFs of the group that received only
insurance (panel 1) and the group that received both insurance and capital (panel 3).
The effects of capital and insurance grants on total expenditure are not those that one would expect to
see for farmers facing binding credit constraints. Farmers in the insurance group were promised future
resources in some states of the world, and given nothing up front. With binding credit constraints, this
would have induced farmers to reduce investment on farming activities; instead, we see a dramatic
increase.
Figure 2 Panel 1 documents a similar increase by the insurance group in expenditures on farm chemicals,
largely fertilizer. Figure 2 Panel 2 shows that the capital grant group also strongly increased their
expenditure on chemicals, as did the group that received both capital grants and insurance. In all these
cases we can reject the hypothesis (p<0.03) that the treatment and control distributions are the same.
In Figure 3, we see that insurance also has a positive effect on the acres cultivated by farmers (the step
pattern is driven by clustering at unit values of reported cultivated acres), but that there is no difference
between the CDFs of area cultivated by the control and capital grant groups. The difference between the
distributions is statistically different for the insurance and insurance plus capital groups versus the
control group ( p  0.04 ). Harvests may be higher for the group that received insurance than for the
19

Note we restrict attention to Year One (Sample Frame One) in these figures, when the insurance was granted.
This allows for a straightforward interpretation of the CDF, whereas including Year Two would add complications
because not everyone bought the insurance. In Section 6 we report the investment response in both years and
show that it is similar.
20
A Kolmogorov‐Smirnov test rejects the equality of the two distributions (p=0.05).

19

control group (Figure 4), but the difference is relatively small (about $120 at the 25th percentile, off a
control group base of $475) and not statistically significant at conventional levels. However, the group
that received both insurance and capital does have a CDF of harvest values that is distinctly shifted to
the right of that of the control group ($190 at the 25th percentile); the Kolmogorov‐Smirnov D statistic is
0.16 (p=0.07). We will discuss this pattern further below, where we argue that it and other evidence
may reflect the salience of both basis risk and the impact of the capital grants on the expectations of
policyholders that insurance payouts will be made when trigger events occur. In none of the treatments
is the increase in the value of output larger than the increase in total expenditures. Figure 5 shows that
there is no evidence that total farm profits, inclusive of the value of any insurance payouts, change with
any of the treatments. In no case can we reject the hypothesis that the distribution of total profits is the
same for the control group as that for any of the treatment groups. We discuss this further in section
6.2.
The index insurance product we designed had the feature that payouts would be made quickly – within
three weeks – of the realization of a trigger. Thus some payouts happened mid‐season, not post‐harvest.
This leads to the natural question as to whether the observed investment responses could simply reflect
the insurance payouts, and not a behavioral response upon receiving the insurance contract? Figure 3 is
important in this respect, because cultivated area is determined during the plot preparation stage of the
farming season, before any insurance payouts could be made. Thus although we cannot rule out any
later investments happening with the insurance proceeds from negative shocks, we do clearly observe
behavioral response prior to any cash infusion.

5. Modeling the Demand for Insurance and Investment
The results of section 4 lead us to focus on an environment in which farmers are not confronted with
binding credit constraints, but in which they do not have access to complete informal insurance
mechanisms. We continue to consider a world with two states and examine the demand for rainfall
index insurance at price p that pays off in state L. The household’s budget constraints are now
(15)

c0  Y  a  xr  x~ r  pI

(16)

c1H  f H ( x )  Ra

(17)

c1L  f L ( x )  Ra  I

20

In addition to non‐negativity constraints on c, cH , cL , x r and x ~ r , short sales of I are not feasible:

I  0.

(18)

If the non‐negativity constraints are not binding, the first order conditions for I, a, and x are

(19)

u '(c0 )  L

u '(c1L )
p

(20)

u '(c0 )   H u '(c1H )   Lu '(c1L )

(21)

u '(c0 )   H u '(c1H )

(22)

u '(c0 )   Lu '(c1L )

If p 

L
R

f H ( x )
xr

f L ( x )
.
x~r

then the insurance is actuarially fair, (18) will not bind and we have the familiar result that

c0  c1L  c1H . In such a case, consumers demand full insurance and the expected return to investment
in the risky agricultural activity is equal to R. Index insurance, however, unless subsidized, is rarely
actuarially fair but rather sells at a premium to cover the transaction and operations costs for the
company if the market is competitive, and also economic profits if non‐competitive. When p 

L
R

, i.e.,

above actuarially fair, households demand less than full insurance and cL  c  cH . Therefore,
1

(23)

L

0

1

f L ( x )
f ( x )
 R  H H
.
x~ r
xr

Farm investment in the risky input is lower than it would be in the case of actuarially fair insurance,
because the investment pays off more in the state in which resources are less valuable (and of course
the converse for the safe input). However, as long as insurance demand is positive, there is a separation
result. Combining (19)‐(22) we have for the risky input
(24)

R
f ( x )
 H
.
x r
1  Rp

21

Despite the fact that there is not full insurance and households are risk averse, production decisions are
21

separable from preferences, wealth and from the riskiness of the farmer’s land. There is of course a

p* 

L

p  p * . In this case, the household
R such that insurance demand is zero and (18) binds for all

equalizes the marginal utility of investing in inputs and in a:

H

f H ( x)
f ( x)
u '(c1H )  R  H u '(c1H )   Lu '(c1L )   L L
u '(c1L )
xr
x~r





and the optimal choice of x depends upon household preferences and wealth. Separation of production
decisions occurs only for households that purchase insurance.

5.1 Selection and Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
Consider a set of farmers characterized by varying coefficients of absolute risk aversion i but otherwise
identical. Let xr ( i , p ) , x ~ r ( i , p ) and I ( i , p ) denote the input choices and insurance demand of
type i at price p, respectively, and x r ( i , a ) and x ~ r ( i , a ) be the input choices by type i without access
to insurance. The treatment effect on the risky investment of access to insurance at price p for type i is
(25)

T ( i , p )  x r ( i , p )  x r ( i , a ).

From (24), T ( i , p1 )  T ( i , p2 ) for p1  p2 , and the inequality is strict if I ( i , p1 )  0. That is, the
treatment effect on risky farm investment by a specific farmer of making insurance available at a high
price is (weakly) less than that of making insurance available at a lower price, although it is nonnegative
at any price.
However, making insurance available at a higher price induces a different set of farmers to purchase
insurance than making insurance available at a lower price, and the treatment effect at a given price
varies across these different types. From (19)‐(22) we have

(26)

21

u '(c1H )
1

u '(c L )

e

The analogous condition for the safe input is

  f H ( x ) ( f L ( x )  I )

1 f L ( x )

.
x~r
p

22



 L 1  Rp
.
 H Rp

If 1   2 , and both types of farmers are purchasing insurance at price p, then x r (1 , p )  x r ( 2 . p ) and

I ( 2 , p )  I (1 , p ). Unsurprisingly, the more risk averse farmer purchases more insurance at every
price p. Since this holds at every price, the price at which (18) binds for type 1 is greater than that for
*
*
type 2: p1  p2 .
Consider treatment effects at p L with pL  p2  p1 ; at this price both types of farmer demand
*

insurance

when

it

is

available.

*

Since x r (1 , a )  x r ( 2 , a )

and

x r (1 , p L )  x r ( 2 , p L ),

T (1 , p L )  T ( 2 , p L ). If the population of farmers consists of these two types, an empirical estimate
of the treatment effect at the low price will lie in between, depending upon the population shares of the
two types.
Suppose p2  pH  p1 , so that only type 1 purchases insurance. T (1 , p H )  T (1 , p L ), as argued
*

*

above, the risky investment response of type 1 farmers is less if they gain access to insurance at a higher
price. But this response may be greater than the response of type 2 farmers to insurance at a lower
price. T (1 , p H )  T ( 2 , p L ) if

x r ( 2 , a )  x r (1 , a )  x r ( 2 , p L )  x r (1 , p H )  x r (1 , p L )  x r (1 , p H ),
which for given 1 ,  2 will be satisfied for pH  pL sufficiently small. In this case we have

T ( 2 , p L )  T (1 , p H )  T (1 , p L ), and the LATE estimate of the treatment effect of availability of
insurance at the low price can be higher or lower than the LATE estimate of the treatment effect of
insurance at the high price. The selection effect of the higher price can offset its direct demand effect, so
the net treatment effect of varying price is ambiguous.
We have illustrated this heterogeneity with respect to variation in risk aversion across farmers; similar
results based on analogous reasoning can be obtained for other dimensions of heterogeneity. For
example farmers with land that is differentially risky will select into insurance differently. The selection
process into insurance with respect to land heterogeneity will depend upon the form of the production
function and in particular on how the marginal product of x varies with the riskiness of the land. We
know of no evidence on this relationship; hence we have focused on heterogeneous risk aversion.

5.2 Basis Risk and Trust
Basis risk and (mis)trust are essential aspects of any actual index insurance product. Both introduce a
divergence between insurance payouts and the realization of bad states. We introduce these ideas by

23

adding a state N in which there is no payout. We suppose that f N ( x )  f L ( x ) . Thus state N can
represent basis risk: a state with a bad outcome for which there is no payout of the index insurance. Or
state N can represent mistrust: a state in which the realization of the index is such that a payout is
obligated but not made. (1   H   L )   N is a measure of either the extent of basis risk, or of the
degree of distrust in the insurance. Consumption in that state is

c1N  f N ( x )  Ra.

(27)

Given our assumption on f N , we have c1L  c1N  I  0 . If the insurance is actuarially fair,

c 0  c1L  c1N . The choice of the safe asset is governed by
u '( c 0 )   H u '( c1H )   L u '( c1L )  (1   H   L )u '( c1N ).

(28)

If the insurance is actuarially fair, then, we have

c1H  c 0  c1L  c1N .
Farm investment in the risky input satisfies

H

(29)

f H ( x ) Ru '(c0 )

R
xr
u '(c1H )

and x r is lower than when there is no basis risk or mistrust.
With CARA preferences, investment in either the safe or risky input remains invariant to capital grants
even in the presence of basis risk or mistrust. The FOC for x r , x ~ r , I and a are (21), (22), (19) and (28).
Consider a farmer’s choices when offered alternative capital grants k a or k b with k b  k a . Then if

 x (k

a

), I (k a ), a(k a ) satisfy the budget constraints ((15), (16), (17), (27)) and the FOC, then

kb  ka
are optimal for grant k b .
R 1
With decreasing absolute risk aversion, as in section 2, x r increases (and x~ r decreases) with larger
b
b
a
x r ( k b )  x r ( k a ), x~ r (k )  x~ r (k ) , I ( k )  I ( k ) and a ( k ) 

b

a

capital grants.

24

Holding constant  H , an increase in  L represents an increase in a farmer’s trust that a payout will be
made in a bad state, either because basis risk falls or because trust increases. Consider a price such that
insurance demand is positive. Since from (19)

(29)

 u '(c 0 ) 
d
 u '( c1 )  
L

   0,
d L
p

(28) implies

 u '( c 0 ) 
d
 u '( c1 ) 
H

  0.
d L
Hence, from (21),

(29)

dxr
 0.
d L

At any price of insurance, and for any conventional risk averse preferences, a decrease in basis risk or an
increase in the farmer’s trust that payouts will be made increases investment. The decline in basis risk
(increase in trust) a fortiori, increases purchases of insurance: c1H  c1L declines as  L increases, and

c1H  c1L  f H ( x )  f L ( x )  I . The demand for insurance increases more than f H ( x ) as  L increases.
Farmers may have varying degrees of trust that the insurance will make payouts in bad states of nature.
If this is so, then the analysis in section 5.1 regarding heterogeneous treatment effects applies in this
dimension as well. Farmers with greater trust will experience larger treatment effects of access to
insurance at any given price (by (29)). At higher insurance prices, farmers with less trust that payouts
will be made will disproportionately drop out of the pool of insurance purchasers (from (29)). The
qualitative process of selection is the same for heterogeneity in trust in the insurance product as we saw
for risk aversion. In section 6.4, we examine two sources of information that might induce a change in
 L : one’s own experience with the index insurance, and the experience of individuals in one’s social
network with the insurance.

25

6. The Demand for Index Insurance, Investment and Social
Interactions
6.1 The Demand for Rainfall Index Insurance in Ghana
The random variation in the price at which farmers were eligible to purchase rainfall index insurance
permits us to examine in a straightforward way the demand for this product. Figure 6 shows the fraction
of farmers purchasing insurance as a function of the price of the insurance. The actuarially fair price of
the insurance product was between 6 and 9 cedis per acre (depending upon the specific rainfall station).
In contrast to (Cole, Sampson, and Zia 2011), demand did not drop off radically when a token price of 1
cedi per acre was charged; even at the actuarially fair price, 40 percent to 50 percent of farmers
purchased insurance. Demand falls to 10% to 20% of farmers at higher rates of 12 to 14 cedis per acre.
Again in contrast to (Cole, Sampson, and Zia 2011), farmers are purchasing more than token amounts of
insurance. On average, farmers who purchased insurance (at a price greater than zero) purchased
coverage for more than 60 percent of their acreage. Figure 7 shows the fraction of acreage for which
insurance was purchased at every price (including 0 for those who did not purchase insurance).
Table 2, Column 1 is the regression analogue of Figure 6. The dependent variable is an indicator variable
for obtaining insurance coverage. The regression includes all three years of data, and in addition to
indicator variables for treatment status (the various prices and prices/capital grant combinations)
includes indicator variables for year effects and year‐sample stratification categories. The general
pattern observed in Figure 6 is replicated.
There are two insurance prices (p=1 and p =4) at which some farmers received capital grants and others
did not. At p=4, the quantity demanded is higher among those who received the capital grant (78%
versus 70%, p‐value from joint test of equality of coefficients at p=1 and p=4 = 0.01, reported at bottom
of table). This contradicts the conclusion of section 5.2 above: with CARA preferences, insurance
demand at a specific price should be independent of the capital grant. If farmers have decreasing
absolute risk aversion then the demand for insurance at a fixed price should be smaller for those
farmers who received the capital grants.
A more encompassing theory is required to understand the higher demand for insurance by those with
the capital grant than by those without the capital grant. First, if the receipt of a capital grant increases
recipient farmers’ trust that payouts will be made on the index insurance when a trigger event occurs,
then insurance demand will be higher at any price for those who receive a grant. Second, insurance

26

demand may increase with the capital grant if there are unobserved informal insurance mechanisms
that guarantee a minimum consumption level. This would work through a wealth effect from the cash
grant: the cash grant reduces the likelihood that this limited liability feature of the consumption
allocation comes into play, thus increasing the effective risk aversion of farmers who are recipients of
the capital grants. However, in Table 2, Column 2 we show that the demand for insurance, conditional
on the insurance price, is uncorrelated with baseline household non‐land wealth. We divide our
measure of wealth by 250 cedis so that wealth is measured in “capital grant units” to ease comparison
across columns 1 and 2, and the result is a point estimate of 0.00 and a standard error of 0.001. We
return to this combination of results – that insurance demand increases with the receipt of a capital
grant, but is not correlated with household wealth ‐‐ in section 6.4. Third, although the grants had not
been paid at the time of insurance purchase, the expectation of the grant may have made individuals
more likely to use available cash for the insurance, rather than investment in the farm. This seems
implausible to explain the result, however, given the low cost of insurance (1 or 4 GHC per acre) relative
to expenditures on risky inputs. Finally, an experimenter or “NGO” effect may have occurred, in which
individuals who receive the grant were more likely to buy the insurance in order to reciprocate to the
NGO for giving them the capital grant.
In Table 2 Columns 2‐4 we limit the sample to the first two years of the data because those are the years
for which we have information on farmer investment. In columns 1, 2 and 3, the dependent variable is
equal to 1 if farmer i has insurance in year t and 0 otherwise. In column 4, the dependent variable is an
indicator variable that the farmer has both insurance and a capital grant in year t. Columns 3 and 4,
therefore, report the first stage estimates for the instrumental variables regressions we implement
below. The instrumental variable specification requires one key assumption regarding the exclusion
restriction: that the mere offer of insurance did not constitute a conveyance of information, such that
even those who did not accept the offer of insurance shifted their existing beliefs regarding the marginal
returns to agricultural investment. As the marketing of insurance was not delivered alongside any
technical assistance on farming, we believe this is a reasonable assumption to make.

6.2 Investment and Insurance
Table 3 presents estimates of the regression analogues of Figures 1‐4, using the two years of data for
which we have information on farmer investments. The regressions are
(30)

Yit   0   I I it   B I it  K it   K K it   X it   it

27

where I it is an indicator variable that farmer i has rainfall index insurance in year t and Kit is an indicator
that the farmer has a capital grant only in year t. X it is a vector which includes indicator variables for the
second year, the sampling strata, and interactions of these. I it is endogenous because it depends on
farmer demand for insurance. We instrument using the randomized prices of insurance, interacted with
an indicator of receiving a capital grant, as shown in Table 2.
In Table 3, we present the outcomes roughly chronologically, i.e., investment decisions that are ex‐ante
with respect to rainfall realization, then ex‐post. Columns 1 and 2 are unambiguously ex‐ante: land
preparation costs (largely tractor rental) and the number of acres cultivated. For both, the insurance
leads to large increases relative to the means of the control group farmers. Expenditure on chemicals
(mostly fertilizer) is somewhat ambiguous with respect to timing of rainfall, as early‐season rainfall is
realized before fertilizer is applied. As with land preparation and number of acres cultivated, we observe
a large increase, relative to the control group mean. The impact on wages paid to hired labor (Column 4)
and the opportunity cost of family labor (Column 5, priced at gender‐community‐season specific wages)
is not significant statistically, but also large and similarly sized relative to the control group.22 We do find
one effect from the capital grant alone: farmers who receive a capital grant alone have higher
expenditures on chemicals compared to control group farmers ($56, se = 17), which is 13% of the
average capital grant amount of $420. We also find an additive effect, but just for chemical investments:
those who receive the capital and insurance invest $66 (se = 16) more than those who receive just the
insurance. These increases in expenditure on chemicals associated with the capital grant are consistent
with the model in section 2.2 for farmers with decreasing absolute risk aversion, although the
magnitudes are strikingly large. We return to these results in section 6.4.
Thus farmers with insurance invest more in cultivation. Column 6 shows that total cultivation
expenditure, inclusive of the value of household and exchange labor (valued at community‐gender‐
season specific wages), is $266 (se=134) higher for farmers with insurance than for farmers in the
control group. Mean expenditure in the control group is $2058, so the magnitude of the increase
associated with insurance is quite large. The point estimate of the additional investment associated with
receiving a capital grant along with the insurance is positive but not statistically significantly different
from zero ($72, se = 139). The point estimate of joint effect of insurance and the capital grant is to
increase investment by $338 (p‐value 0.02 reported in the final row of the table). The capital grant alone
has no significant effect on investment ($2, se = 149). These results are consistent with those shown in

22

The measurement of family labor used on farms remains a significant empirical challenge for an annual
retrospective survey. Future field work aims to address this more.

28

Figure 1 and are inconsistent with the presence of binding credit constraints. Farmers with insurance are
able to find the resources to increase investment in their farms.
Column 7 reports that the total value of production may be higher for households with insurance, but
the estimate is not statistically significant ($104, se = 81). The joint effect of insurance and a capital
grant is large and significant ($234, p‐value=0.01, from a control group mean of 1177). Even if
statistically significant, the increase in the value of output is not sufficiently large to generate additional
profits. In no group can we reject the hypothesis that the higher value of output after treatment is equal
to the increase in total expenditure.
There are two important issues to keep in mind when interpreting results on farm profits (e.g.,
subtracting the effects in column 6 from those in column 7). First, the most important component of
total costs is the value of household labor. But the market for hired labor is thin and it is not clear that
this observed wage is the appropriate opportunity cost of family labor (similar results are found with
respect to cows in India, where profits are positive only if family labor is valued at zero, see (Anagol,
Etang, and Karlan 2012). This may be the most important reason for the observation that profits are
typically negative in this and similar data from rural west Africa (profits turn positive only at the 60th
percentile of realized profits in the control group when family labor valued at gender‐community‐season
specific wages, whereas profits turn positive at the 15th percentile of realized profits in the control group
when family labor is valued at zero). Second, we have data for only two years of cultivation outcomes,
and the effect of additional investment in farm inputs on output depends upon the realization of
aggregate weather shocks. The increase in harvest value that we observe with insurance and capital
grants is conditional on this realization, and may be higher or lower in other rainfall conditions.23
We conclude the discussion of Table 3 with a cautionary note on the comparability of the treatment
effect point estimates for insurance and capital: they are difficult to compare except through the lens of
cost‐effectiveness in a program evaluation. However, such a lens is not exactly right for insurance, since
as we discuss in Section 7.1 below there is demand for insurance at commercially viable prices; a similar
point could be made regarding capital, that a lending market if viable could alleviate capital constraints,
but obviously a lending market would likely lead to less behavior change than giving out grants. Note
that in a world in which both are fully subsidized, the cost of the rainfall insurance is an order of
magnitude less than the cost of the capital grant, while the consequential behavior change is an order of

23

In Table 4, we see that there is some variation in rainfall across the 4 rainfall gauges in our survey area, but this
additional source of variation is modest because of the geographical proximity of all the stations.

29

magnitude more. Hence the cost effectiveness is unambiguous and striking: if using subsidy money to
generate higher farm investments, rainfall insurance grants are far more cost‐effective than cash grants.
Next, in Table 4, we examine the riskiness of investment. We do this by using the same specification as
in Column 7 of Table 3, but adding independent variables for total rain and the interaction of total rain
with treatment assignment. A positive coefficient on the interaction term, when predicting harvest
value, implies farmers made investments that were more sensitive to rainfall if they had insurance.
Table 4 Column 1 shows that indeed this is the case: insurance alone at zero rainfall leads to ‐$1,069
(se=596) lower output, and for each millimeter of rainfall the output increases by $157 (se=76) more for
those with insurance than for those in the control group. With rainfall data in the range of 6 to 9
hundred millimeters, this implies that the impact of insurance on harvest value goes from ‐$127 to $344
from the low end range of rainfall to the high end. The increase in responsiveness of output to rainfall in
the capital grant is less precisely estimated ($125, se = 84), thus it is difficult to draw similar conclusions
for the shift in riskiness for those in the capital group. The additive effect for both insurance and capital
over the direct effects of each is also imprecisely estimated but oppositely signed, creating an
imprecisely estimated net null effect.
Column 2 of Table 4 shows that insured farmers shifted the mix of their crops to highly‐rainfall sensitive
maize, the crop for which the insurance product was designed. Insured farmers increased the share of
their land planted to maize by 9 percentage points (se=3, control group farmers planted maize on 31%
of their cultivated acres). Capital grant recipients increased the share of their land planted with maize by
12 percentage points (se=3.4). Those who received both capital and insurance, however, did not shift
more into maize production than those who received insurance alone (4 percentage points, se = 2.9).
Columns 3‐6 of Table 4 examine the responsiveness of investments in less risky inputs to the insurance
and capital grant treatments. In Column 3 we show that insured households reduce their income from
fruit crops (primarily mango in this region) by $1.16 per week (se $0.66, mean weekly income in the
control group is $1.84). Mango, the most important such crop, is very drought resistant and yields badly
when there is abundant rain due to anthracnose and pests (Sthapit and Scherr 2012). Columns 4‐6
examine nonfarm enterprises, the returns from which may be less sensitive to rainfall risk than are the
returns to rainfed agriculture itself. Column 4 shows that insured households that do not receive a
capital grant are six percentage points less likely to have any non‐farm income generating activity (se =
3.3 pp, and 26% of control group households had some non‐farm income generating activity). Likewise,
Column 5 shows that insured households that do not receive a capital grant have on average 0.11 fewer
members engaged in nonfarm occupations (se = 0.06, control group households had an average of 0.4

30

members engaged in nonfarm occupations). Insured farmers shift the overall portfolio of their activities
to take on more risk, and specifically risk along the dimension covered by the rainfall index insurance.
Columns 7‐9 of Table 4 provide evidence on the welfare impacts of insurance and grants. 23 percent of
control group respondents report that they or another adult in their household have missed meals over
the past 12 months because they could not afford enough food. This proportion is reduced by 8
percentage points (se = 3.3) among those who are insured, also by 8 percentage points among those
who received a capital grant (se = 3.7), and by an additional 3 percentage points among those who
received both (se = 3). The dependent variable in Column 8 of Table 4 is total revenue from farming: the
value of harvest (including own‐consumed production), plus the value of any insurance payouts (net of
the cost of the insurance premiums). Total revenue is $285 higher for farmers who are insured (se = $83,
mean among the control group is $1179). There is no significant additional effect for those who received
the capital grant as well as insurance, nor any effect for those who received the capital grant alone.
Column 9 of Table 4 examines the postharvest liquid real assets of farmers, which are comprised of the
value of their livestock holdings and the value of their stocks of grain.24 Postharvest assets are $529
higher for insured farmers (se = $231, mean among the control group is $1761). Farmers who received
the capital grant hold $620 more assets in the postharvest period than the control group (se = $267);
there is no significant additional effect for those farmers who received the capital grant as well as
insurance.
Table 5 shows the heterogeneous effects of insurance and the capital grants across four key household
characteristics. First we consider pretreatment wealth. The interquartile range of wealth is
approximately $380. The effect of being insured on investment is approximately $95 larger for a
household at the 25th percentile of the wealth distribution than it is for a household at the 75th
percentile. With decreasing absolute risk aversion, the introduction of insurance is associated with a
larger increase in investment for households with a lower level of wealth. Similarly, we find that the
impact of a capital grant is m less for a wealthier than for a less wealthy household, although this result
is not statistically significant.
Three more interactions are explored in columns 2‐4. For the quarter of households headed by someone
who can read, insurance is associated with a much larger but also imprecisely estimated investment

24

Both formal and informal financial borrowing and saving is unimportant in the study area, and because of its
sensitivity we have approximately 200 nonresponses to questions on these. Replicating column 9 adding financial
saving minus debt yields very similar estimates: postharvest assets are $631 (se=$260) higher for insured farmers
and $702 (se=$298) higher for farmers who received the capital grant. There is no significant additional effect for
those who received the cash grant along with insurance ($379, se=$252).

31

than for the other three quarters of households in the sample ($514, se = 251). Interpretation of this
interaction is speculative, of course, but it may have something to do with the household’s ability to
understand the insurance product, or with the level of communication and trust established between
the insurance sales agents and the household head. Farm investments by older household heads are
also less responsive to insurance than those of younger heads (‐$12, se=6.6, per year); this also may
reflect the trust established with the young sales agents or greater confidence in financial innovations
among younger household heads. There is no evidence of differential impacts of insurance according to
the size of the household. In column 5, we simultaneously examine all four of these interactions. The
wealth and age interactions with insurance both remain approximately as large and retain their
statistical significance.25

6.3 The Insurance Market, Heterogeneity, and Separation
In Table 6, we examine the effects of differential selection into the insured pool as the price changes as
discussed in section 5.1, and also the separation implications of the availability of insurance, as derived
in equation (24). Recall that for a given farmer, the treatment effect on investment of the availability of
insurance is smaller when the insurance is sold at a higher price. However, at higher prices, more risk
averse farmers differentially remain in the insured pool and the treatment effects on investment of
insurance availability are larger for these farmers. We show in Table 6 that there is no strong evidence
that one of these effects outweighs the other. To simplify the presentation, we consider a binary
classification of prices into “low” (price less than or equal to GHC 4) and “high” (greater than GHC 4).
With a strict threshold at 90%, only for family labor can we reject the null hypothesis that the impact of
insurance is the same at high prices and at low prices (p=0.05; the  2 (1) test statistic for the equality of
the effect at low and high prices is reported for each investment in the final row of the table). However,
three other results are close: land preparation costs (p‐value of 0.104) and hired labor (p‐value of
0.151), and ultimately harvest value (p‐value 0.134). The treatment heterogeneity with respect to
insurance prices apparently is different for these different inputs: increasing in price for land
preparation costs and for hired labor, but decreasing in price for family labor.
In one of the years of our intervention, capital grants were randomly allocated to some households who
also had access to (randomly priced) insurance. Where there is no basis risk, investment choices are
independent of preferences and wealth. Conditional on the insurance price and the physical
25

Appendix Table 4 shows the same heterogeneity analysis as in Table 5, except just for the two unambiguously
ex‐ante investment decisions, land preparation costs and number of acres cultivated. Results are similar, with the
exception of age, for which we do not find a statistically significant result from insurance, but we do from capital.

32

characteristics of the farm, investment should also be orthogonal to household wealth, household
demographics, lagged shocks to profits, off‐farm employment, or any other household characteristic.
The concern is that such variables might be correlated with unobserved dimensions of land quality,
which might affect the responsiveness of investment. The randomization of the capital grant ensures
that in expectation there is no such correlation here. We show in column 3 that for those who purchase
insurance at a low price, receipt of a capital grant is associated with a large and statistically significant
increase in expenditure on farm chemicals ($66, s.e.=16). This violates the separation result,
underscoring the importance of basis risk for these farmers’ investment decisions.
We showed in section 5 that if households have CARA preferences, investment will be invariant to the
capital grant even if there is basis risk. However, for more general preferences we can expect
investment to be increasing in the capital grant when the farmer has access to insurance but there is
basis risk. For example, with CRRA preferences

u '(c)
will decline with the receipt of a capital grant
u '(cH )

and thus investment will increase. However, this increase is observed only for chemical purchases.

6.4 Learning, Social Interactions and the Demand for Insurance
We are motivated to explore an alternative hypothesis associated with the trustworthiness of insurance
by our observation (column 1 of Table 2, test at bottom of table, F‐test 5.939, p‐value =0.003) that
insurance purchases at a given price are higher for those farmers who received a cash grant (but not
higher for wealthier households (column 2)). This result is consistent with the hypothesis that farmers
are not entirely confident that the promised insurance payouts will be made when trigger events occur
(in the notation of 5.2,  N  0 ). If this concern is mitigated by the provision of the capital grant, then
insurance demand and investment would respond as well.
There are alternative mechanisms that could increase the confidence of purchasers of insurance that
 N is small or zero. The two most obvious are one’s own (good) experience with the insurance product,
or one’s friends and neighbor’s experience with the product. Therefore, we estimate

(31)

I it   IP I i .t 1Payi ,t 1   NP I i ,t 1 (1  Payi ,t 1 )   SP S ( Pay )ij,t 1   SNP S ( NoPay )ij,t 1
 SK S (Capital )ij,t 1   Pay Payi ,t 1   SN Numij,t 1   P Pit  X it   it

Iit‐1 is an indicator variable that farmer i had insurance in t‐1. Payi,t‐1 is an indicator variable that rainfall
in the community of farmer i in t‐1 was such that there would have been an insurance payout in the

33

j

community. Numi,t‐1 is the number of individuals in farmer i’s social network of type j in t‐1.
the fraction of members of that network who were insured and received a payout in t‐1.

j
S(Pay)i,t‐1
is

j
S(NoPay)i,t‐1
is

the fraction of members of that network who were insured and did not receive an insurance payout in t‐
j

1. S(Capital)i,t‐1 is the fraction of members of that network who received a capital grant in t‐1. Pit is the
price at which i is offered insurance. X it is a vector which includes indicator variables for the second
year, the sampling strata, and interactions of these.
The interactions of Ii,t‐1 and

Payi,t‐1 are instrumented with interactions of the randomized prices at which

i was offered insurance in period t‐1 and whether a payout trigger event occurred for i.
j
j
S(Pay)i,t‐1
and S(NoPay)i,t‐1
depend on the insurance demands of individuals within i’s network; they are

instrumented with the share of individuals within i’s network (of type j) who were offered insurance at
each of the randomized prices, times the occurrence of a payout trigger event.
Estimates of (31) are presented Table 7. Each pair of columns represents estimates using a different
definition of the social network: in the first, links are defined by pairs who have ever lent to or borrowed
from each other; in the second links are based on family relationships; and in the third, links are based
on sharing advice regarding farming. For each network type, results are presented using first the
number of acres worth of insurance purchased and second using a binary indicator of insurance take up.
The first notable pattern is that current demand for insurance is strongly associated with an individual’s
lagged experience with payouts. A farmer who had insurance in the previous year and received a payout
purchases 0.61 to 0.88 acres more insurance than a farmer who did not have insurance in the past year
(the mean amount of insurance purchased conditional on purchasing some insurance is 5.5 acres, and is
2.5 acres unconditionally). The result is similar but less strong statistically for the binary outcome of
take‐up (Columns 2, 4 and 6; 4to 5 percentage point increase in takeup over a mean take up rate of 44
percent among those offered insurance). Furthermore, and with important (and disturbing) implications
for market development, a consistent and negative pattern is found for farmers who had insurance the
prior year but did not receive a payout. These farmers purchased insurance for between 1.05 and 1.22
fewer acres than did farmers who did not have insurance in the previous year, and their take up of
insurance was between 17 and 18 percentage points lower (all results significant with p‐values < 0.01).
Our interpretation of this result is that farmers who receive a payout in t‐1 revise downward their
estimate of  N , the probability that a state will occur in which they should be paid but in which the
insurer reneges, and that farmers who were insured but who do not receive a payout revise  N upward.

34

Similarly, farmers may be updating their priors (whether correctly or not) regarding the extent of basis
risk in the contract. Unfortunately it is difficult to examine variation in basis risk in this study. We do not
have randomized placement of the rainfall gauges, as Mobarak and Rosenzweig (2012) do, and
proximity to a rainfall gauge is correlated with market access, road quality, distance to cities, since the
gauges are in principal towns in each area.26
The second notable pattern is that insurance demand is influenced by the payout experience of others
within an individual’s social network. For each of the three network definitions, an increase in the
number of an individual’s network members who had insurance and a payout last year is associated with
an increase in the amount of insurance demanded, and an increase in the take up of insurance. These
effects are statistically and substantively significant, but not as large as the effect from one’s own
experience. The number of acres purchased increases by 0.48 (se=0.23), 0.15 (se=0.07) and 0.13
(se=0.07) for each credit, familial relationship, and farming peer who receives a payout, respectively.
Similar effects are found when examining the probability of buying any insurance (Column 2, 4 and 6).
However, we observe no deleterious effects of peers not receiving a payout: an increase in the number
of peers who are insured and who do not receive a payout does not lower an individual’s demand for
insurance. It is possible that there is less discussion about the absence of payouts in these social
networks than there is about the receipt of payouts.
There is also an increase in the demand for insurance associated with the share of one’s extended family
and farming information networks that received a capital grant in the previous year. This finding is in
accord with our earlier result (Table 2) that one’s own receipt of a capital grant increases demand for
insurance. We interpret this pattern, as we did with one’s own experience with the insurance, as
providing evidence that there is not complete trust that payouts will be made, and that the extent of
this mistrust is influenced by the experience a farmer and his social network have had with the product.
Two alternative interpretations exist: an income effect, and a behavioral recency bias. With incomplete
insurance, farmers who received a payout last year could have a lower income than farmers who did not
have insurance, and farmers who did not receive a payout could have a higher income than uninsured
farmers. With increasing absolute risk aversion, that pattern could translate into changes in insurance
26

Farmers in northern Ghana appear cognizant of this type of basis risk. With 675 households offered insurance in
year 2, we conducted a supplementary survey partly to assess their understanding of basis risk and the correlation
of their rainfall with the rainfall of the nearest gauge. Ninety percent of the household heads listed too much or
too little rain as the cause of most of their crop damage. Among those whose assigned rainfall station was within
10 miles of their farm, 51 percent thought that the rainfall pattern at the rainfall station is similar or very similar to
the rainfall on their plots. But for households with plots further from the rainfall station, only 39 percent thought
that the rainfall pattern at the station is similar to that on their plots.

35

demand with the signs we observe in Table 7. This logic carries over to realizations within social
networks, provided that there is (unobserved to us) risk sharing within these networks.27 The income
effect interpretation, however, is not consistent with the finding that capital grants in one’s social
network increase insurance demand: if there are unobserved transfers this should be associated with a
decline in insurance demand.
A second possible alternative interpretation of these results is behavioral. Rainfall patterns in the semi‐
arid tropics of West Africa exhibit no serial correlation (Nicholson and Palao 1993). However, our results
so far are consistent with farmers who act otherwise. The results are consistent with “recency bias”, in
which farmers who experienced a trigger event last year overestimate the probability of its
reoccurrence this year and similarly farmers who did not experience a trigger event underestimate the
probability of a payout this year (data from the United Stated, e.g., find such a bias for the purchase of
flood insurance (Browne and Hoyt 2000)). The effect of community level payout trigger events reported
in Table 7 provides evidence that recency bias is indeed playing a role in insurance demand. This variable
is an indicator equal to one if a rainfall event occurred last year that would have triggered an insurance
payout to anyone with insurance in the respondent’s community. We see that demand for insurance is
significantly higher for individuals in communities that would have received a payout in the previous
year. However, even conditional on trigger events occurring last year, both one’s own actual experience
with the insurance product, and the experience of members of one’s social network remain important
determinants of insurance demand. Thus both recency bias and the evolving degree of trust that
payouts will be made when trigger events occur are important for the demand for index insurance.
This result can help explain why rainfall insurance markets are scant. Given the importance of basis risk,
the main promise of rainfall insurance is to protect from the rare disasters, the low‐probability high‐loss
events. Yet when payouts are rare, demand is harmed. This could partially explain why insurance firms
have not historically offered rainfall index insurance, however this should also motivate product
experimentation (such as including small payouts for less extreme outcomes) and other mechanisms for
building trust.

27

We have data on informal transfers, and there is no evidence of transfers associated with the realization of
insurance payouts. However, it is possible that there are transfers that are not recorded in our data. There is
qualitative evidence from focus group discussions and informal conversations with respondents of the importance
of informal transfers: narratives on the intervention say that some farmers finance insurance with loans from
informal networks.

36

7. Discussion of Results and Market Development
Several of these results resonate with existing and ongoing research on agricultural risk markets and
capital markets in other settings. Combining our results with lessons from complementary research
provides us with some clear guidance on the mechanisms driving rural financial markets (and their
failures). Such an understanding is helpful for companies, governments and other stakeholders who
seek prescriptions for improved policies, and for researchers who seek a deeper and more robust
understanding of capital and risk markets for agriculture in developing countries.
We start first by discussing the demand component of rainfall insurance. We then discuss the behavioral
response to receiving insurance and capital on investment decisions by farmers. Next, we discuss
implications for the returns to capital for smallholder farmers. We close by discussing the market
development issues as they have unfolded after these experiments.

7.1 Demand
Prior studies have highlighted the demand conundrum: why is it so low, despite the evidence that
farmer behavior is shaped by risk? In one of the first studies on the demand for rainfall insurance, (Giné
and Yang 2009) shows that when rainfall insurance is bundled with credit (and priced at the actuarially
fair rate plus costs), demand for the credit actually falls. Their initial hypothesis was that the rainfall
insurance should have made farmers more likely to take on risk, which would thus motivate higher
levels of borrowing to invest in a new crop. To explain their finding, the authors conjecture that
borrowers already had implicit insurance, in that they could default on their loan with bad rainfall
shocks, thus the bundled insurance was actually overinsuring them, and thus likewise depressed
demand for the bundled credit. We are learning that many factors drive demand, such as trust (Cole,
Sampson, and Zia 2011), social networks (J. Cai 2012a), provision of financial literacy on insurance (J. Cai
2012a; Giné, Ngatia, and Karlan 2011), and simple framing and marketing of the insurance (Cole,
Sampson, and Zia 2011).
Price is a consistent driver, and not simply due to liquidity. The closest study to ours in terms of
completeness of the range of prices tested is (Mobarak and Rosenzweig 2012) they find strikingly similar
demand curves: 15% purchase rate at market prices (versus 11% in our study); about 22% purchase rate
when priced at a 10% discount off of market price (no comparable price point in our study); about a 38%
purchase rate when priced at a 50% discount off of market price, thus about actuarially fair (versus 42%
in our study at near actuarially fair prices); and about a 60% purchase rate when priced at a 75%

37

discount off of market price (versus 67% in our study when priced at about a 75% discount). Our
additional price points are almost linear extrapolations from the above. We are aware of one other
study which randomized the price of rainfall insurance, (Cole, Sampson, and Zia 2011). Although Cole et
al tested a smaller range of prices, they found similarly steep elasticities.
The observed elasticity suggests several areas for further research, and policy exploration. First, we need
to examine whether liquidity could explain the steep demand curve. In our setup the cash drop (and its
announcement) came after the insurance sales, hence this, combined with the fact that wealthier
individuals do not exhibit flatter demand curves, and combined with the fact that individuals in the
insurance only treatment group in the Grant Experiment managed to increase investment substantially,
suggests liquidity is not the driving factor.28
Given the evidence that experience and trust matter as well as price, there is a trade‐off in index
insurance design between lower price by focusing payouts on rare adverse events and payout schemes
that include high‐probability events, products that effectively have a savings component to it so that
individuals get what they perceive as a payout in almost all states of the world. Such approaches are not
uncommon in developed countries either, for example with car insurance policies that reduce future
premiums when no claims are made (this also is a likely mechanism of dealing with adverse selection,
not merely trust).

7.2 Investment Response
Given typically low take‐up rates of the rainfall insurance, the existing literature is light on investment
response (statistical power issues make it difficult to detect, particularly given the difficulty in measuring
many farm inputs precisely). Two exceptions to our knowledge in the recent literature are able to focus
on investment response, and both find results that point in the same direction as those of this paper,
that risk‐taking and investment increase even absent any capital infusion. (Cole et al. 2012) employ the
same approach we do in the first year of our study, providing insurance at zero price. Thus, as long as
individuals trust the insurance provider, and basis risk is not too high (two nontrivial conditions, see
(Mobarak and Rosenzweig 2012) for clear evidence that basis risk matters), such “insurance drops”
provide an estimate of the impact on behavior from reducing risk with respect to rainfall on a general

28

Cole et al (2011) finds evidence that liquidity matters (at least in combination with a mental accounting story in
which transfers by an NGO “stick” to that context and such proceeds are more likely to be used when the NGO
then offers to sell an item). The survey payment drives up the demand for the insurance: when cash paid for
survey completion equals the premium price, the take‐up rate increased by 40 percentage points, a 150% increase
in likelihood of take‐up.

38

population, not just those who take‐up at a positive price. H. Cai et al (2010) similarly finds in China that
insurance for sows leads to higher investment in sows for those who are willing to buy the insurance,
and J. Cai (2012b) finds an increase in production area and borrowing, and a reduction in diversification
and savings, for tobacco farmers from a government weather insurance program in China.
Despite the typical research and policy focus on capital constraints for smallholder farmers, we find
weaker evidence that such constraints bind. There is a strong investment response from the insurance
treatment even with no capital grant. The capital treatment does lead to a modest increase in cash
expenditures, but no overall increase in investment. This is a striking contrast to capital grant studies
that have focused on businesses outside agriculture: e.g., de Mel et al (2008; 2009), which find a large
investment response, although only an increase in profits for men, not women; Fafchamps et al (2011),
which finds large investment response, but only with in‐kind grants, and less so for cash grants; and
Karlan et al (2012), which finds large investment response, but either no impact or negative impact on
profits. Our results do not mean that capital constraints do not bind; they may mean that the risk‐
adjusted returns to investment in farming without insurance are lower than returns outside agriculture.
Furthermore, the fact that the farmers respond so much to the insurance‐only treatment implies that
they anticipate an inability to smooth over time in the event of the realization of an adverse aggregate
transitory rainfall shock (as explained in Section 2.3). This implies capital and savings constraints bind
when such shocks occur, although these were not realized during our study period.

7.3 Returns to Capital
We are not able to use our experiment to estimate the returns to capital, since labor inputs shift along
with the provided capital. In the de Mel et al (2008) capital grant experiment, little change in labor
inputs is observed, thus leading to their conclusion that they measure returns to capital. In our setting,
labor inputs are changing with the capital grant, and we do not have a separately varying instrument for
labor, thus we are not able to separately identify the return to labor and capital (Beaman et al (2013)
provides a similar result). We also note that even if the quantity of labor remained the same, we would
be concerned in our case that the quality of labor inputs might be changing with the grant. Measuring
returns to capital is not easy with simply one instrument. Instead our capital grant should be thought of
as testing how investment behavior changes when capital constraints are relaxed.
Returns to capital no doubt are not homogeneous across farmers, and effective policy on risk and capital
markets must take into consideration not just the average returns to farmers from relaxing capital or
credit constraints, but also the heterogeneity in returns across farmers. Suri (2011) demonstrates this
clearly: she finds that in Kenya low adoption of hybrid maize is driven by heterogeneity in returns. Other

39

research has sought as well to estimate returns to capital, but stated more conservatively has found
considerable heterogeneity (de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff 2009). Returns to capital in agriculture
vary as well with the realization of aggregate shocks. Therefore, even with a set of instruments
sufficiently rich to identify the returns to capital, and to deal with heterogeneity across farmers, these
observed returns are conditional on the realized weather and prices. One has obtained a single
observation from the distribution of potential returns, which will vary over time as these environmental
variables change. It is clear, then, that further research to tackle the returns to capital question is
required.

7.4 Market Development
The insurance products and marketing processes evolved over the duration of the study, based on both
observed farmer preferences and increasing national interest in growing a sustainable weather
insurance industry. Starting in Year 3, the partnerships with Ghana Agricultural Insurance Programme
(GAIP) and Ghana Insurers Association (GIA), along with modifications to the product, have allowed for
expanded market coverage. The Year 4 product (i.e., after the results reported herein) is more
conservative than what was tested in years 1 to 3. We experimented with product generosity, marketing
style and new locations. In terms of product generosity, we responded to previous year feedback from
the insured that they would prefer a more generous product at a higher price; however, despite offering
a more generous product that would have generated a payout in the fairly dry third year, demand for
this more generous product in the fourth year was low. In terms of marketing style, we responded to
stakeholder interest in testing more sustainable and cost‐effective marketing processes by marketing to
entire communities with interactive sessions (thus avoiding the costly one‐on‐one marketing that was
used in the first years of the study); despite pre‐alerting communities to these marketing sessions and
waiting two weeks before returning to collect premiums, demand remained low. Finally, in terms of new
locations, we and stakeholders (GAIP, GIA and SwissRe) were interested in studying whether presence of
historical marketing and payout activities—and thus of institutional trust—mattered to demand for a
more generous product; again, demand was low in all areas.
Year 5 is now beginning. Of particular concern to all stakeholders is the availability of good‐quality, real‐
time rainfall data. Due to the growing public and private interest in weather insurance in Ghana, GIA and
GAIP are piloting two new approaches to data collection: automated weather stations and satellite data.
Three automated weather stations have been installed in the study area alone, and will be available for
indexing in 2014. The associations have also partnered with the TAMSAT group (Tropical Applications of
Meteorology using SATellite data and ground‐based observations) at the University of Reading, in order
to determine the feasibility of satellite rainfall data. Both automated weather stations and satellite

40

rainfall data are promising innovations for capturing high‐quality rainfall data in real time, and further
reducing the cost of insurance administration and thus the cost of premiums for smallholder farmers in
Africa.

8. Conclusion
Risk matters. Of course, we are not the first to discuss this in theory, or to show evidence of this. The
market for rainfall insurance is rapidly advancing; for example, in India, over 9 million farmers have
rainfall insurance, as part of a mandatory‐for‐borrowers and subsidized program (Dercon et al. 2012).
This project advances our knowledge by its comprehensive approach to addressing both capital and risk
constraints for smallholder farmers, and tying the lessons to a model to help understand more about the
underlying market failures that wreak havoc with the ability and willingness of the poor to invest more
in their farms and increase their expected farm profits.
This paper also has an important lesson for the microcredit community, both researchers and
practitioners. Although microcredit has traditionally focused on entrepreneurs, any lending in rural
areas undoubtedly involves smallholder farmers. We learn here however that capital constraints alone
are not the problem, that risk is a key hindrance to investment and thus improved income and growth.
Microcredit networks and infrastructure could be used to build better risk management tools. Although
there has been some attempt at this, it has traditionally been life insurance, not rainfall or agricultural
insurance of some sort. We learn here that mitigating risk alone, without an infusion of capital, leads to
higher investment. Thus the lesson should not be to simply bundle rainfall insurance with loans but
rather to use the delivery infrastructure, and perhaps the trust that microfinance institutions or banks
may have in the community, in order to market and distribute rainfall insurance.
We (and others) focus on rainfall insurance because it does not have the adverse selection and moral
hazard issues that are potentially problematic for crop or pest insurance. But index insurance necessarily
involves basis risk. Further research is needed to understand how to overcome adverse selection and
moral hazard problems in more general crop insurance. Forty years ago many conjectured that adverse
selection and moral hazard made credit markets impossible to succeed for the poor, yet decades of
innovation in microcredit has shown these to be mostly solvable problems. Similar innovation on
business processes, monitoring systems, and delivery vehicles to reduce information asymmetries and
transaction costs might make possible more comprehensive insurance and thus dramatic welfare
improvements for the poor. Here we have shown that risk, in general, hinders investment, and thus we

41

conjecture that reducing other non‐rainfall agricultural risk should lead to similar improvements in
investment.
For rainfall or other index insurance, we note several key lessons and areas for further research. First, it
is important to better understand the extent and implications for welfare of basis risk, and to improve
product design and data infrastructure to improve the connection between insurance payouts and
shocks to farm profits. Second, trust is a key issue, and this can be tackled through product design
(increasing states of the world with payouts), proper linkage with trusted institutions, as well as proper
regulation. Third, and this is partly a research methods question that also has policy implications, we
need to understand whether mental accounting is a key factor or not in the decision to purchase of
insurance. This has implications for how insurance is sold, if framing, timing and bundling with other
processes can significantly change the decision to purchase (nudges, as in Thaler and Sunstein (2009)).
Further tests could help illuminate this, for example by separating the liquidity shock entirely both in
name (i.e., have it come from a separate entity) and in timing. Further ideas could involve bundling the
insurance premium with input costs, or selling through mobile operators in ways similar to existing sales
of life insurance (“Tigo” 2012).
Ultimately we see large investment responses to relaxing risk constraints, thus we conjecture that the
rewards can be larger than the obstacles from a societal perspective. To have evidence rather than
conjecture, we need further work on returns to investment, to understand whether impact on farm
profits are low due to measurement issues, heterogeneity, suboptimal investment decisions or
additional constraints in complementary markets.
From a policy perspective, several important lessons come out of this study, and the progression of the
market in Ghana we believe is enlightening. The new product is fully commercialized, underwritten and
reinsured by SwissRe, and the market pricing confirms that what we had put forward as market prices in
the experiments reported in this paper were accurate. We see this work as demonstrating a proof of
concept, that risk matters and thus products that help reduce risk will lead to higher investment. The
next challenge is operational, to bring down costs of delivery and lower basis risk, and work is underway
by the insurance companies to do just that, with distribution through mobile money and improvements
in product design using remote sensing and more rainfall gauges.

42

References Cited
Anagol, Santosh, Alvin Etang, and Dean Karlan. 2012. “Continued Existence of Cows Disproves Central
Tenets of Capitalism.” Yale University Working Paper Available online:
http://karlan.yale.edu/p/Cows‐2012‐09‐22.pdf.
Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. 2013. “Pro tability of Fertilizer:
Experimental Evidence from Female Rice Farmers in Mali.” American Economic Review Papers &
Proceedings (May).
Browne, Mark J., and Robert E. Hoyt. 2000. “The Demand for Flood Insurance: Empirical Evidence.”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 20 (3) (May 1): 291–306. doi:10.1023/A:1007823631497.
Buera, Francisco J., and Yongseok Shin. 2011. “Self‐insurance Vs. Self‐financing: A Welfare Analysis of
the Persistence of Shocks.” Journal of Economic Theory 146 (3) (May): 845–862.
doi:10.1016/j.jet.2011.01.003.
Cai, Hongbin, Yuyu Chen, Hanming Fang, and Li‐An Zhou. 2010. “The Effect of Microinsurance on
Economic Activities: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Field Experiment.”
Cai, Jing. 2012a. “Social Networks and the Decision to Insure: Evidence from Randomized Experiments in
China”. University of California, Berkeley.
———. 2012b. “The Impact of Insurance Provision on Households Production and Financial Decisions.”
Working Paper.
Cole, Shawn, Xavier Gine, Jeremy Tobacman, Robert Townsend, Petia Topalova, and James Vickery.
2012. “Barriers to Household Risk Management: Evidence from India”. Working Paper 09‐116.
Harvard Business School.
Cole, Shawn, Xavier Giné, and James Vickery. 2011. “How Does Risk Management Influence Production
Decisions? Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Harvard Business School, World Bank, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
Cole, Shawn, Thomas Sampson, and Bilal Zia. 2011. “Prices or Knowledge? What Drives Demand for
Financial Services in Emerging Markets?” Journal of Finance 66 (6): 1933–1967.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Returns to Capital in
Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4):
1329–1372.
———. 2009. “Are Women More Credit Constrained? Experimental Evidence on Gender and
Microenterprise Returns.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3) (July): 1–32.
De Nicola, Francesca. 2012. “The Impact of Weather Insurance on Consumption, Investment, and
Welfare”. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2172422. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network.
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2172422.
Deaton, Angus. 1991. “Saving and Liquidity Constraints.” Econometrica 59 (5) (September 1): 1221–
1248. doi:10.2307/2938366.
Dercon, Stefan, Ruth Hill, Daniel Clarke, Ingo Outes‐Leon, and Alemayehu Taffesse. 2012. “Offering
Rainfall Insurance to Informal Insurance Groups: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Ethiopia.”
Fafchamps, Marcel. 1993. “Sequential Labor Decisions Under Uncertainty: An Estimable Household
Model of West‐African Farmers.” Econometrica 61 (5): 1173–97.
Fafchamps, Marcel, David McKenzie, Simon Quinn, and Christopher Woodruff. 2011. “Female
Microenterprises and the Flypaper Effect: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ghana”.
World Bank.
Fosu, Matthias, and Saa Dittoh. 2011. “Crop Response to Fertilizer in Northern Ghana”. Savannah
Agricultural Research Institute.

43

Giné, Xavier, Muthoni Ngatia, and Dean Karlan. 2011. “Social Networks, Financial Literacy and Index
Insurance.”
Giné, Xavier, and Dean Yang. 2009. “Insurance, Credit, and Technology Adoption: Field Experimental
Evidencefrom Malawi.” Journal of Development Economics 89 (1) (May): 1–11.
doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2008.09.007.
Hazell, P. B. R., Carlos Pomareda, and Alberto Valdés, ed. 1986. Crop Insurance for Agricultural
Development: Issues and Experience. Baltimore: International Food Policy Research Institute by
the Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hill, Ruth Vargas, and Luis Miguel Robles. 2011. “Flexible Insurance for Heterogeneous Farmers: Results
from a Small‐scale Pilot in Ethiopia”. IFPRI discussion paper 1092. International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI). http://econpapers.repec.org/paper/fprifprid/1092.htm.
Karlan, Dean, Ryan Knight, and Christopher Udry. 2012. “Hoping to Win, Expected to Lose: Theory and
Lessons on Micro Enterprise Development.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper w18325.
Kazianga, Harounan, and Christopher Udry. 2006. “Consumption Smoothing? Livestock, Insurance and
Drought in Rural Burkina Faso.” Journal of Development Economics 79 (2) (April): 413–446.
doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2006.01.011.
Mobarak, Ahmed, and Mark Rosenzweig. 2012. “Selling Formal Insurance to the Informally Insured”.
SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2009528. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network.
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2009528.
Moll, Benjamin. 2012. “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self‐Financing Undo Capital
Misallocation?” Princeton University Working Paper (August).
http://www.princeton.edu/~moll/TFPFF.pdf.
Nicholson, Sharon E., and Ian M. Palao. 1993. “A Re‐evaluation of Rainfall Variability in the Sahel. Part I.
Characteristics of Rainfall Fluctuations.” International Journal of Climatology 13 (4): 371–389.
doi:10.1002/joc.3370130403.
Scott, James C. 1976. The Moral Economy of the Peasant: Rebellion and Subsistence in Southeast Asia.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Sthapit, Sajal R., and Sara J. Scherr. 2012. “Tropical Fruit Trees and Climate Change.” In Tropical Fruit
Tree Species and Climate Change, 15–26. Bioversity International.
Suri, Tavneet. 2011. “Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption.” Econometrica 79
(1): 159–209. doi:10.3982/ECTA7749.
Thaler, Richard H, and Cass R Sunstein. 2009. Nudge : Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness. New York: Penguin Books.
“Tigo.” 2012. http://www.tigo.com.gh/Innovations/Tigo‐Family‐Care‐Insurance.aspx.
Yaro, J.A., and Z. Abraham. 2009. “Customary Land Tenure, Investment and Livelihoods Adaptation in
Northern Ghana.” Ogua Journal of Social Science 4 (3): 59–82.

44

Figure 1: Effect of Insurance and Cash Grants on Total Investment

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

CDF of Total Costs

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

CDF of Total Costs

0

1000

2000

Control

3000

4000

Insurance

0

1000

2000

Control

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .05

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

1000

2000
Control

3000

4000
Both

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .07
Note: Units are USD. Total Costs includes sum of chemicals, land preparatory costs, hired labor, and family labor (valued at gender/community/year specific wages).
Sample is Year One grant experiment, thus only Sample Frame One (see Appendix Table 1).

45

4000

Capital

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .21

CDF of Total Costs

0

3000

Figure 2: Effect of Insurance and Cash Grants on Chemical Expenditure

.2 .4 .6 .8

.2 .4 .6 .8

1

CDF of Chemicals

1

CDF of Chemicals

0

200

400

Control

600
Insurance

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

400
Control

600

800

400

600
Capital

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= 0

CDF of Chemicals

200

200
Control

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .03

0

0

1000

Both

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= 0
Note: Units are USD. Sample is Year One grant experiment, thus only Sample Frame One (see Appendix Table 1).

46

Figure 3: Effect of Insurance and Cash Grants on Area Cultivated

.2 .4 .6 .8

1

CDF of Cultivated Acres

.2 .4 .6 .8 1

CDF of Cultivated Acres

0

5

10

Control

15

0

Insurance

Control

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .04

1
.2 .4 .6 .8

5

10
Control

15

10

15
Capital

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .95

CDF of Cultivated Acres

0

5

20
Both

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .03
Note: Units are USD. Sample is Year One grant experiment, thus only Sample Frame One (see Appendix Table 1).

47

Figure 4: Effect of Insurance and Cash Grants on Value of Harvest

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

CDF of Harvest Value

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

CDF of Harvest Value

0

1000

2000

Control

3000

4000

Insurance

0

1000

2000

Control

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .21

3000

4000

Capital

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .98

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

CDF of Harvest Value

0

1000

2000
Control

3000

4000

Both

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .07
Note: Units are USD. Harvest value includes own-produced consumption, valued at community-specific market value. Sample is Year One grant experiment, thus only Sample Frame One (see Appendix Table 1).

48

Figure 5 Effect of Insurance and Cash Grants on total farm profits

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

CDF of Total Farm Profits

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

CDF of Total Farm Profits

-4000

-3000

-2000

-1000

Control

0

1000

-4000

-3000

Insurance

Control

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .28

0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

-3000

-2000
Control

-1000

0

-1000

0

1000

Both

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .39
Note: Units are USD. Total farm profits is the value of harvest (including own-consumed production) plus insurance payouts minus total costs.
Sample is Year One grant experiment, thus only Sample Frame One.

49

1000

Capital

p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .84

CDF of Total Farm Profits

-4000

-2000

Figure 6: Insurance Take‐up

Insurance Takeup

0

Fraction Purchasing Some Insurance
.2
.4
.6
.8

1

by Price per Acre (Cedis)

0

1

3

4

6

Note: Includes results from all three sample frames and years.

50

8

9

9.5

12

14

Figure 7: The Demand for Acres Insured

Insurance Demand

0

Fraction of Acreage Covered
.2
.4
.6
.8

1

by Price per Acre (Cedis)

0

1

3

4

6

Note: Includes results from all three sample frames and years.

51

8

9

9.5

12

14

Appendix Figure 1: Timeline of Activities

2008 Jun ‐ Aug
SURVEY
Baseline survey (GLSS5+)
N = 123

2010 Jan ‐ Mar
SURVEY
Baseline/follow‐up survey
N = 123

2009 Feb
SURVEY
Capital drop survey
N = 123

2011 Jan ‐ Mar
SURVEY
Baseline/follow‐up survey
N = 123

2010 Feb
SURVEY
Capital drop survey
N = 123

2010 Nov
SURVEY
Insurance survey
N = 123

2012 Jan ‐ Mar
SURVEY
Follow‐up survey
N = 123

2011 Dec
SURVEY
Insurance survey
N = 123

■ Dry season
■ Wet season
2009 Jun ‐ Aug
CAPITAL
Drop GHS 60 per acre
N = 123

2010 Jun ‐ Aug
CAPITAL
Drop GHS 350 per household
N = 123

2009 Mar ‐ Apr
2009 Nov ‐ Dec
INSURANCE
INSURANCE
Market free,
Market non‐comm products
non‐commercial product
at GHS 1, 2 per acre
N = 123
N = 123

2011 May ‐ Jun
2012 May ‐ Jun
INSURANCE
INSURANCE
Market comm products to individuals Market comm products to groups
at GHS 3, 6, 9 per acre
at GHS 10, 14 per acre
N = 123
N = 123

2010 Jan ‐ Feb
INSURANCE
Market non‐comm products at
GHS 8, 9.5, 12 & 14 per acre
N = 123
2009 Jul ‐ Aug
INSURANCE
Pay out GHS 60 per acre
N = 123

2010 Jul ‐ Aug
INSURANCE
Pay out GHS 20‐50 per acre
N = 123

2009 Jun ‐ Sep
INSURANCE COVERAGE

2008

2009

2010 Jun ‐ Sep
INSURANCE COVERAGE

2010

2011 May ‐ Sep
INSURANCE COVERAGE

2011

52

2011 Dec
INSURANCE
Outcome notification
N = 123
2012 May ‐ Sep
INSURANCE COVERAGE

2012

Appendix Figure 2: Northern Ghana Map with Rainfall Gauges and Farms in Study

53

Table 1: Baseline Statistics and Orthogonality Tests
Mean (standard errors)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(7)

Data Source:

Total acreage
Cultivated acreage

Chemical value

Year 2

All
6.45
(0.17)
7.80
(0.21)
7.02
(0.19)

Both
Capital
and
Insurance
6.12
(0.38)
8.44
(0.67)
7.31
(0.53)

234
(16)
65
(5)

301
(55)
81
(15)

0.15
(0.02)
47.79
(0.68)

0.15
(0.04)
47.42
(1.55)

Capital
6.40
(0.36)
7.33
(0.37)
6.75
(0.36)

F-test (p-value)
from regression
of var on both,
capital &
insurance

Insurance
6.47
(0.33)
8.17
(0.39)
7.17
(0.32)

Control
6.66
(0.33)
7.43
(0.35)
6.91
(0.33)

226
(22)
58
(7)

238
(30)
60
(9)

1.97
(0.12)
0.90
(0.44)

0.13
(0.03)
47.93
(1.31)

0.18
(0.03)
47.21
(1.22)

0.58
(0.63)
0.23
(0.88)

0.39
(0.76)
1.49
(0.22)
0.40
(0.75)

182
(22)
67
(12)

Family Labour

Head age

F-test from regression of each treatment
assignment on all above covariates
Observations

502

(11)

Year 1

Hired Labour

Head literate

(10)

Year 1 Followup Survey
(Baseline for Year 2 Price Experiment)

Total cost
Harvest value

(9)

GLSS5+
(Baseline for Year 1 Grant Experiment)

Year of Experiment:

Household size

(8)

0.15
(0.03)
48.68
(1.45)

Offered
Offered
insurance insurance
@ 1 cedi @ 4 cedis
6.31
6.35
(0.23)
(0.21)
6.26
5.03
(0.44)
(0.37)
4.59
4.17
(0.36)
(0.36)
1320
1118
(94)
(71)
794
647
(62)
(44)
90
88
(9)
(9)
213
209
(37)
(35)
901
720
(77)
(52)

Control
6.60
(0.31)
6.29
(0.57)
5.00
(0.43)
1430
(127)
764
(62)
114
(14)
307
(88)
883
(76)

1.49
0.17

0.71
0.66

0.46
0.86

1.03
0.41

1.59
0.12

1.48
0.16

0.70
0.69

95

117

135

155

268

258

150

F-test (p-value)
from regression of
var on p=1/p=4

0.35
(0.71)
2.78
(0.06)
1.00
(0.37)
2.65
(0.07)
2.07
(0.13)
1.65
(0.19)
1.02
(0.36)
2.24
(0.11)

Standard errors in parentheses. Total cost, hired labour and family labour data not available from GLSS5+ survey. Note that the number of observations in columns 810 varies, depending on missing data for each row. Also, not reported, for Year 1, t-tests for all pairwise comparisons of each covariate (rows above) for any treatment
versus control (1 test), each individual treatment versus control (3 tests) and each treatment against each other treatment (6 tests), for a total of 10 t-tests per
covariates, and 70 tests in total. Of these 70 tests, only one tests rejects the null hypothesis of equality at the 10% statistical significance level: harvest value of Both
Capital and Insurance versus Capital (p=0.03). Similarly, for Year 2, each covariate has 3 pairwise t-tests (p=1 vs p=4; p=1 vs control; p=4 vs control). Out of these 24 ttests, eight fail: total acreage (1 vs 4, p=0.03; 4 vs control, p=0.05), total costs (1 vs 4, p=0.09, 4 vs control, p=0.02); harvest value (1 vs 4, p=0.06); chemical values (4
vs control, p=0.1); family wages (1 vs 4, p=0.05; 4 vs control, p=0.07)

54

Table 2: Take-up of Insurance (First Stage)
OLS
(1)
Insurance
Dependent variable: Takeup = 1
Insurance Price = 0
1.00***
(0.000)
Insurance Price = 1
0.84***
(0.020)
Insurance Price = 3
0.59***
(0.029)
Insurance Price = 4
0.63***
(0.029)
Insurance Price = 6
0.51***
(0.029)
Insurance Price = 8
0.45***
(0.081)
Insurance Price = 9
0.36***
(0.024)
Insurance Price = 9.5
0.41***
(0.057)
Insurance Price = 12
0.18***
(0.063)
Insurance Price = 14
0.08**
(0.031)
Insurance Price = 0 AND Capital Grant Treatment
1.00***
(0.000)
Insurance Price = 1 AND Capital Grant Treatment
0.88***
(0.028)
Insurance Price = 4 AND Capital Grant Treatment
0.79***
(0.038)
Wealth at baseline (units = GHC wealth / average capital grant per household)
Observations
R-squared

3,314
0.711

F-test: (p=1)=(p=1&CapitalGrant) & (p=4)=(p=4&CapitalGrant), i.e. whether demand
differs at p = (1,4) for insurance with capital grant compared to demand at p = (1,4)
without capital grant
p-value

5.941
0.003

(2)

(3)

(4)
Insurance
and Capital
Takeup = 1

Insurance
Takeup = 1
1.00***
(0.001)
0.89***
(0.018)

Insurance
Takeup = 1
1.00***
(0.000)
0.84***
(0.020)

0.70***
(0.029)

0.63***
(0.029)

0.47***
(0.084)

0.45***
(0.081)

0.42***
(0.058)
0.17**
(0.070)
0.09**
(0.034)
1.00***
(0.001)
0.88***
(0.028)
0.78***
(0.038)
0.00
(0.001)
1,801
0.837

0.41***
(0.057)
0.18***
(0.063)
0.08**
(0.031)
1.00***
(0.000)
0.88***
(0.028)
0.79***
(0.038)

1.00
(.)
0.87***
(0.028)
0.78***
(0.038)

1,908
0.807

1,908
0.860

Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at community-year (i.e., unit of randomization of insurance prices). Column 1 includes 3 years of
demand data, whereas Columns 2-4 include only years 1 and 2 of demand data. Column 2 drops 107 observations due to missing wealth
information. All specifications include controls for full set of sample frame and year interactions (thus no constant). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.

55

Dependent variable:
Insured
Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Capital Grant Treatment
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Mean for Control
Chi2-test of Insured and Insured + Capital Grant Treatment
p value

Table 3: Impact on Investment and Harvest
IV
(1)
(2)
(3)
Land
Value of
Preparation
# of Acres
Chemicals
Costs
Cultivated
Used
25.53**
1.02**
37.90**
(12.064)
(0.420)
(14.854)
15.77
0.26
66.44***
(13.040)
(0.445)
(15.674)
15.36
0.09
55.63***
(13.361)
(0.480)
(17.274)
169.38***
8.12***
171.70***
(10.603)
(0.399)
(13.804)
2,320
0.017
189.1
8.889
0.003

2,320
0.143
5.921
7.125
0.008

2,320
0.041
158.3
36.15
0.000

(4)

(6)

(7)

Wages Paid to
Hired Labor
83.54
(59.623)
39.76
(65.040)
75.61
(68.914)
201.88***
(45.383)

(5)
Opportunity
Cost of Family
Labor
98.16
(84.349)
-52.65
(86.100)
-130.56
(92.217)
1,394.58***
(84.786)

Total Costs
266.15**
(134.229)
72.14
(138.640)
2.44
(148.553)
2,033.11***
(124.294)

Value of
Harvest
104.27
(81.198)
129.24
(81.389)
64.82
(89.764)
1,417.52***
(90.635)

2,320
0.005
327.9
3.136
0.077

2,320
0.006
1302
0.239
0.625

2,320
0.009
2058
5.091
0.024

2,320
0.012
1177
6.618
0.010

Robust standard errors in parentheses. "Insured" instrumented by full set of prices (Table 2, Column 1 presents first stage regressions). Total Costs (Column 6) includes sum of
chemicals, land preparatory costs (e.g., equipment rental, but not labor), hired labor, and family labor (valued at gender/community/year specific wages). Harvest value includes ownproduced consumption, valued at community-specific market value. All specifications include controls for full set of sample frame and year interactions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

56

Dependent variable:
Insured
Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Capital Grant Treatment
Insured * Total Rainfall
Insured * Capital Grant Treatment * Total Rainfall
Capital Grant Treatment * Total Rainfall
Total Rainfall (hundreds of millimeters)
Total Rainfall Squared

Constant
Observations
R-squared

Mean for Control

Table 4: Reallocation of Investments and Welfare Impacts
IV
Reallocation of Investments
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
# of HH
Household
Members
Has NonWorking in
Farm Income Non-Farm
Average
Proportion
Generating
Income
of Land
Weekly
Orchard
Activity
Generating
Value of
Planted with
(binary)
Activity
Harvest
Maize
Income

(6)

Average
Weekly
Enterprise
Income

Welfare Impacts
(7)
(8)
(9)
Household
Total Farm
Reports
Revenue
Having
Missed a
(including Post Harvest
Assets
Meal in Past insurance
12 Months payouts, net (livestock +
of premiums)
grain)
(binary)

-1,069.13*
(596.208)
1,324.48
(821.152)
-879.77
(642.233)
156.82**
(76.291)
-155.36
(105.649)
124.95
(83.589)
2,247.39***
(624.545)
-146.65***
(40.970)

0.09***
(0.031)
0.04
(0.029)
0.12***
(0.034)

-1.16*
(0.656)
0.48
(0.582)
-0.13
(0.686)

-0.06*
(0.033)
0.07**
(0.033)
-0.04
(0.038)

-0.11*
(0.061)
0.16**
(0.062)
-0.08
(0.066)

-8.64
(7.151)
3.77
(9.126)
-2.83
(4.530)

-0.08**
(0.033)
-0.03
(0.030)
-0.08**
(0.037)

284.98***
(82.991)
109.13
(84.446)
66.93
(90.585)

529.16**
(230.879)
321.91
(229.190)
620.00**
(266.682)

-7,154.76***
(2,375.086)
2,320
0.021

0.23***
(0.016)
2,782
0.090

1.82***
(0.463)
2,316
0.001

0.17***
(0.027)
2,320
0.007

0.22***
(0.038)
2,320
0.010

5.79
(4.363)
2,350
0.007

0.37***
(0.035)
2,304
0.013

1,386.17***
(91.209)
2,320
0.023

1,801.27***
(223.509)
2,265
0.007

1177

0.309

1.838

0.261

0.405

6.604

0.229

1179

1761

Robust standard errors in parentheses. "Insured" instrumented by full set of prices (Table 2, Column 1 presents first stage regressions). Total Costs (Column 1) includes sum of chemicals, land
preparatory costs (e.g., equipment rental, but not labor), hired labor, and family labor (valued at gender/community/year specific wages). Columns 4, 5 and 6 (regarding non-farm income) are derived
from a survey question which asks if each person in the household "spent the most time during the past 12 months" (and if so, how many months) on fishing, construction, working as a hired
agricultural laborer, working in non-farm labor, self-employed, employed in a household enterprise, or salaried regular employment. Harvest value includes own-consumed production, valued at
community-specific market value. All specifications include controls for full set of sample frame and year interactions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

57

Table 5: Investment Response, Heterogeneity with respect to Socioeconomic Covariates
IV
(1)
(2)
(3)
Dependent Variable:
Total Farm Costs
Total Farm Costs
Total Farm Costs
Insured
Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Capital Grant Treatment
Wealth * Insured
Wealth * Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Wealth * Capital Grant Treatment
Wealth

403.45***
(144.513)
-26.05
(159.086)
81.60
(160.577)
-0.25*
(0.143)
0.15
(0.171)
-0.17
(0.159)
0.37***
(0.088)

Head of Household Can Read * Insured

134.39
(144.590)
105.20
(156.459)
-92.89
(168.094)

815.32***
(312.240)
-293.93
(404.963)
670.04
(439.846)

Head of Household Can Read * Capital Grant Treatment
Head of Household Can Read
Head of Household Age * Insured

274.53
(259.810)
150.82
(317.762)
-104.99
(335.402)

583.28
(366.383)
-208.20
(495.209)
253.16
(525.588)
-0.22*
(0.117)
0.17
(0.141)
-0.10
(0.159)
0.27***
(0.087)
450.89*
(247.289)
-142.59
(325.800)
224.09
(264.053)
0.02
(117.837)
-11.90*
(6.508)
11.39
(8.753)
-12.19
(8.892)
3.76
(3.447)
31.54
(32.966)
-42.12
(43.713)
38.73
(43.809)
115.83***
(16.341)
990.09***
(212.122)

-12.00*
(6.551)
7.90
(8.598)
-14.98
(9.433)
10.72***
(3.546)

Head of Household Age * Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Head of Household Age * Capital Grant Treatment
Head of Household Age
Household Size * Insured

2,002.98***
(124.703)

2,059.20***
(132.364)

1,637.39***
(194.400)

0.68
(32.262)
-8.97
(43.019)
17.72
(45.485)
132.15***
(15.500)
1,068.18***
(159.855)

2,318
0.029
94.15
458.0
474.0

2,320
0.012
0
0.283
1

2,289
0.013
30
43.34
53

2,289
0.074
4
6.846
9

Household Size * Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Household Size * Capital Grant Treatment
Household Size

Observations
R-squared
25th percentile of covariate
Mean of covariate
75th percentile of covariate

(5)
Total Farm Costs

513.73**
(250.582)
-189.52
(322.897)
303.82
(277.620)
-76.70
(119.606)

Head of Household Can Read * Insured * Capital Grant Treatment

Constant

(4)
Total Farm Costs

2,288
0.090

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Sample size varies because of different number of missing values for each of the interaction covariates. "Insured" instrumented by full set of prices
(Table 2, Column 1 presents first stage regressions). Total Costs (Column 1) includes sum of chemicals, land preparatory costs (e.g., equipment rental, but not labor), hired labor, and family
labor (valued at gender/community/year specific wages). Harvest value includes own-consumed production, valued at community-specific market value. All specifications include controls for
full set of sample frame and year interactions.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

58

Table 6: Heterogeneous Investment Response Conditional on Selection Effects from Different Insurance Prices
IV

Dependent variable:
Insured at Low Price
Insured at High Price
Insured at Low Price * Capital Grant Treatment
Constant

Observations
F-test Insured at Low price = Insured at high price
p-value

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Land Preparation
Costs

# of Acres
Cultivated

Value of
Chemicals Used

Wages Paid to
Hired Labor

Opportunity Cost
of Family Labor

Total Farm
Costs

Value of Harvest

22.52*
(12.371)
122.36**
(60.157)
16.97
(13.158)
142.05***
(17.897)

1.02**
(0.428)
1.10
(2.151)
0.26
(0.446)
8.10***
(0.693)

37.79**
(15.118)
40.95
(78.139)
66.46***
(15.700)
170.79***
(24.592)

70.81
(61.057)
447.09*
(254.552)
44.46
(65.224)
98.72
(64.550)

131.47
(85.847)
-856.22*
(491.599)
-65.05
(86.343)
1,665.24***
(166.538)

277.13**
(136.950)
-47.91
(662.127)
68.05
(139.018)
2,121.88***
(204.233)

132.83
(81.910)
-714.07
(559.616)
118.58
(81.473)
1,649.33***
(191.932)

2,320
2.643
0.104

2,320
0.00122
0.972

2,320
0.00158
0.968

2,320
2.066
0.151

2,320
3.917
0.0478

2,320
0.231
0.631

2,320
2.242
0.134

Robust standard errors in parentheses. "Insured at Low/High" instrumented by full set of low (0, 1 or 4) or high (above 4) prices . Total Costs (Column 1) includes sum of chemicals,
land preparatory costs (e.g., equipment rental, but not labor), hired labor, and family labor (valued at gender/community/year specific wages). Harvest value includes ownconsumed production, valued at community-specific market value. Controls included for capital grant treatment group and full set of sample frame and year interactions. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1

59

Table 7: Dynamic Effects of Prior Year Experience and Social Networks
IV
(1)
(2)
(3)
Social network definition:
Dependent variable:
Insured * Received Payout in Prior Year
Insured * Did Not Receive Payout in Prior Year
# Insured in Social Network that Received Payout in Prior Year
# Insured in Social Network that Did Not Receive Payout in Prior Year
Eligible for Payout in Prior Year
# in Social Network that Received a Capital Grant in Prior Year
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Mean of Dependent Variable

(4)

Borrowed or Lent
# of Acres Insurance
Purchased
0.88***
(0.334)
-1.22***
(0.268)
0.48**
(0.227)
-0.14
(0.128)
0.89***
(0.172)
0.28
(0.333)
4.14***
(0.346)

Borrowed or Lent
Purchased Any
Insurance
0.05*
(0.030)
-0.18***
(0.033)
0.06***
(0.017)
-0.00
(0.017)
0.09***
(0.022)
0.04
(0.029)
0.72***
(0.039)

Related
# of Acres Insurance
Purchased
0.69**
(0.344)
-1.11***
(0.260)
0.15**
(0.066)
-0.01
(0.041)
0.77***
(0.179)
0.27**
(0.125)
4.26***
(0.372)

Related
Purchased Any
Insurance
0.04
(0.029)
-0.17***
(0.033)
0.01
(0.007)
-0.00
(0.005)
0.08***
(0.023)
0.03**
(0.013)
0.69***
(0.043)

(5)
Farming Advice Given
or Received
# of Acres Insurance
Purchased
0.61*
(0.340)
-1.05***
(0.261)
0.13**
(0.067)
-0.07*
(0.039)
0.72***
(0.179)
0.16
(0.136)
4.22***
(0.364)

2,189
0.362
2.467

2,189
0.291
0.444

2,189
0.363
2.467

2,189
0.299
0.444

2,189
0.366
2.467

(6)
Farming Advice Given
or Received
Purchased Any
Insurance
0.04
(0.029)
-0.17***
(0.033)
0.01**
(0.006)
-0.00
(0.005)
0.08***
(0.023)
0.04***
(0.013)
0.70***
(0.042)
2,189
0.298
0.444

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Includes demand data from years 2 and 3. "Insured" instrumented by full set of prices (Table 2, Column 1 presents first stage regressions). "# in Social Network Insured" instrumented
by # of individuals in the network offered insurance at each price. All specifications Include control for current year price, current year price squared, capital grant treatment status, acreage owned by household, control group
in prior year, household size reported in prior year, size of social network, and sample frame and year interactions. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

60

Appendix Table 1: Sample Frame Summaries
Observation Counts
Panel A: Experimental Cells
Sample Frame 1

Communities:
Year 1 Grant Experiment
Capital grant
Insurance Grant
Capital + Insurance Grant
Control
Total
Year 2 Insurance Product Pricing Experiment
p=1 (PPP $US 1.30)
p=4 (PPP $US 5.25)
p=8/9.5 (PPP $US 10.50/12.50)
p=12/14 (PPP $US 15.85/18.50)
Control
Total
Year 2 Capital Grant Experiment
Treatment
Control
Total
Year 3 Insurance Product Pricing Experiment
p=3 GHC (PPP $US 4.00)
p=6 GHC (PPP $US 7.90)
p=9 GHC (PPP $US 11.90)
Control
Total
Panel B: Surveys
Year 1 Followup/Year 2 Baseline
Targeted
Completed
Year 2 Followup Survey
Targeted
Completed
Panel C: Sample Size Explanations for Each Table
Table 2: First Stage & Takeup
Column 1: yr 1 and 2 and 3
Column 2: yr 1 and 2, non-missing wealth
Column 3: yr 1 and 2
Column 4: yr 1 and 2
Table 3: IV Agric Investment/outcomes
All columns
Table 4: Reallocation of Investments and Welfare Impacts
Columns 1, 4, 5, 6 & 8
Column 2
Column 3
Column 7
Column 9
Table 5: Interactions
Column 1: wealth
Column 2: household head reads
Column 3: household head age
Column 4: household size
Column 5: joint
Table 6: Heterogeneity with respect to prices
Table 7: Dynamic Effects & Social Networks

Sample Frame 3

Original communities

Sample Frame 2
New households in
same communities as
SF1

117
135
95
155
502

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

117
135
95
155
502

207
134
0
0
161
502

268
258
0
0
150
676

0
0
114
114
0
228

475
392
114
114
311
1406

0
0
0

363
313
676

0
0
0

363
313
676

105
110
126
161
502

168
175
183
150
676

57
57
114
0
228

330
342
423
311
1406

502
481

676
587

0
0

1178
1068

502
465

676
579

228
208

1406
1252

1506
970
1004
1004

1352
623
676
676

456
208
228
228

3314
1801
1908
1908

946

1166

208

2320

946
988
946
944
935

1166
1338
1163
1154
1134

208
456
207
206
196

2320
2782
2316
2304
2265

946
946
946
946
946
946
682

1165
1166
1155
1155
1154
1166
1051

207
208
188
188
188
208
456

2318
2320
2289
2289
2288
2320
2189

61

Total

New communities

Appendix Table 2: Homestead to Rainfall Gauge Distance Summary Statistics in 2009 & 2010

Gauge Location
Savelugu
Tamale Old Airport
Pong Tamale
Tamale Airport
Walewale

(1)

(2)

(3)

Mean Distance
(km)

Standard
Deviation (km)

8.36
6.69
11.98
13.37
32.77

7.15
3.56
6.42
7.64
8.38

62

Number of
Farmers

(4)
2009 Mean
Rainfall Amount
(decimeters)

(5)
2010 Mean
Rainfall Amount
(decimeters)

264
171
392
469
389

6.74
7.02
6.12
7.44
5.18

‐
‐
6.05
5.97
5.60

Appendix Table 3: Summary of Insurance Product Terms
Year One

Year Two

2009 product

Year Three

2010 product

Post-Study Year

2011 product

2012 product

Insurance Underwriter/Reinsurer

NGO

NGO

Reinsurance Company

Reinsurance Company

Product name

Takayua ("umbrella")

Takayua ("umbrella")

Sanzali ("drought")

Actuarial price (s) per acre

GHC 33 (USD 47.45)

GHC 7.65 (USD 9.58)

GHC 6 (USD 7.90)

Sapooli/Awor ("shortage
of rain")
GHC 12 (USD 15.00)

Premium(s)per acre

GHC 0 (USD 0.00)

GHC 1 (USD 1.30)

GHC 3 (USD 4.00)

GHC 10 (USD 12.50)

GHC 6 (USD 7.90)
GHC 9 (USD 11.90)

GHC 14 (USD 17.50)

GHC 100 (USD 143.80)

GHC 2 (USD 5.25)
GHC 8 (USD 10.50)
GHC 9.50 (USD 12.50)
GHC 12 (USD 15.85)
GHC 14 (USD 18.50)
GHC 100 (USD 132.00)

GHC 70 (USD 87.70)

GHC 100 (USD 125.25)

GHC 20 (USD 28.75)

GHC 20 (USD 26.40)

GHC 0 (USD 0.00)

GHC 26.80 (USD 33.55)

GHC 60 (USD 86.30)

GHC 50 (USD 66.00)

June‐September

June‐September

May‐September

May‐September

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Payout for 13‐16 or more
consecutive dry days
during germination stage,
12‐16 or more dry days
during crop growth stage,
or fewer than 125
cumulative mm rainfall
during flowering stage

Payout for 12‐16 or more
consecutive dry days
during germination stage,
12‐16 or more dry days
during crop growth stage,
or fewer than 125
cumulative mm rainfall
during flowering stage

Max payout per acre
Actual payout(s) per acre
Coverage window
Covers drought?
Covers flood?
Product detail (simplified)

Payout for 8 or fewer dry Payout for 12 or more
days, or 18 or more wet consecutive dry days, or 7
days, per month
or more consecutive wet
days, during coverage
window

Column 4, the 2012 product, was not part of the empirical results in the paper but is included here as it is discussed in the Discussion and Conclusion of the paper.

We use the PPP exchange rate of GHS 0.6953 to USD 1 for 2009, 0.7574 for 2010, and 0.7983 for 2011 (World Bank, 2011).
The World Bank's 2012 PPP exchange rates have not yet been released, so we use the 2011 rate for year 2012.

63

Appendix Table 4: Investment Response, Heterogeneity with respect to Socioeconomic Covariates
IV
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Land
Land
Land
Land
Land
Preparation
Preparation
Preparation
Preparation
Preparation
# of Acres
Costs
Costs
Costs
Costs
Costs
Cultivated
Dependent Variable:
Insured
Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Capital Grant Treatment
Wealth * Insured
Wealth * Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Wealth * Capital Grant Treatment
Wealth

37.05***
(14.026)
5.95
(14.601)
24.91
(15.197)
-0.02
(0.018)
0.01
(0.018)
-0.02
(0.017)
0.03***
(0.009)

Head of Household Can Read * Insured

13.19
(13.472)
21.58
(15.105)
21.45
(16.527)

48.45*
(28.549)
71.81*
(40.175)
92.06**
(37.979)

48.80**
(22.139)
-25.82
(29.555)
-16.43
(22.793)
-15.90
(10.244)

Head of Household Can Read * Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Head of Household Can Read * Capital Grant Treatment
Head of Household Can Read
Head of Household Age * Insured

-0.51
(0.601)
-1.24
(0.832)
-1.74**
(0.759)
0.31
(0.314)

Head of Household Age * Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Head of Household Age * Capital Grant Treatment
Head of Household Age
Household Size * Insured

166.54***
(10.828)

174.63***
(11.386)

158.14***
(16.526)

-2.17
(2.835)
3.63
(4.481)
0.31
(3.040)
12.99***
(1.423)
72.74***
(13.971)

2,318
0.034
94.15
458.0
474.0

2,320
0.021
0
0.283
1

2,289
0.020
30
43.34
53

2,289
0.084
4
6.846
9

Household Size * Insured * Capital Grant Treatment
Household Size * Capital Grant Treatment
Household Size
Constant

Observations
R-squared
25th percentile of covariate
Mean of covariate
75th percentile of covariate

34.86
(21.342)
-6.40
(29.837)
10.45
(23.883)

26.82
(31.348)
65.88
(46.736)
79.77*
(41.808)
-0.01
(0.015)
0.01
(0.017)
-0.01
(0.017)
0.02**
(0.008)
52.37**
(21.724)
-42.30
(29.740)
-23.35
(22.000)
-14.31
(10.135)
-0.18
(0.613)
-1.40*
(0.848)
-1.54**
(0.731)
-0.53*
(0.300)
-0.54
(3.006)
2.61
(4.544)
2.23
(3.155)
12.53***
(1.510)
100.72***
(18.506)
2,288
0.106

1.38***
(0.453)
-0.18
(0.491)
0.31
(0.535)
-0.00
(0.000)
0.00
(0.001)
-0.00
(0.001)
0.00***
(0.000)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

# of Acres
Cultivated

# of Acres
Cultivated

# of Acres
Cultivated

# of Acres
Cultivated

0.48
(0.466)
0.50
(0.513)
0.30
(0.598)

1.76*
(1.021)
1.14
(1.352)
3.55**
(1.429)

0.70
(0.712)
-0.53
(0.893)
0.31
(0.871)

0.68
(1.103)
0.91
(1.529)
3.05**
(1.408)
-0.00
(0.000)
0.00
(0.000)
-0.00
(0.001)
0.00***
(0.000)
1.90***
(0.710)
-1.22
(0.995)
-0.87
(0.722)
-1.33***
(0.311)
-0.02
(0.021)
-0.02
(0.029)
-0.07**
(0.027)
-0.01
(0.011)
0.11
(0.098)
0.04
(0.131)
0.06
(0.117)
0.48***
(0.052)
5.24***
(0.663)

1.98***
(0.741)
-0.91
(1.010)
-0.48
(0.778)
-1.53***
(0.325)
-0.02
(0.021)
-0.02
(0.029)
-0.08***
(0.029)
0.03**
(0.012)

8.03***
(0.402)

8.61***
(0.424)

7.08***
(0.647)

0.04
(0.095)
0.13
(0.128)
-0.03
(0.116)
0.53***
(0.049)
4.08***
(0.474)

2,318
0.186
94.15
458.0
474.0

2,320
0.153
0
0.283
1

2,289
0.150
30
43.34
53

2,289
0.245
4
6.846
9

2,288
0.283

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Sample size varies because of different number of missing values for each of the interaction covariates. "Insured" instrumented by full set of prices (Table 2, Column 1 presents first stage
regressions). Total Costs (Column 1) includes sum of chemicals, land preparatory costs (e.g., equipment rental, but not labor), hired labor, and family labor (valued at gender/community/year specific wages). Harvest value includes
own-consumed production, valued at community-specific market value. All specifications include controls for full set of sample frame and year interactions.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

64

