                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  PRIOR SELECTION FOR VECTOR AUTOREGRESSIONS

                                        Domenico Giannone
                                          Michele Lenza
                                        Giorgio E. Primiceri

                                        Working Paper 18467
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18467


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




We thank Liseo Brunero, Guenter Coenen, Gernot Doppelhofer, Raffaella Giacomini, Dimitris Korobilis,
Frank Schorfheide, Chris Sims and participants in several conferences and seminars for comments
and suggestions. Domenico Giannone is grateful to the Actions de Recherche Concertées (contract
ARC-AUWB/2010-15/ULB-11) and Giorgio Primiceri to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for financial
support. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those
of the Eurosystem. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18467.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Domenico Giannone, Michele Lenza, and Giorgio E. Primiceri. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Prior Selection for Vector Autoregressions
Domenico Giannone, Michele Lenza, and Giorgio E. Primiceri
NBER Working Paper No. 18467
October 2012
JEL No. C11,C32,C53,E37,E47

                                                ABSTRACT

Vector autoregressions (VARs) are flexible time series models that can capture complex dynamic
interrelationships among macroeconomic variables. However, their dense parameterization leads to
unstable inference and inaccurate out-of-sample forecasts, particularly for models with many variables.
A solution to this problem is to use informative priors, in order to shrink the richly parameterized unrestricted
model towards a parsimonious naive benchmark, and thus reduce estimation uncertainty. This paper
studies the optimal choice of the informativeness of these priors, which we treat as additional parameters,
in the spirit of hierarchical modeling. This approach is theoretically grounded, easy to implement,
and greatly reduces the number and importance of subjective choices in the setting of the prior. Moreover,
it performs very well both in terms of out-of-sample forecasting—as well as factor models—and accuracy
in the estimation of impulse response functions.


Domenico Giannone                                       Giorgio E. Primiceri
ECARES - Université Libre de Bruxelles                  Department of Economics
Avenue F. D. Roosevelt, 50                              Northwestern University
1050 Bruxelles                                          318 Andersen Hall
Belgium                                                 2001 Sheridan Road
dgiannon@ulb.ac.be                                      Evanston, IL 60208-2600
                                                        and NBER
Michele Lenza                                           g-primiceri@northwestern.edu
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29
60311 Frankfurt An Main
Germany
michele.lenza@ecb.int
                Prior Selection for Vector Autoregressions∗
                   Domenico Giannone                                 Michele Lenza
        Université Libre de Bruxelles and CEPR                  European Central Bank
                                   Giorgio E. Primiceri
                        Northwestern University, CEPR and NBER

                                 First Version: March 2010
                                This Version: September 2012



                                              Abstract
            Vector autoregressions (VARs) are flexible time series models that can capture
        complex dynamic interrelationships among macroeconomic variables. However,
        their dense parameterization leads to unstable inference and inaccurate out-of-
        sample forecasts, particularly for models with many variables. A solution to this
        problem is to use informative priors, in order to shrink the richly parameterized
        unrestricted model towards a parsimonious naı̈ve benchmark, and thus reduce es-
        timation uncertainty. This paper studies the optimal choice of the informativeness
        of these priors, which we treat as additional parameters, in the spirit of hierarchical
        modeling. This approach is theoretically grounded, easy to implement, and greatly
        reduces the number and importance of subjective choices in the setting of the prior.
        Moreover, it performs very well both in terms of out-of-sample forecasting—as well
        as factor models—and accuracy in the estimation of impulse response functions.


1       Introduction
In this paper, we study the choice of the informativeness of the prior distribution on
the coefficients of the following VAR model:

                             yt = C + B1 yt−1 + ... + Bp yt−p + εt                                (1.1)
                             εt ∼ N (0, Σ) ,

where yt is an n × 1 vector of endogenous variables, εt is an n × 1 vector of exogenous
shocks, and C, B1 ,..., Bp and Σ are matrices of suitable dimensions containing the
model’s unknown parameters.
    ∗
     We thank Liseo Brunero, Guenter Coenen, Gernot Doppelhofer, Raffaella Giacomini, Dimitris
Korobilis, Frank Schorfheide, Chris Sims and participants in several conferences and seminars for
comments and suggestions. Domenico Giannone is grateful to the Actions de Recherche Concertes
(contract ARC-AUWB/2010-15/ULB-11) and Giorgio Primiceri to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for
financial support. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the Eurosystem.


                                                  1
    With flat priors and
                           conditioning  on the initial p observations, the posterior dis-
                                       0
tribution of β ≡ vec [C, B1 , ..., Bp ] is centered at the Ordinary Least Square (OLS)
estimate of the coefficients and it is easy to compute. It is well known, however, that
working with flat priors leads to inadmissible estimators (Stein, 1956) and yields poor
inference, particularly in large dimensional systems (see, for example, Sims, 1980; Lit-
terman, 1986). One typical symptom of this problem is the fact that these models
generate inaccurate out-of-sample predictions, due to the large estimation uncertainty
of the parameters.
    In order to improve the forecasting performance of VAR models, Litterman (1980)
and Doan, Litterman, and Sims (1984) have proposed to combine the likelihood func-
tion with some informative prior distributions. Using the frequentist terminology, these
priors are successful because they effectively reduce the estimation error, while gener-
ating only relatively small biases in the estimates of the parameters. For a more formal
illustration of this point from a Bayesian perspective, let’s consider the following (con-
ditional) prior distribution for the VAR coefficients
                                      β|Σ ∼ N (b, Σ ⊗ Ωξ) ,
where the vector b and the matrix Ω are known, and ξ is a scalar parameter controlling
the tightness of the prior information. The conditional posterior of β can be obtained
by multiplying this prior by the likelihood function. Taking the initial p observations
of the sample as given—a standard assumption that we maintain through the entire
paper, without explicitly conditioning on these observations—the posterior takes the
form
                                                        
                       β|Σ, y ∼ N β̂ (ξ) , V̂ (ξ)
                                                 
                        β̂ (ξ) ≡ vec B̂ (ξ)
                                                        −1                       
                        B̂ (ξ) ≡         x0 x + (Ωξ)−1           x0 y + (Ωξ)−1 b̂
                                                            −1
                        V̂ (ξ) ≡ Σ ⊗ x0 x + (Ωξ)−1                  ,

where y ≡ [yp+1 , ..., yT ]0 , x ≡ [xp+1 , ..., xT ]0 , xt ≡ [1, yt−1
                                                                  0 , ..., y 0 ]0 , and b̂ is a matrix
                                                                            t−p
obtained by reshaping the vector b in such a way that each column            corresponds to the
prior mean of the coefficients of each equation (i.e. b ≡ vec b̂ ). Notice that, if we
choose a lower ξ, the prior becomes more informative, the posterior mean of β moves
towards the prior mean, and the posterior variance falls.
    In this context, one natural way to assess the impact of different priors on the
model’s ability to fit the data is to evaluate their effect on the model’s out-of-sample
forecasting performance, summarized by the probability of observing low forecast errors.
To this end, rewrite (1.1) as
                                         yt = Xt β + εt ,
where Xt ≡ In ⊗x0t and In denotes an n×n identity matrix. At time T , the distribution
of the one-step-ahead forecast is given by
                                                                                       
                    yT +1 |Σ, y ∼ N XT +1 β̂ (ξ) , XT +1 V̂ (ξ) XT0 +1 + Σ ,

                                                  2
whose variance depends both on the posterior variance of the coefficients and the volatil-
ity of the innovations. It is then easy to see that neither very high nor very low values
of ξ are likely to be ideal. On the one hand, if ξ is too low and the prior very dogmatic,
density forecasts will be very concentrated around XT +1 b. This results in a low proba-
bility of observing small forecast errors, unless the prior mean happens to be in a close
neighborhood of the likelihood peak (and there is no reason to believe that this is the
case, in general). On the other hand, if ξ is too high and the prior too uninformative, the
model generates very dispersed density forecasts, especially in high-dimensional VARs,
because of high estimation uncertainty. This also lowers the probability of observing
small forecast errors, despite the fact that the distance between yT +1 and XT +1 β̂ (ξ)
might be small. In sum, neither flat nor dogmatic priors maximize the fit of the model,
which makes the choice of the informativeness of the prior distribution a crucial issue.
    The literature has proposed a number of heuristic methodologies to set the infor-
mativeness of the prior distribution on the VAR coefficients. For example, Litterman
(1980) and Doan, Litterman, and Sims (1984) set the tightness of the prior by maximiz-
ing the out-of-sample forecasting performance of the model over a pre-sample. Bańbura,
Giannone, and Reichlin (2010) propose instead to control for over-fitting by choosing
the shrinkage parameters that yield a desired in-sample fit.1
    From a purely Bayesian perspective, however, the choice of the informativeness of
the prior distribution is conceptually identical to the inference on any other unknown
parameter of the model. Suppose, for instance, that a model is described by a likelihood
function p (y|θ) and a prior distribution pγ (θ), where θ is the vector of the model’s
parameters and γ collects the hyperparameters, i.e. those coefficients that parameterize
the prior distribution, but do not directly affect the likelihood.2 It is then natural to
choose these hyperparameters by interpreting the model as a hierarchical model, i.e.
replacing pγ (θ) with p (θ|γ), and evaluating their posterior (Berger, 1985; Koop, 2003).
Such a posterior can be obtained by applying Bayes’ law, which yields

                                    p (γ|y) ∝ p (y|γ) · p (γ) ,

where p (γ) denotes the prior density on the hyperparameters—also known as the
hyperprior—while p (y|γ) is the so called marginal likelihood (ML), and corresponds to
                                            Z
                                p (y|γ) =       p (y|θ, γ) p (θ|γ) dθ.                        (1.2)

In other words, the ML is the density of the data as a function of the hyperparame-
ters γ, obtained after integrating out the uncertainty about the model’s parameters θ.
Conveniently, in the case of VARs with conjugate priors, the ML is available in closed
form.
   1
     A number of papers have subsequently followed either the first (e.g. Robertson and Tallman,
1999; Wright, 2009; Giannone, Lenza, Momferatou, and Onorante, 2010) or the second strategy (e.g.
Giannone, Lenza, and Reichlin, 2008; Bloor and Matheson, 2009; Carriero, Kapetanios, and Marcellino,
2009; Koop, 2011).
   2
     The distinction between parameters and hyperparameters is mostly fictitious and made only for
convenience.



                                                   3
    Conducting formal inference on the hyperparameters is theoretically grounded and
has also several appealing interpretations. For example, with a flat hyperprior, the
shape of the posterior of the hyperparameters coincides with the ML, which is a measure
of out-of-sample forecasting performance of a model (see Geweke, 2001; Geweke and
Whiteman, 2006). More specifically, the ML corresponds to the probability density
that the model generates zero forecast errors, which can be seen by rewriting the ML
as a product of conditional densities:
                                          T
                                          Y                   
                             p (y|γ) =           p yt |y t−1 , γ .
                                         t=p+1

As a consequence, maximizing the posterior of the hyperparameters corresponds to
maximizing the one-step-ahead out-of-sample forecasting ability of the model.
    Moreover, the strategy of estimating hyperparameters by maximizing the ML (i.e.
their posterior under a flat hyperprior) is an Empirical Bayes method (Robbins, 1956),
which has a clear frequentist interpretation. On the other hand, the full posterior
evaluation of the hyperparameters (as advocated, for example, by Lopes, Moreira, and
Schmidt, 1999, for VARs) can be thought of as conducting Bayesian inference on the
population parameters of a random effects model or, more generally, of a hierarchical
model (see, for instance, Gelman, Carlin, Stern, and Rubin, 2004).
    Finally, the hierarchical structure also implies that the unconditional prior for the
parameters θ has a mixed distribution
                                         Z
                               p (θ) =       p (θ|γ) p (γ) dγ.

Mixed distributions have generally fatter tails than each of the component distributions
p (θ|γ), a property that robustifies inference. In fact, when the prior has fatter tails
than the likelihood, the posterior is less sensitive to extreme discrepancies between
prior and likelihood (Berger, 1985; Berger and Berliner, 1986).

1.1   Contribution
In this paper, we adopt the hierarchical modeling approach to make inference about the
informativeness of the prior distribution of Bayesian Vector Autoregressions (BVARs)
estimated on postwar U.S. macroeconomic data. We consider a combination of the
conjugate priors most commonly used in the literature (the “Minnesota,” “sum-of-
coefficients” and “dummy-initial-observation” priors), and document that this estima-
tion strategy generates very accurate out-of-sample predictions, both in terms of point
and density forecasts. The key to success lies in the fact that this procedure auto-
matically selects the “appropriate” amount of shrinkage, namely tighter priors when
the model involves many unknown coefficients relative to the available data, and looser
priors in the opposite case. Indeed, we derive an expression for the ML showing that
it takes duly into account the trade-off between in-sample fit and model complexity.
    Because of this feature, the hierarchical BVAR improves over naı̈ve benchmarks and
flat-prior VARs, even for small-scale models, for which the optimal shrinkage is low,


                                               4
but not zero. In addition, the hierarchical BVAR outperforms the most popular ad-
hoc procedures to select hyperparameters (see Litterman, 1980; Bańbura, Giannone,
and Reichlin, 2010). Finally, we find that the forecasting performance of the model
typically improves as we include more variables, and it is comparable to that of factor
models. This is remarkable because the latter are among the most successful forecasting
methods in the literature.
    Our second contribution is documenting that this hierarchical BVAR approach per-
forms very well also in terms of accuracy of the estimation of impulse response functions
in identified VARs. We conduct two experiments to make this point. First, we study
the transmission of an exogenous increase in the federal funds rate in a large-scale
model with 22 variables. The estimates of the impulse responses that we obtain are
broadly in line with the usual narrative of the effects of an exogenous tightening in
monetary policy. This finding, together with the result that the same large-scale model
produces good forecasts, indicates that our approach is able to effectively deal with the
curse of dimensionality. However, in this empirical exercise there is no way of formally
checking the accuracy of the estimated impulse response functions, since we do not have
a directly observable counterpart of these objects in the data. Therefore, we conduct
a second exercise, which is a controlled Monte Carlo experiment. Namely, we simu-
late data from a micro-founded, medium-scale, dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
model estimated on U.S. postwar data. We then use the simulated data to estimate
our hierarchical BVAR, and compare the implied impulse responses to monetary pol-
icy shocks to those of the true data generating process. This experiment lends strong
support to our model. The surprising finding is in fact that the hierarchical Bayesian
procedure generates very little bias, while drastically increasing the efficiency of the
impulse response estimates relative to standard flat-prior VARs.

1.2   Related literature
Hierarchical modeling (or Empirical Bayes, i.e. its frequentist version) has been suc-
cessfully adopted in many fields (see Berger, 1985; Gelman, Carlin, Stern, and Rubin,
2004, for an overview). It has also been advocated by the first proponents of BVARs
(see Doan, Litterman and Sims, 1984, Sims and Zha, 1998, and, more recently, Canova,
2007 and Del Negro and Schorfheide, 2012), but seldom formally implemented in this
context. Exceptions to this statement include Del Negro and Schorfheide (2004) and
Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2007), who use the ML to choose the
tightness of a prior for VARs derived from the posterior density of a dynamic stochas-
tic general equilibrium model. In the context of time-varying VARs, the ML has been
used by Primiceri (2005) and Belmonte, Koop, and Korobilis (2011) to choose the infor-
mativeness of the prior distribution for the time variation of coefficients and volatilities.
Relative to these authors, our focus is on BVARs with standard conjugate priors, for
which the posterior of the hyperparameters is available in closed form.
    Closer to our framework, Phillips (1995) chooses the hyperparameters of the Min-
nesota prior for VARs using the asymptotic posterior odds criterion of Phillips and
Ploberger (1994), which is also related to the ML. Del Negro and Schorfheide (2004,
2011), Carriero, Kapetanios, and Marcellino (2010) and Carriero, Clark, and Mar-


                                             5
cellino (2011) have used the ML to select the variance of a Minnesota prior from a grid
of possible values. We generalize this approach to the optimal selection of a variety
of commonly adopted prior distributions for BVARs. This includes the prior on the
sum of coefficients proposed by Doan, Litterman, and Sims (1984), which turns out
to be crucial to enhance the forecasting performance of the model. Moreover, relative
to these studies, we take an explicit hierarchical modeling approach that allows us to
take the uncertainty about hyperparameters into account, and to evaluate the density
forecasts of the model.
    More important, we also complement the model’s forecasting evaluation with an
assessment of the performance of hierarchical BVARs for impulse response estimation,
which is new in the literature.
    Finally, we document that our approach works well for models of very different scale,
including 3-variable VARs and much larger-scale ones. In this respect, our work relates
to the growing literature on forecasting using factors extracted from large information
sets (see, for example, Forni, Hallin, Lippi, and Reichlin, 2000; Stock and Watson,
2002b), Large Bayesian VARs (Bańbura, Giannone, and Reichlin, 2010; Koop, 2011)
and empirical Bayes regressions with large sets of predictors (Knox, Stock, and Watson,
2000).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 and 3 provide some addi-
tional details about the computation and interpretation of the ML, and the priors and
hyperpriors used in our investigation. Section 4 and 5 focus instead on the empirical
application to macroeconomic forecasting and impulse response estimation. Section 6
concludes.


2    The Choice of Hyperparameters for BVARs
In the previous section, we have argued that the most natural way of choosing the
hyperparameters of a model is based on their posterior distribution. This posterior is
proportional to the product of the hyperprior and the ML. The hyperprior is a “level-
two” prior on the hyperparameters, while the ML is the likelihood of the observed data
as a function of the hyperparameters, which can be obtained by integrating out the
model’s coefficients, as in equation (1.2).
    Although this procedure can be applied very generally, in this paper we restrict our
attention to prior distributions for VAR coefficients belonging to the following Normal-
Inverse-Wishart family:

                                  Σ ∼ IW (Ψ; d)                                     (2.3)
                                β|Σ ∼ N (b, Σ ⊗ Ω) ,                                (2.4)

where the elements Ψ, d, b and Ω are typically functions of a lower dimensional vector
of hyperparameters γ. We focus on these priors for two reasons. First of all, this
class includes the priors most commonly used by the existing literature on BVARs (see
the surveys of Koop and Korobilis, 2010; Del Negro and Schorfheide, 2011; Karlsson,



                                           6
2012).3 Second, the prior (2.3)-(2.4) is conjugate and has the advantage that the ML
of the BVAR can be computed in closed form as a function of γ.
    In appendix A, we prove that
                                                        T −p+d               T
                                         −1              2                 Y            − 21
             p (y|γ) ∝        Vεposterior     Vεprior            ·               Vt|t−1             ,   (2.5)
                         |                 {z                }           t=p+1
                                          Fit
                                                                         |       {z          }
                                                                     Penalty for model complexity

where Vεposterior and Vεprior are
                              
                                  the posteriorand prior means (or modes) of the residual
variance, and Vt|t−1 ≡ EΣ var yt |y t−1 , Σ is the variance (conditional on Σ) of the
one-step-ahead forecast of y, averaged across all possible a-priori realizations of Σ.
While exact closed-form expressions for these objects are provided in the appendix,
here we stress that the ML consists of two crucial terms. The first term depends on
the in-sample fit of the model, and it increases when the posterior residual variance
falls relative to the prior variance. Thus, everything else equal, the ML criterion favors
hyperparameter values that generate smaller residuals. The second term in (2.5) is
instead a penalty for model complexity. This term penalizes models with imprecise out-
of-sample forecasts due to either large a-priori residual variances or high uncertainty of
the parameter estimates. These models have a higher a-priori chance of capturing any
possible behavior of the data, while, at the same time, assigning very low probability
to all possible outcomes. This feature is the essence of overfitting and is penalized by
the ML criterion. Therefore, the ML captures the standard trade-off between model fit
and complexity.
     The fact that the ML is available in closed form simplifies inference substantially,
because it makes it easy to either maximize or simulate the posterior of the hyperparam-
eters. As we have pointed out in the introduction, the advantage of the approach based
on the maximization is that, under a flat hyperprior, it is an Empirical Bayes proce-
dure and has a classical interpretation. It also coincides with selecting hyperparameters
that maximize the one-step-ahead out-of-sample forecasting performance of the model.
On the other hand, the full posterior simulation allows to account for the estimation
uncertainty of the hyperparameters, and has an interpretation of Bayesian hierarchi-
cal modeling. This approach can be implemented using a simple Markov chain Monte
Carlo algorithm. In particular, we use a Metropolis step to draw the low dimensional
vector of hyperparameters. Conditional on a value of γ, the VAR coefficients [β, Σ]
can then be drawn from their posterior, which is Normal-Inverse-Wishart. Appendix
B presents the details of this procedure.
     We now turn to the empirical application of our methodology.


3    Priors and Hyperpriors
This section describes the specific priors that we employ in our empirical analysis.
For the sake of comparability with previous studies, we choose the most popular prior
   3
     Some recent studies have also proposed alternative priors for VARs that do not belong to this
family. See, for example, Del Negro and Schorfheide (2004), Villani (2009), Jarociski and Marcet
(2010) and Koop (2011).


                                                    7
densities adopted by the existing literature for the estimation of BVARs in levels.
However, it is important to stress that our method is not confined to these priors, but,
as mentioned in the previous section, applies more generally to all priors belonging to
the class defined by (2.3) and (2.4).
    As in Kadiyala and Karlsson (1997), we set the degrees of freedom of the Inverse-
Wishart distribution to d = n + 2, which is the minimum value that guarantees the
existence of the prior mean of Σ (it is equal to Ψ/(d − n − 1)). In addition, we take Ψ
to be a diagonal matrix with an n × 1 vector ψ on the main diagonal. We treat ψ as
an hyperparameter, which differs from the existing literature that has been fixing this
parameter using sample information. As for the conditional Gaussian prior for β, we
combine the following prior densities:

   1. The baseline prior is a version of the so-called Minnesota prior, first introduced
      in Litterman (1979, 1980). This prior is centered on the assumption that each
      variable follows a random walk process, possibly with drift, which is a parsi-
      monious yet “reasonable approximation of the behavior of an economic vari-
      able”(Litterman, 1979, p. 20). More precisely, this prior is characterized by
      the following first and second moments:
                                              (
                         h            i           1   if i = j and s = 1
                       E (Bs )ij |Σ       =
                                                      0 otherwise
                                              (
                                                              Σih
                                                λ2 s12 ψj /(d−n−1)   if m = j and r = s
           cov (Bs )ij , (Br )hm |Σ       =                                               ,
                                                               0        otherwise

      and can be easily cast into the form of (2.4). Notice that the variance of this prior
      is lower for the coefficients associated with more distant lags, and that coefficients
      associated with the same variable and lag in different equations are allowed to be
      correlated. Finally, the key hyperparameter is λ, which controls the scale of all
      the variances and covariances, and effectively determines the overall tightness of
      this prior.

The literature following Litterman’s work has introduced refinements of the Minnesota
prior to further “favor unit roots and cointegration, which fits the beliefs reflected
in the practices of many applied macroeconomists” (Sims and Zha, 1998, p. 958).
Loosely speaking, the objective of these additional priors is to reduce the impor-
tance of the deterministic component implied by VARs estimated conditioning on
the initial
          observations (Sims, 1992a). This deterministic component is defined as
τt ≡ Ep yt |y1 , ..., yp , β̂ , i.e. the expectation of future y’s given the initial conditions
and the value of the estimated VAR coefficients. According to Sims (1992a), in un-
restricted VARs, τt has a tendency to exhibit temporal heterogeneity—a markedly
different behavior at the beginning and the end of the sample—and to explain an im-
plausibly high share of the variation of the variables over the sample. As a consequence,
priors limiting the explanatory power of this deterministic component have been shown
to improve the forecasting performance of BVARs.


                                                  8
  2. The first prior of this type is known as “sum-of-coefficients” prior and was orig-
     inally proposed by Doan, Litterman, and Sims (1984). Following the litera-
     ture, it is implemented using Theil mixed estimation, with a set of n artificial
     observations—one for each variable—stating that a no-change forecast is a good
     forecast at the beginning of the sample. More precisely, we construct the following
     set of dummy observations:
                                                                     
                                           +          ȳ0
                                       y       = diag
                                       n×n             µ
                                                                               
                                       +                          +         +
                                   x           =           0 , y , ..., y           ,
                                n×(1+np)               n×1

     where ȳ0 is an n × 1 vector containing the average of the first p observations for
     each variable, and the expression diag(v) denotes the diagonal matrix with the
     vector v on the main diagonal. These artificial observations are added on top of
     the data matrices y ≡ [yp+1 , ..., yT ]0 and x ≡ [xp+1 , ..., xT ]0 , which are then used
     for inference. The prior implied by these dummy observations is centered at 1
     for the sum of coefficients on own lags for each variable, and at 0 for the sum
     of coefficients on other variables’ lags. It also introduces correlation among the
     coefficients on each variable in each equation. The hyperparameter µ controls
     the variance of these prior beliefs: as µ → ∞ the prior becomes uninformative,
     while µ → 0 implies the presence of a unit root in each equation and rules out
     cointegration.

  3. The fact that, in the limit, the sum-of-coefficients prior is not consistent with
     cointegration motivates the use of an additional prior that was introduced by
     Sims (1993), known as “dummy-initial-observation” prior. It is implemented
     using the following dummy observation

                                                 ȳ00
                                    y ++ =
                                    1×n           δ
                                                                     
                                                   1 ++
                                 x++           =      , y , ..., y ++
                                                                        ,
                               1×(1+np)            δ

     which states that a no-change forecast for all variables is a good forecast at the
     beginning of the sample. The hyperparameter δ controls the tightness of the prior
     implied by this artificial observation. As δ → ∞ the prior becomes uninformative.
     On the other hand, as δ → 0, all the variables of the VAR are forced to be at
     their unconditional mean, or the system is characterized by the presence of an
     unspecified number of unit roots without drift. As such, the dummy-initial-
     observation prior is consistent with cointegration.

Summing up, the setting of these priors depends on the hyperparameters λ, µ, δ and
ψ, which we treat as additional parameters. As hyperpriors for λ, µ and δ, we choose
Gamma densities with mode equal to 0.2, 1 and 1—the values recommended by Sims
and Zha (1998)—and standard deviations equal to 0.4, 1 and 1 respectively. Finally,


                                                   9
our prior on ψ/ (d − n − 1), i.e. the prior mean of the main diagonal of Σ, is an Inverse-
Gamma with scale and shape equal to (0.02)2 . This hyperprior peaks at approximately
(0.02)2 , since we use data in annualized log-terms. Moreover, it is proper, but quite
disperse since it does not have either a variance or a mean. We work with proper hyper-
priors because they guarantee the properness of the posterior and, from a frequentist
perspective, the admissibility of the estimator of the hyperparameters, which is a dif-
ficult property to check for the case of hierarchical models (see Berger, Strawderman,
and Dejung, 2005). Another appealing feature of non-flat hyperpriors is that they help
stabilize inference when the ML happens to have little curvature with respect to some
hyperparameters. For example, we have noticed that this can sometimes occur for
the hyperparameters of the sum-of-coefficients or the dummy-initial-observation priors
in larger-scale models. This being said, we stress that our hyperpriors are relatively
diffuse, and our empirical results are confirmed when using completely flat, improper
hyperpriors.


4     Forecasting Evaluation of BVAR Models
The assessment of the forecasting performance of econometric models has become stan-
dard in macroeconomics, even when the main objective of the study is not to provide
accurate out-of-sample predictions. This is because the forecasting evaluation can be
thought of as a model validation procedure. In fact, if model complexity is introduced
with a proliferation of parameters, instabilities due to estimation uncertainty might
completely offset the gains obtained by limiting model misspecification. Out-of-sample
forecasting reflects both parameter uncertainty and model misspecification and reveals
whether the benefits due to flexibility are outweighed by the fact that the more general
model captures also non-prominent features of the data.
    Our out-of-sample evaluation is based on the US dataset constructed by Stock and
Watson (2008). We work with three different VAR models, including progressively
larger sets of variables:4

    1. A SMALL-scale model—the prototypical monetary VAR—with three variables,
       i.e. GDP, the GDP deflator and the federal funds rate.

    2. A MEDIUM -scale model, which includes the variables used for the estimation
       of the DSGE model of Smets and Wouters (2007) for the US economy. In other
       words, we add consumption, investment, hours worked and wages to the small
       model.

    3. A LARGE -scale model, with 22 variables, using a dataset that nests the previ-
       ous two specifications and also includes a number of important additional labor
       market, financial and monetary variables.

Further details on the database are reported in Table 1.
   4
     The complete database in Stock and Watson (2008) includes 149 quarterly variables from 1959Q1
to 2008Q4. Since several variables are monthly, we follow Stock and Watson (2008) and transform
them into quarterly by taking averages.


                                               10
                                   INSERT TABLE 1 HERE

    The variables enter the models in annualized log-levels (i.e. we take logs and mul-
tiply by 4), except those already defined in terms of annualized rates, such as interest
rates, which are taken in levels. The number of lags in all the VARs is set to five.
    Using each of these three datasets, we produce the BVAR forecasts recursively for
two horizons (1 and 4 quarters), starting with the estimation sample that ranges from
1959Q1 to 1974Q4. More precisely, using data from 1959Q1 to 1974Q4, we gener-
ate draws from the posterior predictive density of the model for 1975Q1 (one quarter
ahead) and 1975Q4 (one year ahead). We then iterate the same procedure updating
the estimation sample, one quarter at a time, until the end of the sample, i.e. 2008Q4.
At each iteration, of course, we also re-estimate the posterior distribution of the hyper-
parameters. The outcome of this procedure is a time-series of 137 density forecasts for
each of the two forecast horizons.
    We start by assessing the accuracy of our models in terms of point forecasts, defined
as the median of the predictive density at each point in time. We then turn to the
evaluation of the density forecasts to assess how accurately different models capture
the uncertainty around the point forecasts.
    For each variable, the target of our evaluation is defined in terms of the h-period
                                          h
annualized average growth rates, i.e. zi,t+h   = h1 [yi,t+h − yi,t ]. For variables specified
in log-levels, this is approximately the average annualized growth rate over the next h
quarters, while for variables not transformed in logs this is the average quarterly change
over the next h quarters.
    We compare the forecasting performance of the BVAR to a VAR with flat prior,
estimated by OLS (we will refer to this model as VAR or flat-prior VAR) and a ran-
dom walk with drift, which is the model implied by a dogmatic Minnesota prior (we
will refer to this model as RW). We also compare the point forecasts of the BVAR
to those of a single equation model, augmented with factors extracted from a large
dataset using principal components.5 Factor models offer a parsimonious representa-
tion for macroeconomic variables while retaining the salient features of the data that
notoriously strongly comove. Hence, factor-augmented regressions are widely used in
order to deal with the curse of dimensionality, since a large set of potential predictors
can be replaced in the regressions by a much smaller number of factors. Factor-based
approaches are a benchmark in the literature and have been shown to produce very
accurate forecasts exploiting large cross sections of data. Specifically we focus on the
factor based forecasting approach of Stock and Watson (2002a,b), whose implementa-
tion details are reported in appendix C. Finally, in a later subsection, we compare the
forecasting performance of our hierarchical BVAR to more heuristic procedures for the
choice of hyperparameters.
  5
    The principal components are extracted from the whole set of 149 variables described in Stock and
Watson (2008).




                                                 11
4.1   Point forecasts
Table 2 analyzes the accuracy of point forecasts by reporting the mean squared forecast
errors (MSFE) of real GDP, the GDP deflator and the federal funds rate.

                               INSERT TABLE 2 HERE

    Comparing models of different size, notice that it is not possible to estimate the
large-scale VAR with a flat prior. In addition, the VAR forecasts worsen substantially
when moving from the small to the medium-scale model. This outcome indicates that
the gains from exploiting larger information sets are completely offset by an increase
in estimation error. On the contrary, the forecast accuracy of the BVARs does not
deteriorate when increasing the scale of the model, and sometimes even improves sub-
stantially (as it is the case for inflation). In this sense, the use of priors seems to be
able to turn the curse into a blessing of dimensionality. Moreover, BVAR forecasts are
systematically more accurate than the flat-prior VAR forecasts, for all the variables
and horizons that we consider.
    The comparison with the RW model is also favorable to the BVARs, with the pos-
sible exception of the forecasts of the federal funds rate at the one-year horizon. The
improvement of BVARs over the RW, which is the prior model, indicates that our
inference-based choice of the hyperparameters leads to the use of informative priors,
but not excessively so, letting the data shape the posterior beliefs about the model’s
coefficients. Finally, notice that the performance of the prior model is particularly poor
for inflation. In fact Atkeson and Ohanian (2001) show that a random walk for the
growth rate of the GDP deflator is a more appropriate naı̈ve benchmark model. Specif-
ically, they propose to forecast inflation over the subsequent year using the inflation
rate over the past year. The MSFE of this alternative simple model for inflation at a
4-quarter horizon is 1.24, which is smaller than that obtained with the random walk in
levels or with the small and medium BVARs, but higher than the corresponding MSFE
of the large-scale BVAR.
    Table 2 also suggests that the BVAR predictions are competitive with those of the
factor model. This outcome is in line with the findings of De Mol, Giannone, and
Reichlin (2008) and indicates that factor augmented and Bayesian regressions capture
the same features of the data. In fact, De Mol, Giannone, and Reichlin (2008) have
shown that Bayesian shrinkage and regressions augmented with principal components
are strictly connected.

4.2   Density forecasts
The point forecast evaluation of the previous subsection is a useful tool to discriminate
among models, but disregards the uncertainty assigned by each model to its point
prediction. For this reason, we now turn to the evaluation of the density forecasts.
We measure the accuracy of a density forecast using the log-predictive score, which
is simply the logarithm of the predictive density generated by a model, evaluated at
the realized value of the time series. Therefore, if model A has a higher average log



                                           12
predictive score than model B, it means that values close to the actual realizations of
a time series were a priori more likely according to model A relative to model B.
    Table 3 reports the average difference between the log predictive scores of the
BVARs and the competing models (the flat-prior VAR and RW models), for each
variable and horizon. A positive number indicates that the density forecasts produced
by our proposed procedure are more accurate than those of the alternative models. In
addition, the HAC estimate of its standard deviation (in parentheses) gives a rough
idea of the statistical significance and the volatility of this difference.6

                                    INSERT TABLE 3 HERE

    Table 3 makes clear that the BVAR forecasts outperform those of the RW and
flat-prior VAR also when evaluating the whole density.

4.3    Inspecting the mechanism
In this subsection, we provide some intuition about why the hierarchical procedure
described in the previous sections generates accurate forecasts. As we have discussed at
length in the introduction, VAR models require the estimation of many free parameters,
which, when using a flat prior, leads to high estimation uncertainty and overfitting. It
is therefore beneficial to shrink the model parameters towards a parsimonious prior
model. The key to success of the hierarchical BVAR is that it automatically infers the
“appropriate” amount of shrinkage, by selecting the tightness of the prior distribution.
For example, the procedure will select looser priors for models with fewer parameters,
and tighter priors for models with many parameters relative to the available data.
     To illustrate this point, consider a much simplified version of our model, i.e. a
BVAR with only a Minnesota prior, and the prior mean of the diagonal elements of
Σ set equal to the variance of the residuals of an AR(1) for each variables (as in
Kadiyala and Karlsson, 1997). This model is convenient because it involves only one
hyperparameter, namely the hyperparameter λ governing the overall standard deviation
of the Minnesota prior. For each dataset—small, medium and large—we estimate our
hierarchical BVAR on the full sample, and compute the posterior distribution of the
hyperparameter λ. These posteriors are plotted in figure 1, along with the hyperprior.
Notice that, in line with intuition, the posterior mode (and variance) of λ decreases with
the size of the model. In other words, the larger the size of the BVAR, the more likely
it is that we should shrink the model toward the parsimonious specification implied by
the Minnesota prior.

                                    INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE

4.4    Comparison with alternative methods
Given the good forecasting performance of our inference-based methodology for choos-
ing the hyperparameters (as good as that of factor models), a section discussing the
   6
     Notice that the associated t-statistics corresponds to the statistics of Amisano and Giacomini (2007)
with standard Normal distribution when the models are estimated using a rolling scheme. This is not
the case in our exercise since we use a recursive estimation procedure.


                                                   13
relative performance of alternative methods seems warranted. However, formal alterna-
tives to the marginal likelihood are absent in the literature. For instance, the Bayesian
or the Akaike information criteria cannot be adopted because their penalization for
model complexity only involves the number of parameters, and does not depend on
the value of the hyperparameters. As a consequence, both of these criteria would favor
models with loose priors that maximize the model in-sample fit.
    An informal method to choose the hyperparameters is to maximize the model fore-
casting performance over a pre-sample, as in Litterman (1980). An alternative possi-
bility is to control for over-fitting by targeting a desired in-sample fit, as in Bańbura,
Giannone, and Reichlin (2010). These heuristic procedures can be interpreted as rough
empirical Bayes estimators, and their ad-hoc nature might partly explain why Bayesian
VARs have encountered a number of opponents, especially among non-Bayesian re-
searchers. These approaches obviously raise a number of questions: what is the right
size of the pre-sample and the forecasting horizon? Should we minimize the MSFE or
control for the in-sample fit of all the variables or just those of interest? Moreover,
these procedures make it hard to conduct inference incorporating hyperparameter un-
certainty. Despite these limitations, these are the most popular approaches in the
literature, and we have compared them to our methodology.
    Concerning the first method, we have repeated our forecasting experiment by choos-
ing at each point in time the hyperparameters that maximize the past forecasting ability
of the VAR. In particular, to follow Litterman (1980) as close as possible, the measure
of out-of-sample forecasting performance is the Theil-U statistic, computed over the
previous 5 years, and averaged across variables and forecasting horizons (1 to 4). As
for the second method, we have replicated Bańbura, Giannone, and Reichlin (2010) by
setting the hyperparameters in the medium and large BVARs to match the average in-
sample fit of the small VAR with flat priors.7 Overall, we find that the performance of
these two approaches is similar, and considerably worse than our methodology. In fact,
they generate MSFEs that are up to 40 (Litterman, 1980) and 65 percent (Bańbura,
Giannone, and Reichlin, 2010) higher than those reported in table 2, with a particularly
poor forecasting performance for inflation.
    Finally, note that some authors do not even perform an informal search for the
optimal hyperparameters, but simply use values from previous studies. For example,
a common choice are the hyperparameters of Sims and Zha (1998), which are also
the values around which we center our hyperpriors. We have experimented with these
fixed hyperparameters and, quite interestingly, have found that they improve over the
heuristic procedures of Litterman (1980) and Bańbura, Giannone, and Reichlin (2010),
in our empirical application. In fact, the MSFE is only up to 20 percent worse than
our method for the small and medium BVAR, and comparable to our method for
the large BVAR. On the one hand, this result is somewhat unexpected because these
hyperparameters are not data dependent, and imply the same amount of shrinkage
regardless of the size and frequency of the model. This suggests that BVARs might
improve forecast accuracy over models with flat priors across a relatively wide range
   7
    Bańbura, Giannone, and Reichlin (2010) define the in-sample fit as the percentage deviation of the
in-sample MSFE from the MSFE of the no-change forecast.



                                                  14
of parameter settings. On the other hand, the relatively good performance of Sims
and Zha’s hyperparameters should not be very surprising, given that they seem to
be based on a rough optimization of the ML (as the authors have told us in a private
conversation). It is clear, however, that these specific values of the hyperparameters are
not guaranteed to work well for other applications—possibly outside the range of US
macroeconomic time series—and cannot be applied to different priors. On the contrary,
the main appeal of our methodology is that it can be used in a wide range of models and
applications, requiring little human judgement in the search for reasonable ranges of
hyperparameters. Consequently, there is also less need for extensive robustness checks
that characterize empirical works using more ad-hoc methodologies.


5    Structural BVARs and Estimation of Impulse Response
     Functions
The forecast accuracy of the hierarchical modeling procedure proposed in this paper
is quite remarkable, and in line with the interpretation of the marginal likelihood as a
measure of out-of-sample forecasting performance. However, VARs are not used in the
literature only for forecasting, but also as a tool to identify structural shocks and assess
their transmission mechanism. Inspired by an important insight of statistical decision
theory—the separation between loss functions and probability models—we now present
evidence that the same hierarchical modeling strategy also delivers accurate estimates
of the impulse response functions to structural shocks.
    More specifically, in this section we perform two exercises. First, we estimate the
impulse responses to monetary policy shocks using our large-scale BVAR with 22 vari-
ables. The analysis of the effects of monetary policy innovations is widespread in the
literature because, among other things, it allows to discriminate between competing
theoretical models of the economy (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 1999). The
purpose of this first exercise is to demonstrate that our hierarchical procedure allows
us to obtain plausible estimates of impulse response functions even when working with
large-scale models, which is not the case for flat-prior VARs. However, we do not have
an observable counterpart of these impulse responses in the data that can be used to
directly check their accuracy. This motivates our second exercise, which is a controlled
Monte Carlo experiment. In a nutshell, we simulate artificial datasets from a dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model, and assess the gains in accuracy for the
estimation of impulse responses to monetary policy shocks of our hierarchical procedure
over flat-prior VARs.
    Concerning our first exercise, the monetary policy shock is identified using a rela-
tively standard recursive identification scheme, assuming that prices and real activity
do not react contemporaneously to the monetary policy shock. The only variables
that can react contemporaneously to monetary policy shocks are the financial variables
(bond rates and stock prices), the exchange rate and M2, while the policy rate does
not react contemporaneously to financial variables (see Christiano, Eichenbaum, and
Evans, 1999). Figures 2, 3 and 4 report the median and the 16th and 84th percentiles
of the posterior distribution of the impulse responses to a monetary policy shock esti-


                                            15
mated in the large-scale model, using the full sample. The distribution of the impulse
responses encompasses both uncertainty on the parameters and hyperparameters.

                         INSERT FIGURES FROM 2 TO 4 HERE

    A one-standard-deviation (approximately 60 basis points) exogenous increase in the
federal funds rate generates a substantial contraction in GDP, employment and all other
variables related to economic activity. Monetary aggregates also decrease on impact,
indicating strong liquidity effects. Moreover, stock prices decline, the exchange rate
appreciates and the yield curve flattens. Prices decrease with a delay. Notice that,
with the exception of the CPI, the response of prices does not exhibit the so called
price puzzle, i.e. a counterintuitive positive response to a monetary contraction, which
is instead typical of VARs with small information sets (on this point, see Sims, 1992b;
Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz, 2005; Bańbura, Giannone, and Reichlin, 2010). These
responses are all in line with intuition, and hence lend support to our hierarchical
procedure. On the other hand, there is no formal way to assess the accuracy of this
estimation, since there is no counterpart of these responses directly observable in the
data. This is why we now turn to our second exercise.
    In our controlled Monte Carlo experiment, we adopt a medium-scale DSGE model
to simulate 500 artificial time series of length of 200 quarters, for the following seven
macro variables: output (Y), consumption (C), investment (I), hours worked (H), wages
(W), prices (P) and the short-term interest rate (R). For each dataset, we estimate the
impulse responses to a monetary policy shock with our hierarchical BVAR model and
a flat-prior VAR, and compare these estimates to the true impulse responses of the
theoretical model.
    The DSGE that we use to simulate the data is identical to Justiniano, Primiceri,
and Tambalotti (2010), with the exception that the behavior of the private sector is pre-
determined with respect to the monetary policy shock, as in Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (2005). This justifies the use of a recursive scheme for the identification of
monetary policy shocks in the BVAR and the VAR. Finally, the DSGE is parameter-
ized using the posterior mode of the unknown coefficients, estimated using U.S. data on
output growth, consumption growth, investment growth, hours, wage inflation, price
inflation and the federal funds rate, as in Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010).
This is a good laboratory to study the question at hand, since it is well known that
this class of medium-scale DSGE models fits the data quite well (Smets and Wouters,
2007).
    Figure 5 reports the theoretical DSGE impulse responses to a monetary policy
shock (solid line), and the average across replications of the median responses using
our hierarchical procedure (dashed line) and the flat-prior VAR (dotted line). Both the
BVAR and the VAR responses replicate the shape of the true impulse responses quite
well. In general, the bias introduced by using an informative prior is not substantially
larger than the small sample bias of the flat-prior VAR.8
   8
     We have also computed the impulse responses to a monetary policy shock in the theoretical VAR(5)
representation of the DSGE model. These responses are extremely similar to the DSGE responses.



                                                 16
                              INSERT FIGURE 5 HERE

    However, the difference between the average median across replications and the
theoretical impulse response, the bias, represents only one dimension of accuracy. In
order to take into account also the standard deviation of the errors across replications,
we need to look at the average squared error across replications.
    More in details, for each replication, we compute the overall error as the difference
between the theoretical response and the estimated median response across variables
and horizons. Then, for each variable and horizon, we take the average of the squared
errors across replications (MSE). Figure 6 reports the ratio between the MSE for the
flat-prior VAR and the hierarchical BVAR.

                              INSERT FIGURE 6 HERE

    Such a ratio is greater than one for most variables and horizons, indicating that the
hierarchical BVAR yields very substantial accuracy gains. For instance, depending on
the horizon, the impulse responses of output, consumption, investment, hours and wages
based on the BVAR can be about twice as accurate. An important exception is the
response of the federal funds rate, which is estimated to be too persistent and to decay
too slowly when using informative priors (see figures 5 and 6). Further experimentation
reveals that this excessively persistent behavior is due to the sum-of-coefficients prior.
While this prior is very important to enhance the forecasting performance of the model,
the outcomes in figures 5 and 6 suggest that more sophisticated priors might be needed
to discipline the behavior of the model at low frequencies. It is also reasonable to expect
that these more sophisticated priors should be based on insights coming from economic
theory (on this point, see, for example, Del Negro and Schorfheide, 2004; Villani, 2009),
since it is well known that the data are less informative about low frequency trends.


6    Conclusion
In this paper, we have studied the problem of how to choose the informativeness of a
variety of commonly used prior distributions for VAR models. Our approach consists
of treating the coefficients of the prior as additional parameters, in the spirit of hier-
archical modeling. We have shown that this approach is theoretically grounded, easy
to implement, and performs very well both in terms of out-of-sample forecasting, and
accuracy in the estimation of impulse response functions. Moreover, it greatly reduces
the number and importance of subjective choices in the setting of the prior. In sum,
this hierarchical modeling procedure is beneficial for both reduced-form and structural
analysis with VARs. Moreover, this approach may prove particularly useful also for
the increasingly large literature on DSGE models. It is in fact typical in this literature
to validate a theoretical model by comparing its fit and impulse responses to those of
VARs.




                                            17
A         The Marginal Likelihood of BVARs with Conjugate
          Priors
This appendix derives an analytical expression for the ML of BVARs with conjugate
priors (possibly implemented using dummy observations), and proves the fit-complexity
trade-off result that we have stated in (2.5) in the main text.

A.1          Analytical derivation of the ML
Consider the VAR model of section 1

                      yt = C + B1 yt−1 + ... + Bp yt−p + εt , t = 1, ..., T
                      εt ∼ N (0, Σ) ,

and rewrite it as


                                          Y       = Xβ + 
                                            ∼ N (0, Σ ⊗ IT −p ) ,

where y ≡ [yp+1 , ..., yT ]0 , Y ≡ vec (y), xt ≡ [1, yt−1    0 , ..., y 0 ]0 , X ≡ I ⊗ x0 , x ≡
                                                                       t−p      t   n     t
[xp+1 , ..., xT ]0 , X ≡ In ⊗ x, ε ≡ [εp+1 , ..., εT ]0 ,  ≡ vec (ε), B ≡ [C, B1 , ..., Bp ]0 and
β ≡ vec(B). Finally, define the number of regressors for each equation by k ≡ np + 1.
    As in section 2, the prior on (β, Σ) is given by the following Normal-Inverse-Wishart
distribution9

                                                  Σ ∼ IW (Ψ, d)
                                           β|Σ ∼ N (b, Σ ⊗ Ω) ,

where, for simplicity, we are not explicitly conditioning on the hyperparameters b, Ω,
Ψ and d.
   The unnormalized posterior of (β, Σ) can be obtained by multiplying the prior
density by the likelihood function. If we condition on the initial p observations of the
sample, which is a standard assumption, we obtain:
                                       n(T −p+k)                                          1
                                                                                        e− 2 tr(ΨΣ )
                                                                                                 −1
                                  1           2
                                                      − T −p+k+n+d+1     −n         d
             p (β, Σ|Y ) =                          |Σ|       2        |Ω|2   |Ψ|   2
                                                                                                nd
                                                                                                             ·
                                 2π                                                     2        2   · Γn    d
                                                                                                             2
                                     "                                                  #
                                         (Y − Xβ)0 (Σ ⊗ IT )−1 (Y − Xβ) +
                              − 12
                                            + (β − b)0 (Σ ⊗ Ω)−1 (β − b)
                             e                                                              .                      (A.6)
    9
        We are using the following parameterization of the Inverse Wishart density:                          p (Σ|Ψ, d) =
                   ·e 2 (     )
    d       n+d+1 − 1 tr ΨΣ−1
          −
|Ψ| 2 ·|Σ|     2
             nd                 .
            2 2 ·Γn ( 2 )
                      d




                                                          18
Tedious algebraic manipulations of (A.6) yield the expression
                                        n(T −p+k)                                                                             1
                                                                                                                            e− 2 tr(ΨΣ )
                                                                                                                                     −1
                                1                    2
                                                                       − T −p+k+n+d+1                       −n          d
     p (β, Σ|Y ) =                                                |Σ|          2                    |Ω|      2    |Ψ|   2
                                                                                                                                 nd
                                                                                                                                                ·
                               2π                                                                                           2     2   · Γn      d
                                                                                                                                                2
                                                           0 h                                                                     i                       
                                                 β − β̂               X 0 (Σ ⊗ IT )−1 X + (Σ ⊗ Ω)−1                                        β − β̂ +
                              − 12                                   0                                                                                     
                                                  + β̂ − b (Σ ⊗ Ω)−1 β̂ − b + ˆ0 (Σ ⊗ IT )−1 ˆ
                          e                                                                                                                                         ,(A.7)
                                −1                                                        
where B̂ ≡ x0 x + Ω−1      x0 y + Ω−1 b̂ , β̂ ≡ vec B̂ , ε̂ ≡ y − xB̂, ˆ ≡ vec (ε̂), and b̂
is a k × n matrix obtained by reshaping the vector b in such a way that each column    
corresponds to the prior mean of the coefficients of each equation (i.e. b ≡ vec b̂ ).
It can then be shown that (A.7) is the kernel of the following Normal-Inverse-Wishart
posterior distribution:
                                                                                     0                                                     
                                                                  0                             −1
               Σ|Y        ∼ IW Ψ + ε̂ ε̂ + B̂ − b̂ Ω                                                        B̂ − b̂ , T − p + d                                     (A.8)
                                                                                    −1    
            β|Σ, Y        ∼ N β̂, Σ ⊗ x0 x + Ω−1                                                    .                                                               (A.9)

   The ML is the integral of the unnormalized posterior:
                                                  Z Z
                          p (Y ) =                           p (Y |β, Σ) · p (β|Σ) · p (Σ) dβdΣ.                                                                (A.10)

Let’s start with the integral with respect to β. Substituting (A.7) into (A.10) we obtain
                                                                                                                                                               
                                     n(T −p+k)                                                                                − 1 tr ΨΣ−1
                                                                                                                                      (        )
                                 1                2                   − T −p+k+n+d+1                     −n            d
                                                                                                                            e     2
                               2π                            |Σ|             2                  |Ω|      2      |Ψ|   2
                                                                                                                                 nd                ·
                                                                                                                                 i ( ) 
           Z                                                                                                                   2 2 ·Γn d2       
                                               0 h                                                                                          
 p (Y, Σ) =                                                 X 0 (Σ ⊗ IT −p )−1 X + (Σ ⊗ Ω)−1
                                                                                                                                                  dβ,
                                  β − β̂                                                                                             β − β̂ +   
                  − 12                                     0                                                                              
                                       + β̂ − b (Σ ⊗ Ω)−1 β̂ − b + ˆ0 (Σ ⊗ IT −p )                                                     −1
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                ˆ
                   e
which can be solved by “completing the squares,” yielding
                                              n(T −p)                                                                   1
                                                                                                                      e− 2 tr(ΨΣ )
                                                                                                                               −1
                                    1                2
                                                                      − T −p+n+d+1                  −n            d
         p (Y, Σ) =                                           |Σ|            2              |Ω|      2      |Ψ|   2
                                                                                                                           nd
                                                                                                                                           ·
                                   2π                                                                                 2     2    · Γn      d
                                                                                                                                           2
                                         h                                                                        i
                                                         0                                                   −1
                                  − 12       (β̂−b) (Σ⊗Ω)−1 (β̂−b)+ˆ0 (Σ⊗IT −p )                                 
                                                                                                                  ˆ                             −n
                              e                                                                                       · x0 x + Ω−1               2
                                                                                                                                                            .

   We are now ready to take the integral with respect to Σ:
                            n(T −p)
                        1                2                   n          d             1                                          −n
      p (Y ) =                                    |Ω|− 2 |Ψ| 2                  nd
                                                                                              x0 x + Ω−1                        2

                       2π                                                   2    2   · Γn       d
                                                                                                2
                                                                       T −p+n+d+1             1
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                            e− 2 tr(ΨΣ ) ·
                                                                                                      −1
                                                            |Σ|−           2
                                                                                                                                                 
                   Z                                        0                                     
                                                 β̂ − b (Σ ⊗ Ω)−1 β̂ − b + ˆ0 (Σ ⊗ IT −p )−1 ˆ 
                                                                                                                                                 
                                − 21
                                                                                                  dΣ.(A.11)
                     
                     
                                        |                                                  {z                                                  } 
                              e                                                             P




                                                                                19
The expression for P can be simplified by using the following property of the vec
operator:                                                 
                     vec (A)0 (D ⊗ B) vec (C) = tr A0 BCD0 .
This yields                                                                                           
                                                                 0                        
                                  0     −1                                 −1                     −1
                     P = tr ε̂ ε̂Σ              + B̂ − b̂ Ω                         B̂ − b̂ Σ              .                  (A.12)

We can now solve the integral by substituting (A.12) into (A.11), and multiplying and
dividing the expression inside the integral by the constant term necessary to obtain
the density of an Inverse-Wishart. These operations result in the following closed-form
solution for the ML:
                                                                           
                                  n(T −p) Γ                     T −p+d
                                 1     2      n                      2
                  p (Y ) =                                                    ·
                                   π                      Γn           d
                                                                       2
                                       n             d                              −n
                                |Ω|− 2 · |Ψ| 2 · x0 x + Ω−1                          2
                                                                                         ·
                                                                  0                           − T −p+d
                                                                                                       2
                                           0                               −1
                                  Ψ + ε̂ ε̂ + B̂ − b̂ Ω                             B̂ − b̂                      .            (A.13)


A.2    Numerical issues
For large systems, (A.13) is numerically unstable and it is convenient to replace it with
the equivalent expression
                                                                  
                           n(T −p) Γ               T −p+d
                          1     2      n                2
              p (Y ) =                                               ·
                          π                      Γn       d
                                                          2
                                T −p
                                                                           −n
                         |Ψ|−     2       0 0
                                       · DΩ x xDΩ + Ik                      2   ·
                                                                 0                                       − T −p+d
                                                                                                                    2
                                   0        0                              −1
                         In +     DΨ       ε̂ ε̂ + B̂ − b̂ Ω                         B̂ − b̂        DΨ                    ,   (A.14)

where DΩ DΩ 0 = Ω and D D 0 = Ψ−1 . The last two determinants can be computed as
                          Ψ Ψ                                           0           
                                            0  0         0   0
the product of one plus the eigenvalues of DΩ x xDΩ and DΨ ε̂ ε̂ + B̂ − b̂ Ω −1  B̂ − b̂ DΨ
respectively, which is numerically stable.

A.3    The ML with dummy observations
It is common in the literature to implement some conjugate priors using dummy obser-
vations (e.g. the sum-of-coefficients and the dummy-initial-observation priors). In this
case, the ML is given by p (Y ⊕ ) /p (Y ∗ ), where p (·) is the function (A.13) or (A.14),
Y ∗ denotes the dummy observations, and Y ⊕ is the extended set of data, consisting of
Y and Y ∗ .




                                                          20
A.4    Proof of the fit-complexity trade-off result
In order to prove (2.5), rewrite (A.13) as
                                                                 
                       n(T −p) Γ                 T −p+d                                                        − T −p+d
                      1     2      n                  2                  T −p+d+n+1                                         2
         p (Y ) =                                                    ·
                       π                    Γn           d                  d+n+1
                                                         2
                            n             T −p                                     −n
                     |Ω|− 2 · |Ψ|−          2      · x0 x + Ω−1                     2
                                                                                            ·
                                                                                                                           T −p+d
                                                            0                                 −1                          2

                      Ψ +      ε̂0 ε̂ +       B̂ − b̂            Ω−1            B̂ − b̂                 Ψ
                                                                                                                                   .   (A.15)
                                     T −p+d+n+1                                                         d+n+1

Define xt ≡ [xp+1 , ..., xt ]0 and notice that xt0 xt can be written recursively as xt0 xt =
xt−10 xt−1 +xt x0t . The matrix determinant lemma (Harville, 1997) implies that xt0 xt + Ω−1
can also be expressed recursively as
                                                                                                                 −1          
       t0 t     −1         t−10 t−1              −1
      x x +Ω         = x        x     +Ω                 · 1+              x0t         x   t−10 t−1
                                                                                                x       +Ω    −1
                                                                                                                         xt .            (A.16)

The iteration of (A.16), starting from the initial value Ω−1 , allows to derive
                                               T
                                               Y                                                               −1        
                0     −1             −1
              xx+Ω          = Ω                              1+        x0t         x   t−10 t−1
                                                                                             x       +Ω   −1
                                                                                                                        xt .
                                           t=p+1

   If we substitute this last expression into (A.15), we obtain
                                                                 
                       n(T −p) Γ                 T −p+d                                                        − T −p+d
                      1     2      n                  2                        T −p+d+n+1                                   2
         p (Y ) =                                                    ·
                       π                    Γn           d                        d+n+1
                                                         2
                                     T                                                                −1        − n
                            T −p     Y                                                                                  2
                     |Ψ|−     2                  1 + x0t xt−10 xt−1 + Ω−1                                     xt
                                    t=p+1
                                                                                                                            T −p+d
                                                           0                                 −1                          2

                      Ψ +      ε̂0 ε̂ +       B̂ − b̂            Ω−1            B̂ − b̂                 Ψ
                                                                                                                                   ,
                                     T −p+d+n+1                                                         d+n+1

which, using the properties of the determinants and Kronecker products, can be rewrit-
ten as
                                                                 
                       n(T −p) Γ                 T −p+d                                                        − T −p+d
                      1     2      n                  2                  T −p+d+n+1                                         2
         p (Y ) =                                                    ·
                       π                    Γn           d                  d+n+1
                                                         2
                      T                                                                                      − 12
                                                                                                −1 −1
                      Y
                                Ψ⊗ 1+              x0t       x   t−10 t−1
                                                                           x           +Ω               xt
                     t=p+1
                                                                                                                            T −p+d
                                                           0                                 −1                          2

                      Ψ +      ε̂0 ε̂ +       B̂ − b̂            Ω−1            B̂ − b̂                 Ψ
                                                                                                                                   .
                                     T −p+d+n+1                                                         d+n+1


                                                                  21
    Finally, notice that
             h                     i                                                                        −1                
                         t−1                                                       t−10 t−1                 −1
       EΣ var yt |y            ,Σ        = EΣ Xt Σ ⊗ x                                         x       +Ω                Xt0   +Σ
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                 −1 −1
                                         = EΣ Σ ⊗ 1 +                            x0t       x   t−10 t−1
                                                                                                   x       +Ω              xt
                                                                                                                                    
                                                     Ψ                             −1
                                         =               ⊗ 1 + x0t xt−10 xt−1 + Ω−1     xt ,
                                                   d−n−1
where EΣ denotes the expectation operator with respect to Σ. We can now express the
ML as

                                                                        T −p+d             T
                                                  −1                     2               Y                  − 21
     p (Y ) = const ·              Vεposterior              Vεprior                ·               Vt|t−1
                                                                                       t=p+1
                                                           
                   n(T −p) Γ                   T −p+d                                                d
                  1     2      n                    2                        (d − n − 1) 2
     const ≡                                                  ·                                          T −p+d
                     π                   Γn         d
                                                                    (T − p + d − n − 1)                       2
                                                    2
                                                                                                                                        
                         h     
                                         t−1
                                                      i        Ψ                             −1
     Vt|t−1 ≡ EΣ var yt |y                       ,Σ         =       ⊗ 1 + x0t xt−10 xt−1 + Ω−1     xt
                                                              d−n−1
                                 Ψ
     Vεprior ≡ E [Σ] =
                               d−n−1
                                                                       0                        
                                     Ψ + ε̂0 ε̂ + B̂ − b̂ Ω−1 B̂ − b̂
Vεposterior ≡ E [Σ|Y ] =                                                                               ,
                                                   T −p+d−n−1
where Vεprior and Vεposterior are the prior and posterior means of the residual variance,
and their analytical expressions follow from the properties of the Inverse-Wishart dis-
tribution.


B      The MCMC Algorithm
This appendix presents the details of the MCMC algorithm that we use to simulate the
posterior of the coefficients of the BVAR, including the hyperparameters. We use the
following standard Metropolis algorithm:

    1. Initialize the hyperparameters γ at their posterior mode, which requires a numer-
       ically maximization.
    2. Draw a candidate value of the hyperparameters γ ∗ from a Gaussian proposal
       distribution, with mean equal to γ (j−1) and variance equal to c · W , where γ (j−1)
       is the previous draw of γ, W is the inverse Hessian of the negative of the log-
       posterior of the hyperparameters at the peak, and c is a scaling constant chosen
       to obtain an acceptance rate of approximately 20 percent.
    3. Set                                              (
                                             (j)                     γ ∗ with pr. α(j)
                                         γ         =
                                                             γ (j−1)    with pr. 1 − α(j) ,

                                                                    22
       where                                            (                   )
                                       (j)              p (γ ∗ |y)
                                     α       = min 1,              
                                                      p γ (j−1) |y
               h       i                           
    4. Draw β (j) , Σ(j) from p β, Σ|y, γ (j) , which is the density of the Normal-Inverse-
       Wishart distribution in (A.8)-(A.9).

    5. Increment j to j + 1 and go to 2.


C      Factor Augmented Regression
We consider the following forecasting equation:
                                       pX
                                        z −1                   r
                                                               X
                      h
                     zi,t+h   = ci +           αi,s zi,t−s +         λik fk,t + ehi,t+h
                                       s=0                     k=1

where   h
       zi,t+h   denotes the h-step ahead variable to be forecasted. The predictors fk,t, k =
1, ..., r are common factors extracted from the set of all variables. The lags of the target
variable zi,t−s are explicitly used as predictors in order to capture variable specific
dynamics. The regression coefficients are allowed to differ across forecast horizons, but
the dependence is dropped for notational convenience.
     The estimation of the forecasting equation is performed in two steps, as in Stock
and Watson (2002a,b). In the first step, the common factors fk,t are estimated by
principal components extracted from a large set of 149 predictors. Before extracting
the common factors, the data are transformed in order to achieve stationarity and
standardized. For details on data definitions and transformations see table 1 and Stock
and Watson (2008).
     In the second step, the coefficients are estimated by ordinary least squares. Using all
the principal components (i.e. by setting r equal to the number of variables 149) would
be equivalent to running an OLS regression on all the available regressors. Therefore,
as in Stock and Watson (2008), we set r = 3 and pz = 4.


References
Amisano, G., and R. Giacomini (2007): “Comparing density forecasts via weighted
 likelihood ratio tests,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 25, 177–190.

Atkeson, A., and L. E. Ohanian (2001): “Are Phillips curves useful for forecasting
 inflation?,” Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, (Win), 2–11.

Bańbura, M., D. Giannone, and L. Reichlin (2010): “Large Bayesian VARs,”
 Journal of Applied Econometrics, 25(1), 71–92.

Belmonte, M., G. Koop, and D. Korobilis (2011): “Hierarchical shrinkage in
 time-varying parameter models,” MPRA Paper 31827, University Library of Munich,
 Germany.

                                                    23
Berger, J. O. (1985): Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis. Berlin:
 Springer-Verlag.

Berger, J. O., and L. Berliner (1986): “Robust Bayes and Empirical Bayes Anal-
 ysis with # -Contaminated Priors,” The Annals of Statistics, 14, 461–486.

Berger, J. O., W. Strawderman, and T. Dejung (2005): “Posterior Property
 and Admissibility of Hyperpriors in Normal Hierarchical Models,” The Annals of
 Statistics, 33(2), 604–646.

Bernanke, B., J. Boivin, and P. S. Eliasz (2005): “Measuring the Effects of
 Monetary Policy: A Factor-augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1), 387–422.

Bloor, C., and T. Matheson (2009): “Real-time conditional forecasts with Bayesian
 VARs: An application to New Zealand,” Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion
 Paper Series DP2009/02, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.

Canova, F. (2007): Methods for Applied Macroeconomic Research. Princeton Univer-
 sity Press.

Carriero, A., T. Clark, and M. Marcellino (2011): “Bayesian VARs: specifica-
 tion choices and forecast accuracy,” Discussion paper.

Carriero, A., G. Kapetanios, and M. Marcellino (2009): “Forecasting exchange
 rates with a large Bayesian VAR,” International Journal of Forecasting, 25(2), 400–
 417.

        (2010): “Forecasting Government Bond Yields,” mimeo, University of London.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1999): “Monetary policy
 shocks: What have we learned and to what end?,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics,
 ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, chap. 2,
 pp. 65–148. Elsevier.

         (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary
  Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 1–45.

De Mol, C., D. Giannone, and L. Reichlin (2008): “Forecasting using a large
 number of predictors: Is Bayesian shrinkage a valid alternative to principal compo-
 nents?,” Journal of Econometrics, 146(2), 318–328.

Del Negro, M., and F. Schorfheide (2004): “Priors from General Equilibrium
 Models for VARS,” International Economic Review, 45(2), 643–673.

        (2011): “Bayesian Macroeconometrics,” in The Oxford Handbook of Bayesian
  Econometrics, ed. by J. Geweke, G. Koop, and H. van Dijk, pp. 293–389. Oxford
  University Press.



                                         24
Del Negro, M., F. Schorfheide, F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2007): “On the Fit
 of New Keynesian Models,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 25, 123–143.

Doan, T., R. Litterman, and C. A. Sims (1984): “Forecasting and Conditional
 Projection Using Realistic Prior Distributions,” Econometric Reviews, 3, 1–100.

Forni, M., M. Hallin, M. Lippi, and L. Reichlin (2000): “The Generalized Dy-
  namic Factor Model: identification and estimation,” Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics, 82, 540–554.

Gelman, A., J. B. Carlin, H. S. Stern, and D. B. Rubin (2004): Bayesian Data
 Analysis: Second Edition. Boca Raton: Chapman and Hall CRC.

Geweke, J. (2001): “Bayesian econometrics and forecasting,” Journal of Economet-
 rics, 100(1), 11–15.

Geweke, J., and C. Whiteman (2006): “Bayesian Forecasting,” in Handbook of
 Economic Forecasting, ed. by G. Elliott, C. Granger, and A. Timmermann, chap. 1,
 pp. 3–80. Elsevier.

Giannone, D., M. Lenza, D. Momferatou, and L. Onorante (2010): “Short-
  Term Inflation Projections: a Bayesian Vector Autoregressive approach,” CEPR
  Discussion Papers 7746, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Giannone, D., M. Lenza, and L. Reichlin (2008): “Explaining The Great Moder-
  ation: It Is Not The Shocks,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3),
  621–633.

Harville, D. (1997): Matrix Algebra from a Statistician’s Perspective. Springer Verlag.

Jarociski, M., and A. Marcet (2010): “Autoregressions in small samples, priors
  about observables and initial conditions,” Working Paper Series 1263, European
  Central Bank.

Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2010): “Investment shocks
  and business cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(2), 132–145.

Kadiyala, K. R., and S. Karlsson (1997): “Numerical Methods for Estimation
 and Inference in Bayesian VAR-Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 12(2),
 99–132.

Karlsson, S. (2012): “Forecasting with Bayesian Vector Autoregressions,” Working
 Papers 2012:12, Orebro University, Swedish Business School.

Knox, T., J. H. Stock, and M. W. Watson (2000): “Empirical Bayes Forecasts
 of One Time Series Using Many Predictors,” Econometric Society World Congress
 2000 Contributed Papers 1421, Econometric Society.

Koop, G. (2003): Bayesian Econometrics. Wiley.


                                          25
         (2011): “Forecasting with Medium and Large Bayesian VARs,” Journal of
  Applied Econometrics, forthcoming.

Koop, G., and D. Korobilis (2010): “Bayesian Multivariate Time Series Methods
 for Empirical Macroeconomics,” Foundations and Trends in Econometrics, 3(4), 267–
 358.

Litterman, R. (1979): “Techniques of forecasting using vector autoregressions,” Fed-
  eral Reserve of Minneapolis Working Paper 115.

        (1980): “A Bayesian Procedure for Forecasting with Vector Autoregression.,”
  Working paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Economics.

         (1986): “Forecasting With Bayesian Vector Autoregressions – Five Years of
  Experience,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 4, 25–38.

Lopes, H. F., A. R. B. Moreira, and A. M. Schmidt (1999): “Hyperparameter
  estimation in forecast models,” Comput. Stat. Data Anal., 29(4), 387–410.

Phillips, P. C. (1995): “Automated Forecasts of Asia-Pacific Economic Activity,”
 Cowles foundation discussion papers, Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics,
 Yale University.

Phillips, P. C., and W. Ploberger (1994): “Posterior Odds Testing for a Unit
 Root with Data-Based Model Selection,” Econometric Theory, 10(3-4), 774–808.

Primiceri, G. E. (2005): “Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and Mon-
 etary Policy,” Review of Economic Studies, 72, 821–852.

Robbins, H. (1956): “An Empirical Bayes Approach to Statistics,” Proceedings of the
 Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Volume 1:
 Contributions to the Theory of Statistics, pp. 157–163.

Robertson, J. C., and E. W. Tallman (1999): “Vector autoregressions: forecasting
 and reality,” Economic Review, (Q1), 4–18.

Sims, C. A. (1980): “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica, 48(1), 1–48.

Sims, C. A. (1992a): “Bayesian inference for multivariate time series with trend,”
  mimeo, Princeton University.

        (1992b): “Interpreting the macroeconomic time series facts: the effects of
  monetary policy,” European Economic Review, 36, 975–1000.

        (1993): “A Nine-Variable Probabilistic Macroeconomic Forecasting Model,” in
  Business Cycles, Indicators and Forecasting, NBER Chapters, pp. 179–212. National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (1998): “Bayesian Methods for Dynamic Multivariate Mod-
  els,” International Economic Review, 39(4), 949–68.


                                        26
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles:
  A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606.

Stein, C. (1956): “Inadmissibility of the Usual Estimator for the Mean of a Multivari-
  ate Normal Distribution,” Proc. Third Berkeley Symp. on Math. Statist. and Prob.,
  1, 197–206.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2002a): “Forecasting Using Principal Com-
  ponents from a Large Number of Predictors,” Journal of the American Statistical
  Association, 97, 147–162.

        (2002b): “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diffusion Indexes,” Journal of
  Business and Economics Statistics, 20, 147–162.

          (2008): “Forecasting in Dynamic Factor Models Subject to Structural Insta-
  bility,” in The Methodology and Practice of Econometrics, A Festschrift in Honour
  of Professor David F. Hendry, ed. by J. Castle, and N. Shephard. Oxford University
  Press.

Villani, M. (2009): “Steady-state priors for vector autoregressions,” Journal of Ap-
  plied Econometrics, 24(4), 630–650.

Wright, J. H. (2009): “Forecasting US inflation by Bayesian model averaging,” Jour-
 nal of Forecasting, 28(2), 131–144.




                                         27
Tables

                                 Table 1: The description of the database
 Variables                                             Mnemonic                Transf.       Transf.          Small   Medium      Large
                                                                               BVAR          Factor Model     BVAR    BVAR        BVAR
 Real GDP                                              RGDP                    log           log difference     x       x            x
 GDP deflator                                          PGDP                    logs          log difference     x       x            x
 Federal Funds Rate                                    FedFunds                raw           difference         x       x            x
 CPI                                                   CPI-ALL                 logs          log difference                          x
 Commodity Price                                       Com:spotprice(real)     logs          log difference                          x
 Industrial Production                                 IP:total                logs          log difference                          x
 Employment                                            Emp:total               logs          log difference                          x
 Unemployment                                          Emp:services            raw           difference                              x
 Real Consumption                                      Cons                    logs          log difference             x            x
 Real Investment                                       Inv                     logs          log difference             x
 Residential Investment                                Res.Inv                 logs          log difference                          x
 Non Residential Investment                            NonResInv               logs          log difference                          x
 Personal Consumption Expenditures, Price Index        PCED                    logs          log difference                          x
 Gross Private Domestic Investment, Price Index        PGPDI                   logs          log difference                          x
 Capacity Utilization                                  CapacityUtil            raw           difference                              x
 Consumer expectations                                 Consumerexpect          raw           difference                              x
 Hours Worked                                          Emp.Hours               logs          log difference             x            x
 Real compensation per hours                           RealComp/Hour           logs          log difference             x            x
 One year bond rate                                    1yrT-bond               raw           difference                              x
 Five years bond rate                                  5yrT-bond               raw           difference                              x
 SP500                                                 S&P500                  logs          log difference                          x
 Effective exchange rate                               Exrate:avg              logs          log difference                          x
 M2                                                    M2                      logs          log difference                          x




                      Table 2: Mean squared forecast errors of point forecasts
                                                 Small (S)              Medium (M)                    Large (L)             Factor M.     RW
    Horizons              Variables            VAR    BVAR             VAR    BVAR                  VAR    BVAR

 One Quarter             Real GDP              13.57      9.61         19.18          7.97                     8.18           7.29        10.23
                       GDP Deflator             1.54      1.32         2.27           1.35                     1.10           1.14        5.19
                    Federal Funds Rates         1.61      1.04         1.83           1.03                     1.00           1.25        1.06

   One Year              Real GDP              5.39       3.85         11.90          3.42                     3.97           3.52        3.98
                       GDP Deflator            1.61       1.45         2.22           1.58                     0.96           1.01        4.65
                    Federal Funds Rates        0.58       0.32         0.56           0.31                     0.36           0.32        0.31

Note: The table reports the mean squared forecast errors of the BVARs and the competing models (VAR: flat-prior VAR, RW:

Random Walk in levels with drift, Factor M.: factor augmented regression), for each variable and horizon. The evaluation sample

is 1975Q1 - 2008Q4 for the one quarter ahead forecasts and 1975Q4 - 2008Q4 for the one year ahead forecasts.




                                                              28
                                Table 3: Average difference of log-scores
                                                  Small (S)               Medium (M)                   Large (L)
    Horizons             Variables            vs VAR vs RW              vs VAR   vs RW             vs VAR vs RW

 One Quarter             Real GDP               0.10       0.06           0.31        0.16                       0.17
                                               (0.04)      (0.05)         (0.05)      (0.06)                    (0.06)
                       GDP Deflator             0.05       0.74           0.15        0.73                       0.81
                                               (0.03)      (0.09)         (0.05)      (0.09)                    (0.09)
                   Federal Funds Rates          0.07        0.06          0.10        0.07                       0.09
                                               (0.07)      (0.08)         (0.13)      (0.08)                    (0.10)


   One Year              Real GDP               0.11       0.00           0.43        0.06                       0.03
                                               (0.07)      (0.09)         (0.12)      (0.09)                    (0.13)
                       GDP Deflator             0.05       1.00           0.02        0.88                       1.18
                                               (0.10)      (0.33)         (0.22)      (0.36)                    (0.30)
                   Federal Funds Rates          0.26       0.07           0.27        0.05                       -0.03
                                                (0.07)     (0.07)           (0.12)      (0.09)                  (0.12)
Note: The table reports the average difference between the log predictive scores of the BVARs and the competing models (the

flat-prior VAR and RW models), for each variable and horizon. The HAC estimate of the standard deviation of the difference

between the log predictive scores of the BVARs and the competing models is reported in parenthesis. The evaluation sample is

1975Q1 - 2008Q4 for the one quarter ahead forecasts and 1975Q4 - 2008Q4 for the one year ahead forecasts.




                                                            29
Figures


          Figure 1: Posterior distribution of the hyperparameter gov-
          erning the variance of the Minnesota Prior

                    60
                                                                                  Large
                                                                                  Medium
                                                                                  Small
                    50                                                            Hyperprior



                    40



                    30



                    20



                    10



                     0
                         0   0.1      0.2      0.3     0.4      0.5     0.6      0.7           0.8


          Note: The figure reports the posterior distribution of the hyperparameter λ, the parame-
          ter governing the variance of the Minnesota prior in the small, medium, large BVARs, and
          its prior distribution. The posterior distribution is obtained by using the whole sample.




                                                     30
           Figure 2: Impulse responses of real variables

                        RGDP                                      Cons                       Real Comp/Hour

           0                                     0                                   0

          −1                                    −1                                  −1

          −2                                    −2                                  −2
                   5     10         15   20               5       10     15   20             5     10    15    20
                       Emp: total                             Emp: services                      Emp. Hours
           0                                     0                                   0

          −1                                    −1                                  −1

          −2                                    −2                                  −2

          −3                                    −3                                  −3
                   5     10         15   20               5       10     15   20             5     10    15    20
                        IP: total                             Capacity Util                  Consumer expect
           0                                     0
                                                                                     1
          −1                                   −0.2

          −2                                   −0.4                                  0

          −3                                   −0.6
                                                                                    −1
               0          10              20          0            10          20        0          10          20
                        Res.Inv                                NonResInv
           0                                     0


          −5                                    −5


         −10                                   −10
               0          10              20          0            10          20




Note: The figure reports the median (solid line) and the 16th and 84th percentiles
(dashed lines) of the distribution of the impulse response functions of the large BVAR to
a one standard deviation monetary policy shock.




                                                               31
        Figure 3: Impulse responses of nominal variables
                   PGDP                            CPI−ALL                          PCED
           1                         1                                      1


           0                         0                                      0


          −1                       −1                                      −1


          −2                       −2                                      −2


          −3                       −3                                      −3


          −4                       −4                                      −4
               0     10       20         0     5      10      15      20        0    10    20



                   PGPDI                     Com: spot price (real)

           0                         0


          −2                       −2


          −4                       −4


          −6                       −6


          −8                       −8


         −10                       −10
               0     10       20         0     5      10      15      20




Note: The figure reports the median (solid line) and the 16th and 84th percentiles
(dashed lines) of the distribution of the impulse response functions of the large BVAR to
a one standard deviation monetary policy shock.




                                                   32
        Figure 4: Impulse responses of financial variables
                  FedFunds                    1 yr T−bond                    5 yr T−bond

        0.6                         0.6                            0.6

        0.4                         0.4                            0.4

        0.2                         0.2                            0.2

          0                          0                              0

       −0.2                        −0.2                           −0.2
              0      10       20          0       10         20          0       10        20

                  S&P 500                     Ex rate: avg                       M2
          6                                                         0
                                     6
          4                                                       −0.5
          2                                                        −1
                                     4
          0
                                                                  −1.5
         −2                          2
                                                                   −2
         −4
                                     0                            −2.5
              0      10       20          0       10         20          0       10        20


Note: The figure reports the median (solid line) and the 16th and 84th percentiles
(dashed lines) of the distribution of the impulse response functions of the large BVAR to
a one standard deviation monetary policy shock.




                                               33
         Figure 5: Impulse responses on simulated data

                    Y                         C                           I
                                    0                            0
       −0.05
                                                               −0.2
        −0.1                     −0.05
       −0.15                                                   −0.4
        −0.2                      −0.1                         −0.6
       −0.25                                                   −0.8
               0   10       20           0    10         20           0   10   20
                    H                         W                           P

       −0.05                     −0.05                        −0.05
        −0.1                      −0.1                         −0.1
       −0.15                     −0.15
                                                              −0.15
        −0.2                      −0.2
                                                               −0.2
       −0.25                     −0.25
                                                              −0.25
               0   10       20           0    10         20           0   10   20
                    R
         0.2
        0.15
                                                  DSGE
         0.1                                      BVAR
                                                  VAR
        0.05
          0
               0   10       20



Note: The figure reports the impulse responses to a monetary policy shock in the DSGE
model used to generate the data and the median across Monte Carlo replications of the
BVAR and the VAR impulse responses.




                                             34
              Figure 6: Ratio of MSE: VAR versus BVAR

                    Y                        C                        I
          3                        3                       3

          2                        2                       2

          1                        1                       1

          0                        0                       0
              0     10       20        0    10        20       0     10       20
                    H                       W                        P
          3                        3                       3

          2                        2                       2

          1                        1                       1

          0                        0                       0
              0     10       20        0    10        20       0     10       20
                    R
          3

          2

          1

          0
              0     10       20


Note: The figure reports the ratio of the MSE of the VAR over the MSE of the BVAR.
Values larger than one indicate that the MSE of the VAR is larger than that of the BVAR.




                                           35
