                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                            POPULARITY

                                            Gabriella Conti
                                            Andrea Galeotti
                                             Gerrit Mueller
                                            Stephen Pudney

                                         Working Paper 18475
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18475


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




We are grateful to the UK Economic and Social Research Council for support through the MiSoC
research centre (award no. RES-518-285-001). Andrea Galeotti is grateful to the European Research
Council for support through ERC-starting grant (award no. 283454). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Gabriella Conti, Andrea Galeotti, Gerrit Mueller, and Stephen Pudney. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Popularity
Gabriella Conti, Andrea Galeotti, Gerrit Mueller, and Stephen Pudney
NBER Working Paper No. 18475
October 2012
JEL No. A14,I21,J31

                                           ABSTRACT

What makes you popular at school? And what are the labor market returns to popularity? We investigate
these questions using an objective measure of popularity derived from sociometric theory: the number
of friendship nominations received from schoolmates, interpreted as a measure of early accumulation
of personal social capital. We develop an econometric model of friendship formation and labor market
outcomes allowing for partial observation of networks, and provide new evidence on the impact of
early family environment on popularity. We estimate that moving from the 20th to 80th percentile
of the high-school popularity distribution yields a 10% wage premium nearly 40 years later.


Gabriella Conti                                   Gerrit Mueller
Harris School of Public Policy                    Institute for Employment Research (IAB)
University of Chicago                             Regensburger Str. 104
1155 East 60th Street                             90478 Nuremberg
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Germany
and NBER                                          gerrit.mueller@iab.de
gconti@uchicago.edu
                                                  Stephen Pudney
Andrea Galeotti                                   University of Essex
University of Essex                               Wivenhoe Park, Colchester
Wivenhoe Park, Colchester                         Essex CO4 3SQ
Essex CO4 3SQ                                     United Kingdom
United Kingdom                                    spudney@essex.ac.uk
agaleo@essex.ac.uk
1     Introduction

Intelligence has long been emphasized as a major determinant of success in life (Herrnstein
and Murray [1994]), but there is mounting evidence of the importance of other social skills
for a range of social, economic and health outcomes (Bowles et al. [2001], Heckman et
al. [2006], Conti et al. [2010]). There is also evidence that successful early childhood
interventions work primarily through the development of non-cognitive skills (Heckman et
al. [2012]). Measurement of these skills is difficult, and still under development (Almlund et
al. [2011]). One strand of research uses scales based on self-reports and reports by parents
and teachers, which are relatively easy to gather but have potential shortcomings. It has
been found that parents’ and teachers’ ratings can differ systematically from each other
and those of the children themselves and professional psychiatric assessors (Pepler and Craig
[1998], Fergusson and Horwood [1987], Rosenthal and Jacobsen [1968], Johnston et al [2011]).
Another strand uses measures of participation in high school social activities to proxy for
social skills (Barron et al. [2000], Glaeser et al. [2002], Postlewaite and Silverman [2005],
Kuhn and Weinberger [2005]).
    In contrast with the previous literature we import methods from social network analysis,
see, for example, Burt [1976], Borgatti and Everett [1992], Coleman [1961], Wasserman
and Faust [1994]. The basic idea is to derive from observed school friendship networks
sociometric measures of individuals’ relational attributes and to analyse their determinants
and their association with adult outcomes.1 Hence, our proxy for social skills is based on
information about interpersonal relationships that is more reliable than self-reports. We use
detailed information on high school friendship relations collected from respondents to the
Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS), who were asked to report the names of up to three
best friends from their senior class in high school. Friendship nominations are by nature
   1
     Researchers in this tradition have found that sociometric proxies of social skills are correlated with
prosocial qualities and the absence of antisocial behavior. In addition, there are significant differences in
the characteristics associated with sociometric measures of social skills, either self-perceived or reported by
peers (Parkhurst and Hopmeyer [1998]).



                                                      1
directed and this leads to an important conceptual distinction. If Paul nominates John as
his friend, he reveals his affection towards John. In receiving a claim of friendship, John
is socially approved by Paul. We can then distinguish students on the basis of the number
of friendship nominations they give, which we term the out-degree of friendship, and the
number of friendship nominations they receive, termed the in-degree. We are not the first
to use network data to analyze the effect of social connections on individual behavior (see
Bramoullé and Fortin [2009] for a recent review). Most existing work, however, focuses on
short-run outcomes (Calvó-Armengol et al. [2009]), does not analyze the determinants of
social connections (an exception is Bandiera et al. [2009]), or does not attempt to estimate
jointly network formation and individual behavior.2
       The precise definition of a reference group is one of the strengths of our approach. Con-
trary to many papers in the literature on social interactions, which use a broad definition of
reference group, the use of network data allows us to identify individuals within pre-specified
group boundaries.3 It is also worth emphasizing that the focus on the senior class strengthens
the power of our measures of adolescent social standing. Adolescents have been exposed to
interactions in different contexts, from mathematics courses to athletics and extracurricular
activities. This implies that the pool of individuals who can be nominated is much larger
than in cases where the boundaries are restricted to a particular course.
       We also make a methodological contribution. A major obstacle to research on social
networks is that it is rarely possible to observe the whole network together with individuals’
long term economic outcomes. The WLS samples only one in three of the students in
each class, which means that many students do not receive as many nominations as they
would if every member of the class were polled. For each sampled individual we observe
the out-degree fully (subject to the censoring limit of three nominations) but have partial
observability of the in-degree, since nominations are only recorded from schoolmates who
   2
     The only two examples closer to our work are Weinberg [2006] and Mihaly [2009]. However, we adopt a
more structural modeling approach.
   3
     See Conley and Topa [2003] on the effect that different definitions of reference group have on estimating
local spillovers.


                                                      2
happen to be included in the WLS sample. Thus, the observed in-degree differs from the
true in-degree by a non-classical measurement error, which has a complicated distribution
with non-zero mean and correlation with the true in-degree. For this reason, instrumental
variable methods do not give consistent estimates and are not appropriate here. Instead, we
develop a pseudo-likelihood-based approach to dealing with this problem which takes account
of the sampled nature of the network data. The basic idea is to estimate simultaneously the
outcome of interest together with the friendship formation process. The latter is modeled
as the probability that a student would be nominated by a randomly-selected member of
his class (in-degree probability), and the probability that a randomly-selected class member
would be nominated by him (out-degree probability). More generally, we show how to
analyze data from partially sampled social networks with a censored number of possible
links. Given the difficulties of sampling complete networks, we expect our method to have
wide applicability and to be used to investigate the effect of adolescent social standing on
other outcomes, such as health and risk behavior.
   We now give an overview of the main results. We consider three groups of determinants
of friendship nominations. The first refers to the child’s early family environment. In line
with earlier research on the effects of early family life on long-term cognitive and behavioral
outcomes (Repetti et al. [2002]), our results show a positive association between a warm
early family environment and the number of friendship nominations given and received. The
second group of determinants are the proportions of classmates who share similar character-
istics with the respondent. There is a lot of evidence documenting a tendency for various
types of individuals to associate with others who are similar to themselves, a phenomenon
that Lazarsfeld and Merton [1954] termed homophily. Homophily has since been documented
across characteristics such as age, race, gender, religion and occupations (Fong and Isajiw
[2000], Moody [2001], McPherson et al. [2001]). Type-sensitive preferences and matching
bias are the two main mechanisms used to explain these patterns (Currarini et al. [2008]).
We use indicators of common nationality, family background and friends’ characteristics


                                              3
to capture preference-based homophily, and find a strong positive association between the
degree of group homogeneity and in-degree and out-degree of friendships. The last set of
determinants capture the respondent’s relative position among schoolmates: we find that
relatively older and smarter students are more popular, while relative family income status
plays only a minor role.
       We then analyze the effects of in-degree and out-degree of friendship on adult economic
success as measured by the wage. While the out-degree has no effect, we find a positive effect
of the in-degree. For a median individual, an increase in the stock of social skills sufficient
to move up by one decile is equivalent on average to one additional friendship nomination
in high school. This increase in social skills is associated with a 2% wage advantage 35
years later, which is roughly 40% of the return accruing to one more year of education. This
holds after accounting for a wide range of observable attributes – family background, school
quality, cognitive ability, human capital, and adult personality traits and social capital – and
for unobserved residual heterogeneity.4
       Why would the in-degree of friendship in high school matter for subsequent economic
attainment? One possible interpretation is that connections established in high school are
maintained throughout the life-cycle and produce positive spillovers, such as privileged access
to job opportunities. However, controlling for variables which reflect adult social capital and
the current job being found through friends does not reduce the magnitude and significance
of our estimated association – indeed, the in-degree effect appears to be stronger among
those who migrate from Wisconsin to pursue their careers.
       A more plausible interpretation is that the number of friendship nominations received
is a reflection of the popularity of a student among his schoolmates, which is a measure
of his skill in building positive personal and social relationships and adjusting to the de-
mands of a social situation. During secondary school the individual’s initial reference points
   4
    Note that the strength of the popularity effect relative to the return to education is partly due to the
low rate of return found in WLS data when measures of ability, family background, etc., are included in the
wage equation.



                                                     4
of “generation-superiors” such as parents, class teacher from elementary school and other
significant adults are gradually superseded by new reference groups. In this new reference
system students come to occupy differentiated positions as an immediate consequence of
their own interpersonal behavior (which may have been shaped by their childhood experi-
ence) and of what others consider appropriate conduct.5 Large parts of an individual’s role
performance when adult, as an employee in a team of co-workers for example, will also be
in association with status-equals or near-equals. By that time, an individual needs to have
acquired and developed the appropriate social skills: understand the “rules of the game”
– how to gain acceptance and social support from colleagues, whom to trust and when to
reciprocate. Thus, social interactions within the group of classmates provide the bridge to
the adult world as they train individual personalities to be socially adequate for the success-
ful performance of their adult roles. Consistent with this view, we interpret our measure of
popularity as a measure of the stock of social skills of a particular individual, rather than
a measure of an innate personality trait. It is the productive skill itself that is rewarded in
the labor market, rather than friendships per se. We return to this issue of interpretation
in section 3.2 below.6 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We describe the
data and the econometric methodology in section 2 and we present the results in section 3.
We conclude in section 4 discussing possible policy implications of our findings.
   5
     In a study of Illinois high schools, Coleman [1961] finds that students identify themselves as belonging
to social categories such as nerds, geeks, leading crowd and others. Students tend to differentiate themselves
along two major dimensions: ‘cognitive achievement’ as measured by grades, and ‘social approval’ as reflected
by leadership roles in extracurricular student activities and participation in high school athletics. See Akerlof
and Kranton [2002] for a review and economic interpretation of the sociological literature on education.
   6
     This view of the school class as an agency of socialization was emphasized by Talcott Parsons [1959] in
his seminal work on the school class as a social system.




                                                       5
2         Data and econometric methodology

2.1         Friendship relations among young men in the WLS

The WLS is a random, one-third sample of all seniors in Wisconsin high schools in 1957.
Survey data were collected from the original respondents or their parents in 1957, 1964, 1975,
1993 and 2004, and from a selected sibling in 1977, 1994 and 2005. The data provide rich
information on socio-economic background, mental ability, educational attainment, family
formation, and labor market history.7 The WLS sample is broadly representative of white,
non-Hispanic Americans who have completed at least a high school education. In this paper,
to avoid difficulties arising from the lower rate of labor force participation among women of
the WLS generation, we restrict our analysis to men. Of the 10,317 WLS respondents, 4,991
are men, and we use information on the 4,330 male respondents to the 1975 questionnaire
who provided names of their best friends in 1957. For more detailed information on the WLS
see Sewell et al. [2001].
        Our main variables of interest are adolescent friendship ties and adult earnings. We
measure the former from responses to the 1975 Telephone Questionnaire, where respondents
were asked to report the names of up to three same-sex best friends from their senior class
in high school. Student i is recorded as having a tie with student j if i claims his friendship
to j. We do not have information about the strength of the friendship relations, which are
therefore dichotomous: either a relation exists or it does not. Relations are also directed: i
may claim friendship to j, but the reverse is not necessarily true. These asymmetries allow
us to distinguish students on the basis of the number of friendship nominations made, which
we term the out-degree of friendship, and that received, termed the in-degree of friendship.
        There is always a possibility of bias in retrospective data, although one could argue
that friendships recalled years later are in fact the “real” friendships, while ones perceived
    7
        The exact sampling rate is 0.31. Table A1 in the online appendix:
http://iserwww.essex.ac.uk/home/spudney/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Popularity final 15July2012 APPENDIX1.pdf gives
detailed information on the variables we use, the wave at which they were collected and the survey instrument
used.


                                                        6
at the time might be transient (we are unaware of any empirical evidence on this point).
A particular concern is the possibility of biased recollection in favor of those friends who
turn out to be economically successful, which would impart a positive bias to the empirical
association between wages and measured popularity. However, note that the relatively long
recall period works in our favor here. Recall bias in favor of successful friends can only occur
if the respondent knows who is and who is not successful. For this to be so, the respondent
must still be in touch, directly or indirectly, 18 years later. Since the probability of being in
touch and thus aware of the friend’s eventual success is less than 1, the retrospective nature
of the data reduces this bias. Two further pieces of evidence suggest that selective recall is
not a source of serious bias. First, the distribution of out-degree of friendship is consistent
with previous studies, which do not use retrospective information: for example, Ennett and
Bauman [2000] give sample proportions nominating one, two and three best friends as 17%,
32% and 41% respectively, which match closely the WLS proportions presented in Table
1 below. Second, the selective recall hypothesis also suggests that there will be a larger
estimated popularity effect for people who remained in Wisconsin, and whose success is
therefore more visible to old schoolmates, than for those who migrated elsewhere (bear in
mind that these measurements pre-date digital communication technology). We report below
a test which rejects this hypothesis.
   The WLS design imposes several restrictions. First, students are asked to report names
of friends within the same school and grade. This raises the boundary specification problem
(Laumann et al. [1983]). Previous empirical studies suggest that this is not a severe problem
in the context of adolescent friendship networks. For example, Ennett and Bauman [2000]
consider friendship networks among ninth graders in North Carolina in 1980. Each student
was asked to nominate up to three best friends, without restriction to friends from school. In
their sample of roughly 1,100 students, 95% of friendship links were within the same school.
However, the boundary issue may be important for students in single-sex schools and we
return to this in section 3.1 below.


                                               7
       Second, the questionnaire design censors the number of possible friendship nominations
at three8 and, due to random sampling, we only have partial observation of the nominations
that would have been received by the sampled students had the sample been exhaustive.
While we observe all the ties nominated by sample members towards individuals both inside
and outside the sample (the out-degree of friendship), we miss the claims of friendship
with sampled members which would have been made by classmates who are not sampled
in the WLS. Thus, the observed in-degree differs from the true in-degree by a non-classical
measurement error taking non-positive values, with a complicated distribution which is not
independent of the true in-degree. Our estimation strategy addresses all these issues.
       There are other possible sociometric measures of social status, such as Proximity and
Centrality. Such measures go further by taking into account indirect relationships, reflecting
the popularity of the people whose friendship is received by the individual. Our use of
only the most direct sociometric definition of social status is due to the lack of complete
information on the social network and the difficulty of extending sample-based analysis to
more complex measures. If the appropriate notion of popularity is better measured by
these intensity-sensitive indicators, we would expect our analysis to capture only part of the
popularity effect and thus to understate the true effect. However, in most networks that
have been studied empirically, there is a high correlation between degree and other more
complex measures, so we would not expect bias from this source to be a significant problem.
See Borgatti and Everett [1992] and Wasserman and Faust [1994] for discussion of different
notions of position and their applicability in several areas of social network analysis.
       Table 1 gives summary statistics on the observed partial in-degree, k̃i , and out-degree, mi ,
and reveals substantial variation in both measures. Roughly 11% of respondents give zero
nominations, 15% give one, 30% report two and 44% nominate three friends. The average
   8
     See Holland and Leinhard [1973] for a discussion of the right-censoring by vertex degree introduced by
this fixed-choice design. Note that, although out-degree is censored at 3, our measurement approach allows
us to relate the out-degree wage effect to the latent uncensored out-degree. Moreover 56% of respondents
give 0, 1 or 2 nominations and some proportion of those making 3 nominations are also uncensored), so there
is a fair amount of uncensored variation in the sampled in-degrees.



                                                    8
number of individuals observed per graduating class is close to 170 students, ranging from
a minimum of 6 to a maximum of 482. The 661 men who did not respond to the friendship
nomination question were excluded from the sample and treated as missing at random. We
are able to check this assumption by comparing the measured in-degree for respondents and
non-respondents to the friendship questionnaire. For the latter, the proportions receiving
0, 1, 2, 3 nominations were respectively 0.655, 0.254, 0.077 and 0.009, which are similar to
the distribution for respondents shown in Table 1. A formal t-test of the difference in mean
nomination rates is insignificant (P = 0.241).

                      Table 1 In-degree and out-degree distributions
                      No. of         In-degree              Out-degree
                    nominations   n     Sample %          n     Sample %
                        0       2,598      60.00         483      11.15
                        1       1,191      27.51         644      14.87
                        2        398        9.19        1,275     29.45
                        3        106        2.45        1,928     44.53
                        4         29        0.67          -         -
                        5         6        0.14           -         -
                        6         2        0.05           -         -



2.2    A model of early friendship and adult economic success

The determination of friendship relationships at the individual level depends on the char-
acteristics of both parties, whereas the sampling structure of the WLS does not reveal the
characteristics of members of the social network who are not captured by the sampling
scheme. Our solution to this partial observability problem is to specify a model which, for
each member of our sample, allows inward and outward friendship nominations to depend
on the characteristics of the two individuals concerned, but then to marginalize with respect
to the characteristics of the other party, so that the estimated form of the model is expressed
in terms of observable characteristics of the sample members alone.
   The model of friendship envisages an important role for homophily. We can check this
assumption to a limited extent from the WLS data, since we observe the characteristics of

                                              9
any nominated friend who happens to be included in the random sample. We see only mild
evidence of homophily with respect to family income, since the correlation between family
income of nominators and nominees is 0.15. There is much stronger evidence for IQ, with
a correlation of 0.33, and homophily is also evident in indicators of family background: for
example, only 8% of nominations by the sons of fathers without a college education are
of classmates with college-educated fathers, but that proportion rises to 35% for the sons
of college graduates. There is little evidence for homophily in the available measures of
personality traits since the nominator-nominee correlations for extroversion, agreeableness,
conscientiousness, neuroticism and openness measures are all below 0.1, but those trait
measurements are made much later in adulthood and it is likely that the low correlations are
largely due to personality changes that may have occurred between high school and mid-life.
       Let N be a school class9 in our data set with size N , and let S ⊂ N be the sampled
group in class N and assume it has size n = |S|. We make the basic assumption that the
actual class is a random sample from a superpopulation of individuals who might potentially
have been in that class. A male individual i ∈ S is described uniquely by two vectors of
observable variables yi , vi and an unobservable ui . yi contains variables which determine the
form his preferences take; vi is a vector specifying the personal characteristics that he looks
for in a friend and we assume that similarity in terms of v and u is the basis of friendship
choices. The characteristics influencing preferences (yi ) need not coincide with the subject
of those preferences (vi ).10 For any pair of classmates i and j with characteristics (yi , vi , ui )
and (yj , vj , uj ), the probability that person i perceives a friendship with person j is:


               P r (friendship i → j|yi , vi , ui , yj , vj , uj , s) = ψ (yi , vj − vi , ui , uj , s)    (1)


where s is a set of descriptors of the school. The probability that someone chosen at random
   9
    Defined here as the whole grade-group, not the size of an individual teaching group.
  10
    For example, living in a particular neighborhood (y=location) may predispose one to friendship with a
particular ethnic group (v=ethnicity). The distinction between y and v is that i’s probability of a friendship
nomination for j depends on vj but not yj (note that y may be empty). Because we marginalize with respect
to j’s characteristics, we do not have to specify which variables are in y and which in v.


                                                         10
from the class would be nominated by person i as a friend, conditional only on the school’s
and person i’s characteristics (the out-degree probability) is:


                          λ (yi , vi , ui , s) = Evj ,uj {ψ (yi , vj − vi , ui , uj , s)}                 (2)


and the analogous probability that person i would be nominated as a friend by someone
chosen at random from the class (the in-degree probability) is:


                           π (vi , ui , s) = Eyj ,vj ,uj {ψ (yj , vi − vj , uj , ui , s)}                 (3)


Now let xi be the observable vector (yi , vi , s), so the in-degree and out-degree probabilities
can be written in general terms as π (xi , ui ) and λ (xi , ui ).11 Note that λ (xi , ui ) and π (xi , ui )
are reduced form constructs which depend not only on i’s friendship preferences but also on
the structure of the class group and the distribution of others’ preferences.
       Define ki as the number of class members who would, if interviewed, nominate student
i as a friend, while k̃i is the number of such people who appear in the sample. So, k̃i is
the observed in-degree, ki is the “true” in-degree of friendship of individual i and, since
ki ≥ k̃i , there is an inherent downward bias in the crude in-degree measure, k̃i . Although the
observed in-degree k̃i is an error-prone measure of the true ki , it is important to realize that
the measurement error is non-classical: it has non-zero mean and is not independent of the
true ki . Consequently, IV estimation does not provide consistent estimates in this context.
       Let mi be the number of people that the individual i thinks of as friends. Under the
assumption that the actual class group is a random sample from a superpopulation of individ-
uals who might potentially have been in that class, ki and mi have binomial [N − 1, π(xi , ui )]
and [N − 1, λ(xi , ui )] distributions, respectively. Since the sampling of WLS participants is
random, k̃i has a hypergeometric [N − 1, n − 1, ki ] distribution conditional on ki . The joint
  11
     The in-degreee probability π is the joint probability of being thought of as a friend and being nominated
in response to the survey. It should therefore be interpreted as incorporating the probability of response to
the friendship question.


                                                        11
distribution of (ki , mi , k̃i ) is therefore:

                                        
                                     N −1
      f (ki , mi , k̃i |xi , ui ) =       π(xi , ui )k [1 − π(xi , ui )]N −1−k
                                      ki

                                                                          
               N −1             m                 N −1−m ki  N − 1 − ki     N −1
            ×        λ(xi , ui ) [1 − λ(xi , ui )]                        /                                                    (4)
                m                                        k̃i n − 1 − k̃i     n−1

    Our aim is to understand the effect of differences in adolescent social standings on subse-
quent adult economic success, allowing for the possibility of spurious correlation induced by
the persistent unobservable factor, ui . To do this, we assume that the subsequently-observed
log earnings variable, wi , has a conditional Gaussian density, with linear mean function:


                            µ(zi , ui , mi , ki ) = β0 + zi β 1 + β2 ui + β3 mi + β4 ki


The conditional wage distribution is then:

                                                                                                  
                                                            −1        wi − µ(zi , ui , mi , ki )
                           f (wi |zi , ui , mi , ki ) = σ φ                                            ,
                                                                               σ

where zi is a set of covariates, σ 2 is the residual variance and φ(.) is the N(0,1) density. We
use a ML approach, based on the following likelihood:

                                                                                                          
                                                N
                                                X −1
     P (mi , k̃i , wi |xi , zi ) =    Eu              f (ki , mi , k̃i |xi , u)f (wi |zi , u, mi , ki )          if mi < 3
                                             ki =k̃i

                                                                                                              
                                            N
                                            X −1 N
                                                 X −1
                                     Eu                 f (ki , mi , k̃i |xi , u)f (wi |zi , u, mi , ki ) if mi ≥ 3 (5)
                                         ki =k̃i m=3



where Eu denotes an expectation with respect to a known distribution for the unobserved
effect u. We assume a Gaussian density for u. Thus the likelihood function has the form
of a single or double summation within an integral and we use Hermite quadrature for the
integration step. The expression (5) is the marginal likelihood for a single individual i. A

                                                                 12
pseudo-likelihood function for the full sample of I individuals is constructed as:

                                          I
                                          Y
                                     L=          P (mi , k̃i , wi |xi , zi ).
                                           i=1



This is not a full likelihood function, since it does not reflect the stochastic dependence
between the individuals sampled within the same class and therefore does not generate
asymptotically efficient estimates. The sample comes from a set of class groups, gener-
ating clusters of realisations of the jointly-dependent variables: (y11 ...y1n1 ), (y21 ...y2n2 ), ...,
with independence between clusters but dependence within. The joint distribution of y g =
(yg1 ...ygng ) is fg (y g ; θ) and this has marginals fgi (ygi ; θ) (i = 1..., ng ), where θ is the param-
eter vector. The pseudo log-likelihood based on the marginals is L∗ = g i ln fgi (ygi ; θ),
                                                                                       P P

with pseudo-score ∂L∗ /∂θ = g i ∂ ln fgi (ygi ; θ)/∂θ, which has expectation E∂L∗ /∂θ =
                                      P P
P P
   g     i E(∂ ln fgi (ygi ; θ)/∂θ). The inner expectation involves a function of ygi only, and

therefore requires only the marginal density for its construction. Then we write in the usual
                                  R
way that E(∂ ln fgi (ygi ; θ)/∂θ = {[∂fgi (ygi ; θ)/∂θ]/fgi (ygi ; θ)}fgi (ygi ; θ0 )dygi . Evaluated at
                           R                             R
θ = θ0 , this reduces to [∂fgi (ygi ; θ0 )/∂θ0 ]dygi = ∂{ fgi (ygi ; θ0 )dygi }/∂θ0 = 0, under stan-
dard regularity conditions, since fgi (ygi ; θ0 ) integrates identically to 1. This means that
consistency is achieved as the number of clusters goes to infinity, provided a local identifi-
cation assumption is also satisfied. However, by neglecting the within-cluster dependence,
we sacrifice efficiency relative to (intractable) true maximum likelihood. Standard errors
and test statistics are derived from the usual ‘sandwich’ asymptotic approximation to the
covariance matrix, which adjusts for within-class clustering of the sample.
   In this model, identification comes from two sources. The first is the specific binomial
and hypergeometric distributional forms entailed by the sampling structure. Unusually,
the distributional form (4) is dictated by the sampling structure and is not an arbitrary
approximation. The second source of identifying information is the exclusion from the wage
equation of covariates which appear in the friendship part of the model (see the discussion


                                                       13
on homophily and respondent’s characteristics relative to class norm in the introduction).
This is not formally necessary for identification, since we have a priori information on the
distributional form of observed in-degree and out-degree. Nevertheless, exclusions sharpen
identification and are testable. We return to this in the section below.



3       Results

We present estimates for four specifications of the wage equation, all including the in-degree
k and the out-degree m as wage determinants. All variants of the model use the same vector
of covariates, x, for the in-degree and out-degree equations, but use different covariates, z, in
the wage equation.12 In the first specification, z only includes measures of family background,
school quality and location; the second introduces additional measures for cognitive ability
and human capital, the third includes covariates reflecting adult social capital, marital status
and job search methods, and the final specification adds late-measured personality traits. We
first discuss the results for the determinants of the in-degree and out-degree of friendship,
summarized in Table 2, then the results for wages, which are presented in Table 3. Full
parameter estimates are given in the online Appendix Table A2.


3.1     In-degree and out-degree of friendship

Table 2 summarizes the friendship components of the model by means of marginal effects of
variations in x on the expected in-degree and out-degree, averaged over all sampled individ-
uals:
                          n                                         n
                          X ∂ [N π(xi , u = 0)]                     X ∂ [N λ(xi , u = 0)]
             Min = n−1                                Mout = n−1                            .
                          i=1
                                      ∂xi                           i=1
                                                                                ∂xi

  12
    We have experimented with different covariates also in the friendship part of the model and the results
are not sensitive to such changes.




                                                    14
            Table 2 Marginal effects on expected out-degree and in-degree
                    from the full model (3) of friendship structure and wages
                                                Out-degree              In-degree
                    Covariate                 Effect     Std.err.    Effect   Std.err.
                          Respondent’s location and size of school
       Rural area                           1.437*** (0.109) 1.477*** (0.252)
       Small town                           1.184*** (0.099) 1.477*** (0.198)
       Large town                           -0.704*** (0.118) -0.635*** (0.213)
       Graduating class size                0.018*** (0.001) 0.022*** (0.001)
                             Respondent’s childhood family ties
       Mother’s affection                   0.375*** (0.068) 0.767*** (0.174)
       Only child                           0.164*** (0.039) 0.136            (0.086)
       Aggressive sibling                   -0.635*** (0.041) 0.070           (0.101)
                     Respondent’s characteristics relative to class norm
       Deviation from mean IQ               0.163*** (0.070) 0.382*** (0.070)
       Deviation from mean year of birth 0.217*** (0.071) -0.265*** (0.063)
       Deviation from mean income           0.029**      (0.012) 0.036        (0.025)
                                                                      1
                        Respondent’s school composition: Homophily
       Proportion males in class            0.234**      (0.111) -4.163*** (0.265)
       Parental origin                      1.355*** (0.103) 2.470*** (0.476)
       Religion                             0.681*** (0.121) 0.477            (0.311)
       Father high school educated          0.655*** (0.102) 1.463*** (0.500)
       Father college educated              -0.491** (0.187) -1.055*** (1.021)
       Mother high school educated          0.483*** (0.049) 0.577**          (0.263)
       Mother college educated              1.282*** (0.100) 0.329            (0.562)
       Father managerial/professional       1.304*** (0.199) 2.395*** (0.900)
       Mother managerial/professional       2.708*** (0.447) -0.321           (2.744)
       Friends with job plans               0.274        (0.145) 1.255*** (0.347)
       Friends with college plans           1.091*** (0.094) 1.598*** (0.232)
       Individual effect                    1.390*** (0.102) 2.381*** (0.117)
       1   Homophily covariates with respect to a given characteristic are constructed as a dummy for the child
            himself possessing that characteristic × the proportion of the class also possessing it.
           Statistical significance: * = 10%; ** = 5%; *** = 1%


   We consider three groups of variables which are potentially important for the formation
of friendship ties and therefore for the location of a student in the friendship network.
The first group relates to the respondent’s childhood family environment, represented by
only-child status, the quality of the sibling relationship and the closeness of the mother-
child relationship. Overall, the estimates show that a warmer family environment during
childhood is associated with a significantly higher degree of adolescent social engagement.
The strongest of these effects are the positive impact of a close maternal relationship on the

                                                            15
expected in-degree and out-degree (of 0.8 and 0.4 respectively); and the negative impact (of
0.6) of a poor sibling relationship on the expected out-degree. This underlines the importance
of the early family environment for subsequent adolescent social life and acquisition of non-
cognitive skills. We also find some evidence that siblings and friends are substitutes, since
only-children have a slightly higher out-degree probability, suggesting that they look for
external social contacts.
       The second group of covariates relates to the characteristics of the respondent and his
family relative to the class norm: class-mean deviations of the students’ IQ, year of birth
and family income. We find a tendency for high-IQ students to nominate more friends and
to be popular in turn, suggesting that high ability students might be more attractive as
peers and better understand the opportunities arising from social interactions. However, the
effect is modest: a 1-standard deviation increase in IQ leads to an increase of around 0.16
in the expected out-degree, and a larger effect of 0.38 in the in-degree. There is significant
evidence of a positive effect of relative family income only on expected out-degree: the point
estimate suggests that a 1-standard deviation increase in relative income increases expected
out-degree by around 1.8, but with a wide 90% confidence interval of ±1.2. Being relatively
young is associated with a small reduction (of about 0.1 for a 6-month age difference) in
the expected in-degree and a similar increase in out-degree (see also Dhuey and Lipscomb
[2008]).13
       The final group of variables captures preferences for homophily: that friendship ties
tend to be formed among individuals who share similar attributes. We construct a variety
of homophily indicators by defining the type of a respondent with respect to his parents’
attributes (such as national origin, religion and occupation) and his own attitudes (such as
whether he shares schoolmates’ aspirations to go to college or to find a job). Each of these
                                                                        h           i
variables has the same structure. For individual i in class c: Xic = ξic Nc−1 N
                                                                             P c
                                                                              j=1 jc , where
                                                                                 ξ
  13
    This result is consistent with a model in which all students tend to name slightly older friends. In that
case, the younger students might tend to be named by those in a younger class, and the older students might
tend to name those in an older class, so that observed in-degree is censored among younger students, and
out-degree is censored among older students. We thank an anonymous referee for pointing this out.

                                                     16
Xic is the constructed covariate, ξic is a dummy variable recording whether individual i has
the characteristic in question and Nc is class size. Most of these variables are positively
associated with in-degree and out-degree of friendship and there are some large effects: for
example, if a student belongs to a school where half the students share his national origin,
his expected in-degree and out-degree are raised by 1.2 and 0.7 respectively. Still large
homophily effects include having a managerial/professional father. The influence of the
gender composition of the class on the expected in-degree is large: moving from an equally-
mixed to a single-sex school reduces the expected in-degree by 4.16. This may be related to
the network boundary issue. A student in a male-only class, who has a demand for female
social contacts, must necessarily look outside his school class for social contacts, bringing
with it some substitution of external friends for school friends. For most of the sample, this
gender-mix effect is very small: only 5% of the sampled students are in single-sex classes
and, for the remainder, there is little deviation from the median 50-50 mix.
   Beside these three groups of covariates, we have also included variables for the location
of the respondents and class size (the number of male students in the school grade). The
expected number of inward and outward nominations change non-monotonically with the
degree of urbanization, with the lowest degree of social interaction observed for large towns
and higher levels for city schools and (especially) small towns and rural areas. Holding
class size and other factors constant, location in a non-urbanized area produces an expected
increase of around 2 friendship nominations relative to a large town, while a city location
gives rise to an increase of around 0.6-0.7.
   School size has two conflicting effects on social interactions. On one hand, it increases
the size of the pool of potential friends; on the other, it reduces the probability that any
one member of that pool will be chosen as a friend. The net effect of school size therefore
depends on which of these two dominates. It turns out that in our sample the marginal
effect of school size on expected in-degree and out-degree of friendship is typically positive,
despite its negative coefficient in the in-degree and out-degree probabilities (see Table A2 in


                                               17
the online appendix). The magnitude of this effect is moderate: for example, at the median
class size of 129, an increase of around 40% in class size is required to increase the expected
in-degree and out-degree by 1. The finding of a predominantly positive effect of class size is
consistent with previous studies of the effect of school size on the nature of school friendship
networks (Hallinan and Smith [1989], Allcott et al. [2007]). We return to this issue and its
relation to educational policy in the conclusion.
      In addition to these observable influences on friendship relations, unobserved hetero-
geneity also matters. A single individual random effect, representing additive unobservable
time-invariant individual-specific factors, appears with large and significant coefficients in
both the in-degree and out-degree probability functions.14 The estimates imply that a 1-
standard deviation increase in the unobserved factor generates an increase in the expected
in-degree and out-degree of 2.4 and 1.4 respectively.
      The estimated model implies a much more plausible distribution of in-degree across
individuals than the empirical distribution of partially-observed inward nominations. Figure
1 shows the sample average of the individual binomial distributions of in-degree that the
model predicts we would observe if we had full observation of all class members, compared
with the empirical distribution of in-degree in the partially-observed class networks in the
WLS sample. The predicted in-degree distribution is consistent with distributions reported
in previous studies of high-school friendship networks with complete information on the
relational data (for example, Strauss and Pollack [2003]).




 14
      We also estimated a 2-factor variant of the model, but the second factor was never significant.


                                                      18
                                          0.7
                                                                Predicted distribution with full observation
        Probability / sample proportion   0.6                   Empirical distribution with partial observation

                                          0.5

                                          0.4

                                          0.3

                                          0.2

                                          0.1

                                           0
                                                0   1   2   3   4        5      6       7       8        9        10
                                                                    In-degree


Figure 1: The predicted in-degree distribution and the empirical distribution of in-degree in
partially-sampled classes



3.2    The popularity premium

We now look at the association between friendship nominations and adult earnings. We
are able to measure wages at a relatively advanced age and thus our estimates capture the
cumulative effects of differences in relational skills that have materialized over the entire life
course. The core results are reported in columns (1)-(3) of Table 3. Column (4) contains
coefficient estimates from the full model extended to include also late measures of personality
traits in the wage equation, which are discussed in the next section. We now consider each
of the three sets of covariates in the wage model in turn.
   Family Background, School Quality and Location. In the first specification, the wage equa-
tion only includes measures of family background (parental education), high school quality
(proportion of students with friends planning to go to college) and size of the graduating
class, location (place of residence both in high school and in 1992), and childhood family ties
(as included in the friendship part of the model), in addition to in-degree and out-degree.

                                                                    19
The results are reported in Table 3 column 1. All the estimates have the expected sign and
they are highly significant. Interestingly, both having a closer maternal relationship and
belonging to a bigger class are significant determinants of friendship formation, but have no
direct effect on wages. The dominant location effect is the indicator of Wisconsin residence
in 1992, which may be in part an outcome indicator, since there is a potential return to
mobility. However, excluding the Wisconsin residence variable from the wage equation does
not qualitatively alter any of our main findings.15
       We find that the number of friendships nominated by a student (which measures in
part a desire for popularity) has no effect on adult earnings. In contrast, actual popularity
as measured by the number of friendship nominations that the student receives from his
schoolmates has a sizable effect: the wage premium of additional social skills equivalent to
a 1-unit increase in the expected number of friendship nominations at high school is 7%. It
is important to note that the unobserved individual effect is never statistically significant in
the wage equation, which suggests that the estimated popularity effect is not a statistical
artefact generated by common heterogeneity. The nearly two-decade separation between
the observation of the friendship relations and the wage is a further argument against the
suggestion that the popularity effect is an artefact resulting from endogeneity bias.
       Ability and Human Capital. In the second specification, we add proxies for cognitive
ability (the Henman-Nelson test of Mental Ability and the grade rank in the high school
graduating class) and human capital (years of education) to control for the possibility that
our measure of in-degree could act as a proxy of intelligence or achievement.16 Column 2 in
table 3 reports the results of our second specification.17 We notice that relative age, paternal
education and school quality affect wages only indirectly through the process of human
capital accumulation. As expected, the addition of these controls reduces the estimated in-
degree coefficient. This suggests that the association between school-based social skills and
  15
     Results available from the authors on request.
  16
     In fact, the positive relationship between social capital and human capital is one of the most robust
empirical regularities in the social capital literature (Helliwell and Putnam [1999]).
  17
     Note that these estimates are very similar to the ones reported in Zax and Rees [2002].


                                                   20
wages operates in part through schooling itself (Babcock [2008]), although the popularity
premium is large (2%) and remains significant at the 5% level.
       Marital Status, Job Finding Methods and Adult Social Capital. In our third specification,
we add controls for marital status, adult social capital and job finding methods, to account
for possible channels through which the effect of in-degree might operate. Joining a social
network is one of the most common forms of social capital investment. These networks cover
institutions ranging from labor unions, hobby groups and religious associations, and play
a role in providing opportunities which may be important for economic success. Empirical
work on social capital often uses survey responses about the number of group memberships
and the frequency of contacts with friends and family members as proxies for social capital
(for example, Glaeser et al. [2002]). We follow the literature and include both an index for
social participation18 and two measures of frequency of contacts with friends and relatives.
We also include an indicator for whether the job was found through informal contacts, to
allow for the role played by network ties in job search.19
       The results of this third specification are reported in column 3 of Table 3. The introduc-
tion of the additional variables does not qualitatively alter the estimated impact of cognitive
ability, human capital, school quality and family background. We also confirm existing find-
ings that individuals with higher level of adult social capital and married men have higher
wages (see, for the latter, Korenman and Neumark [1991]), and we find a small wage pre-
mium for individuals who found their current job via informal channels. Most importantly,
once we condition on this richer set of covariates, our conclusions on the wage premium of
high school popularity do not change. Shifting somebody from the 20th to the 80th per-
centile of the predicted in-degree distribution yields a 10% wage premium, a return consistent
with estimates reported in previous studies, (Kuhn and Weinberger [2005], Postlewaite and
Silverman [2005]). For a median individual, a decile increase in the stock of social skills,
  18
   We exclude the subset of organizations with a strong consumption component (see Table A1).
  19
   There is an established literature showing that connections transmit information about jobs, offsetting
some of the informational asymmetries between the supply and demand side of the labor market (for example
Granovetter [1974], Montgomery [1991], Rees [1996] and Topa [2000]).


                                                   21
corresponding to a 1-unit increase in the expected number of friendship nominations in high
school, is worth a (statistically significant) 2% higher wage 35 years later. This popularity
premium is roughly 40% of the wage premium of an additional year of education.


             Table 3 Coefficients in the log-wage equation
                 Covariate                       (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)
                          Respondent’s location and size of school
  In-degree                                  0.071*** 0.021**         0.020**   0.023***
                                             (0.018)      (0.010)     (0.009)   (0.009)
  Out-degree                                 -0.019       -0.001      0.000     -0.001
                                             (0.021)      (0.011)     (0.011)   (0.011)
  Individual Effect                          -0.035       0.003       -0.004    -0.005
                                             (0.030)      (0.021)     (0.022)   (0.017)
  Rural area (1957)                          -0.077** -0.051          -0.057    -0.060***
                                             (0.035)      (0.034)     (0.032)   (0.019)
  Small Town (1957)                          -0.118*** -0.095*** -0.103***      -0.102***
                                             (0.029)      (0.029)     (0.029)   (0.019)
  Large Town (1957)                          0.070*** 0.033           0.039     0.046**
                                             (0.026)      (0.029)     (0.034)   (0.021)
  Resident in Wisconsin (1992)               -0.289*** -0.192*** -0.180***      -0.177***
                                             (0.020)      (0.017)     (0.021)   (0.020)
  Graduating Class size                      0.008        0.012       0.011     0.011
                                             (0.012)      (0.011)     (0.011)   (0.009)
                            Respondent’s childhood family ties
  Mother’s affection                         0.012        0.029       0.027     0.020
                                             (0.017)      (0.019)     (0.018)   (0.015)
  Only child                                 0.096*** 0.068**         0.065**   0.067***
                                             (0.018)      (0.031)     (0.028)   (0.019)
  Aggressive sibling                         -0.113*** -0.109*** -0.086**       -0.102**
                                             (0.018)      (0.039)     (0.035)   (0.040)
  Male sibling                               0.044*** 0.043*** 0.033**          0.032***
                                             (0.016)      (0.013)     (0.014)   (0.010)
                     Respondent’s characteristics relative to class norm
  Deviation from mean year of birth          0.088*** 0.010           0.010     0.012
                                             (0.020)      (0.018)     (0.017)   (0.009)
                           Family background and school quality
  College-educated father                    0.085*** 0.023           0.039     0.031
                                             (0.029)      (0.027)     (0.040)   (0.020)
  College-educated mother                    0.153*** 0.110*** 0.088**          0.078***
                                             (0.032)      (0.028)     (0.041)   (0.021)
  Proportion of friends with college plans 0.193*** 0.046             0.037     0.032
                                             (0.033)      (0.047)     (0.051)   (0.040)


                                             22
                       Table 3 (continued) Coefficients in the log-wage equation
                     Covariate             (1)     (2)         (3)         (4)
                                   Ability and human capital
           IQ                               - 0.088*** 0.087*** 0.084***
                                                (0.011)    (0.011)   (0.012)
           Grade rank                       - 0.098        0.060     0.065*
                                                (0.097)    (0.071)   (0.038)
           Years of schooling               - 4.951*** 4.612*** 4.484***
                                                (0.469)    (0.356)   (0.425)
                             Marital status and adult social capital
           Married                          -       -      0.174*** 0.177***
                                                           (0.031)   (0.011)
           Social participation             -       -      0.323*** 0.318***
                                                           (0.068)   (0.078)
           No. of outings with friends      -       -      0.722*** 0.740***
                                                           (0.048)   (0.082)
           No. of outings with relatives -          -      -0.654*** -0.620***
                                                           (0.054)   (0.094)
           Job found through network        -       -      0.016*    0.015*
                                                           (0.009)   (0.009)
                                       Personality traits
           Extraversion                     -       -           -    0.001
                                                                     (0.012)
           Agreeableness                    -       -           -    -0.031**
                                                                     (0.015)
           Conscientiousness                -       -           -    -0.009
                                                                     (0.015)
           Neuroticism                      -       -           -    -0.003
                                                                     (0.008)
           Openness                         -       -           -    0.036**
                                                                     (0.014)
           Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance: * = 10%; ** = 5%; *** = 1%.


    We make two final remarks about these estimates. First, the unobserved individual effect
appearing in the in-degree and out-degree equations remains statistically insignificant in the
wage equation, implying that in-degree and out-degree, if fully observed, could be treated
as exogenous conditional on our set of covariates.20 However, the wage equation cannot
be estimated in isolation, since the non-classical measurement error in k̃ resulting from
   20
      This is also reassuring, given the retrospective nature of our friendship data. As the friendship informa-
tion is collected almost twenty years before the wage, this weakens the possibility that the observed positive
association between the two might arise from spurious correlation in unobservables.



                                                          23
partial observation of the friendship network must still be dealt with. Standard arguments
suggesting attenuation bias in OLS and consistency of IV estimators of the wage equation
are invalid here, since the measurement error is correlated with the true variable and has
non-zero mean. In fact, OLS gives a significant estimated popularity premium of 0.048, while
2SLS or LIML give 0.16 and 0.33 respectively (neither significant at the 5% level).21
       The second remark concerns the validity of our exclusion restrictions. Apart from having
ex-ante theoretical and empirical plausibility, they are also tested ex-post and not rejected.
A generalized model with unrestricted wage equation yielded a log-likelihood of −11396.180,
with an insignificant likelihood ratio statistic of 8.44 with 14 degrees of freedom (P = 0.86),
comparing this unrestricted model with the most general form of the restricted model.22


3.3       Popularity – personal capital or personality trait?

Our interpretation of the in-degree is that it is a measure of early investment in a form of
personal social capital or non-cognitive skill, rather than an indicator of innate personality
traits. The WLS sample allows us to explore this further, since the 1992/3 interview con-
tained the “big 5” instrument designed to measure the individual’s degree of extraversion,
agreeableness, conscientiousness, neuroticism and openness. We have reservations about
these measures, since they are observed contemporaneously with the wage and are therefore
possibly subject to spurious correlation. While there is some debate about the malleability
of personality traits (Almlund et al 2011), it would be inappropriate to include late adult
measures of personality in the in-degree and out-degree equations which represent friendship
relations during the transition to adulthood, so we include these measures only in the wage
equation. This changes the estimates very little (see column 4 of Table 3). In particular, the
in-degree coefficient in the wage equation rises from 0.20 to 0.23 and remains statistically
significant, consistent with our view that the in-degree captures a productive skill quite dis-
  21
    The OLS and IV results are available upon request to the authors.
  22
    It should of course be borne in mind that, like tests of overidentifying restrictions in other contexts, this
procedure is dependent on the particular specification we use and the asymptotic approximation to its null
distribution may not always be a good guide to its finite sample properties.

                                                       24
tinct from the personality traits measured by the big five. Like Mueller and Plug (2006),
we find that, in the labor market, openness commands a positive return, while the negative
impact of the agreeableness measure suggests that a willingness to be challenging has some
market value.
    We finally return to the issue of recall bias in the friendship nominations which underlie
our popularity measure. If there is a tendency for recall to be biased towards friends who
turn out to be successful in the labor market, this bias will be strongest among the group
who remain in Wisconsin and are presumably more likely to be able to observe the success
of their friends 18 years later. As a consequence, we would expect to see a larger estimated
popularity effect (caused by recall bias) among those who remain in Wisconsin than those
who live elsewhere in 1992. This can be tested by including an interaction between the
Wisconsin residence dummy and the latent popularity measure. The hypothesis of biased
recall then implies that this interaction parameter should be positive. Estimation of the
extended model in fact suggests the reverse: a significantly larger estimated parameter for
non-Wisconsin residents (0.033, P = 0.002) than for Wisconsin residents (0.011, P = 0.079),
with a P -value of 0.022 for the difference. Given the strong negative correlation (-0.74)
between these two estimates, it is unwise to read too much into the relatively high popularity
premium for non-Wisconsin residents, but it suggests that geographical mobility may be one
of the routes by which people with good social skills developed in adolescence achieve success.



4     Conclusions

This paper contributes to the emerging literature on the relevance of social skills for achieving
economic success in life. We overcome some of the difficulties encountered in the literature on
the meaning and measurement of these skills by focusing on popularity, objectively measured
as the number of friendship nominations received from high-school classmates. This measure
of social skills is based on information about interpersonal relationships, is more reliable than



                                               25
self-reported proxies and is distinct from measures of personality traits. We exploit the non-
reciprocal nature of friendship relations and are able to show that the popularity premium
is substantial: an increase in the stock of popularity, measured by an additional friendship
nomination received in high-school, is associated with about 2% higher wages 35 years later.
In contrast, there is no evidence of a wage premium associated with the number of friendship
nominations the individual makes.
   As a by-product of our estimation strategy, we also provide novel evidence on the deter-
minants of popularity. Of particular interest is the role played by early family environment,
school composition and school size on adolescent social engagement. While current research
focuses on the effect of class size on cognitive achievement (Angrist and Lavy [1999], Hoxby
[2000]), our results suggest that a deeper understanding of the effect of school size and
composition on the development of social skills is needed. Policies that focus on promot-
ing integration in schools and on developing social competencies may be a fruitful way of
promoting success in life.
   Finally, we also provide a methodological contribution. We show how to analyze data
from partially-sampled social networks with a censored number of possible links. Given the
difficulty of observing complete networks, we expect our method to have wide applicability.
While we focus on earnings here, the analysis can be extended to investigate the effect of
adolescent social standing on other outcomes, such as health and risk behavior.



References

 Akerlof, G. and Kranton, R. (2002). “Identity and schooling: Some lessons for the eco-
     nomics of education.” Journal of Economic Literature, 40(4), 1167-1201.

 Allcott, H., D. Karlan, M.M. Mobius, T.S. Rosenblat and A. Szeidl (2007). Community
      size and network closure.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 97(2),
      80-85.

 Almlund, M., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J. and Kautz, T. D. (2011). “Personality
     psychology and economics”, Handbook of the Economics of Education, vol.4.

                                             26
Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy (1999). “Using Maimonides’ Rule to estimate the
    effect of class size on scholastic achievement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2):
    533-75.

Babcock, P.S. (2008). “From ties to gains? evidence on connectedness and human capital
   acquisition.” Journal of Human Capital, 2(4).

Bandiera, O., I. Barankay and I. Rasul (2009). “Social connections and incentives in the
   workplace: Evidence from personnel data.” Econometrica, 77(4), 1047-1094.

Barron, J.M., Ewing, T.B., and Waddell, G.R. (2000). “The effects of high school athletic
    participation on education and labor market outcomes.” The Review of Economics
    and Statistics, 82(3), 409-421.

Borgatti, S. and Everett, M.G. (1992). “Notions of position in social network analysis.”
    Sociological Methodology, 22, 1-35.

Bowles, S., Gintis, H. and Osborne, M. (2001). “The determinants of earnings: a behavioral
   approach.” Journal of Economic Literature, 39, 1137-1176.

Bramoullé, Y. and B. Fortin (2009). “The econometrics of social networks.” In S.N. Durlauf
   and L.E. Blume (eds), New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics.

Burt, R., (1976). “Positions in networks.” Social Forces, 55, 93-122.

Calvó-Armengol, A., E. Patacchini and Y. Zenou (2009). “Peer effects and social networks
    in education.” Review of Economic Studies, 76(4), 1239-1267.

Coleman, J. (1961). The Adolescent Society: The Social Life of the Teenager and Its Impact
    on Education. New York: The Free Press.

Conley, T. G. and G. Topa (2003). “Identification of local interaction models with imperfect
    location data.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18(5), 605-18.

Conti, G., J.J. Heckman and S. Urzua (2010). “The Education-Health Gradient.” American
    Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 100, 234-238.

Currarini, S., M.O. Jackson and P. Pin (2009). “An economic model of friendship: Ho-
    mophily, minorities and segregation.” Econometrica, 77(4), 1003-1045.

Dhuey E. and S. Lipscomb (2008). “What makes a leader? Relative age and High school
   leadership.” Economics of Education Review, 27, 173-183.

Ennett, S.T., and K.E. Bauman (2000). “Adolescent social networks: Friendship cliques,
   social isolates, and drug use risk.” In W.B. Hansen, S.M. Gilles, and M.D. Fearnow-
   Kenney (Eds.) Improving Prevention Effectiveness, 47-57. Greensboro, NC: Tangle-
   wood Research, Inc.




                                            27
Fergusson, D.M. and L.J. Horwood (1987). “The trait and method components of ratings
    of conduct disorder: I. Maternal and teacher evaluations of conduct disorder in young
    children.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 28, 249-260.

Fong, E., and W.W. Isajiw (2000). “Determinants of friendships choices in multiethnic
    society.” Sociological Forum, 15(2), 249-272.

Glaeser, E.L., Laibson, D. and Sacerdote, B. (2002). “An economic approach to social
    capital.” The Economic Journal, 112, 437-458.

Granovetter, M. (1974). Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers. University of
    Chicago Press.

Hallinan, M.T. and Smith, S.S. (1989). “Classroom characteristics and student friendship
     cliques.” Social Forces, 67, 898-919.

Heckman, J. J., R.P. Pinto, and P. Savelyev (2012). “Understanding the Mechanisms
    Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.”
    American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Heckman, J. J., Stixrud, J., Urzua, S. (2006). “The effects of cognitive and noncognitive
    abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior.” Journal of Labor Economics,
    24, 411-482.

Helliwell, J. and Putnam, R. (1999). “Education and social capital.” NBER Working Paper
     No. 7121.

Herrnstein, R.J and C.A. Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure
    in American Life. New York: Free Press.

Holland, P.W. and S. Leinhard (1973), “Structural implications of measurement error in
    sociometry.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 3, 85-111.

Hoxby, C.M. (2000). “The effects of class size on student achievement: New evidence from
   population variation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4), 1239-85.

Johnston, D., Propper, C., Pudney, S. E. and Shields, M. A. (2011). “Child mental health
    and educational attainment: Multiple observers and the measurement error problem”.
    University of Essex: ISER Working Paper 2011-20.

Korenman, S. and Neumark, D. (1991). “Does marriage really make men more productive?”
    Journal of Human Resources, 26, 282-307.

Kuhn, P. and C. Weinberger (2005). “Leadership skills and wages.” Journal of Labor
   Economics, 23, 395-436.

Laumann, E.O., P.V. Marsden and D. Prensky (1983), “The boundary specification problem
   in network analysis.” In R.S. Burt and J.M. Minor (eds.), Applied Network Analysis,
   Sage Publications, London, 18-34.

                                          28
Lazarsfeld, P.F., and R.K. Merton (1954). “Friendship as a social process: a substantive
    and methodological analysis.” In M. Berger (ed.) Freedon and Control in Modern
    Society, 18-66, New York: Van Nostrand.

McPherson, M., L. Smith-Loving, and J.M. Cook (2001). “Birds of a eather: Homophily
   in social networks”. Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 415-44.

Mihaly, K. (2009). “Do more friends mean better grades? Student popularity and academic
    achievement.” RAND Working Paper 678.

Montgomery, J. (1991). “Social networks and labor-market outcomes: Toward an economic
   analysis.” American Economic Review, 81, 1408-1418.

Moody, J. (2001). “Race, school integration, and friendship segregation in America.” Amer-
   ican Journal of Sociology, 107(3), 679-716.

Mueller, G. and Plug, E. (2006). “Estimating the effect of personality on male-female
   earnings”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 60, 3-22.

Parkhurst, J. T. and A. Hopmeyer, (1998). “Sociometric popularity and peer-perceived
    popularity: two distinct dimensions of peer status”. The Journal of Early Adolescence,
    18(2), 125-144.

Parsons, T. (1959). “The school class as a social system”. Harvard Educational Review,
    29(4), 297-318.

Pepler, D.J. and M. Craig (1998). “Assessing children’s peer relationships”. Child Psychol-
    ogy and Psychiatry Review, 3(4), 176-182.

Postlewaite, A. and D. Silverman (2005). “Social Isolation and Inequality.” Journal of
    Economic Inequality, 3, 243-262.

Rees, A. (1996). “Information Networks in Labor Markets.” American Economic Review,
    Papers and Proceedings, 56, 559-566.

Repetti, R.L., Taylor, S.E., and Seeman, T.E. (2002). “Risky families: Family social
    environments and the mental and physical health of offspring.” Psychological Bulletin,
    128(2), 330-366.

Rosenthal, R. and L. Jacobsen (1968). Pygmalion in the classroom. New York: Holt,
    Rinehart, & Winston.

Sewell,W.H., Hauser, R.M., Springer, K.W., and Hauser, T.S. (2001). “As we age: The
    Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, 1957-2001.” In Kevin T. Leicht, ed., Research in Social
    Stratification and Mobility. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press.

Strauss, R.S. and H.A. Pollack (2003). “Social Marginalization of Overweight Children.”
    Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med., 157, 746-752.



                                           29
Topa, G. (2000). “Social interactions, local spillovers and unemployment.” Review of
    Economic Studies, 68, 261-295.

Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications.
   Cambridge University Press.

Weinberg, B. (2006). “Social interactions and endogenous association.” Mimeo.

Zax, J.S. and D. I. Rees (2002). “IQ, academic performance, environment and earnings.”
    The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(4), 600-616.




                                         30
