                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DIASPORAS AND OUTSOURCING:
                             EVIDENCE FROM ODESK AND INDIA

                                              Ejaz Ghani
                                          William R. Kerr
                                        Christopher T. Stanton

                                        Working Paper 18474
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18474


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




We thank John Horton, Ed Lazear, Ramana Nanda, Paul Oyer, and Kathryn Shaw for helpful comments
on this work. Funding for this project was provided by World Bank and Multi-Donor Trade Trust Fund.
Kerr and Stanton were paid short-term contractors of the World Bank for this project. The views expressed
here are those of the authors and not of any institution they may be associated with, nor of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Ejaz Ghani, William R. Kerr, and Christopher T. Stanton. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Diasporas and Outsourcing: Evidence from oDesk and India
Ejaz Ghani, William R. Kerr, and Christopher T. Stanton
NBER Working Paper No. 18474
October 2012
JEL No. F15,F22,J15,J31,J44,L14,L24,L26,L84,M55,O32

                                             ABSTRACT

This study examines the role of the Indian diaspora in the outsourcing of work to India. Our data are
taken from oDesk, the world’s largest online platform for outsourced contracts, where India is the
largest country in terms of contract volume. We use an ethnic name procedure to identify ethnic Indian
users of oDesk in other countries around the world. We find very clear evidence that diaspora-based
links matter on oDesk, with ethnic Indians in other countries 32% (9 percentage points) more likely
to choose a worker in India. Yet, the size of the Indian diaspora on oDesk and the timing of its effects
make clear that the Indian diaspora was not a very important factor in India becoming the leading country
on oDesk for fulfilling work. In fact, multiple pieces of evidence suggest that diaspora use of oDesk
increases with familiarity of the platform, rather than a scenario where diaspora connections serve
to navigate uncertain environments. We further show that diaspora-based contracts mainly serve to
lower costs for the company contacts outsourcing the work, as the workers in India are paid about
the market wage for their work. These results and other observations lead to the conclusion that diaspora
connections continue to be important even as online platforms provide many of the features that diaspora
networks historically provided (e.g., information about potential workers, monitoring and reputation
foundations).


Ejaz Ghani                                          Christopher T. Stanton
South Asia PREM                                     Department of Finance
The World Bank                                      David Eccles School of Business
Washington D.C.                                     University of Utah
Eghani@worldbank.org                                Salt Lake City, UT 84112
                                                    christopher.t.stanton@gmail.com
William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1. Introduction

The economic integration of developing countries into world markets is an important stepping
stone for economic transitions and growth. This integration can be quite challenging, however,
due to the many differences across countries in language, cultural understanding, legal
regulations, and much more. As a consequence, business and social networks are valuable
mechanisms for achieving this integration (Rauch, 2001).
       Ethnic-based interactions and diaspora connections are a prominent form of these
networks. The benefits typically cited for diaspora networks include stronger access to
information (especially very recent or tacit knowledge), matching and referral services that aid in
linking firms together, language skills and cultural sensitivity that improve interactions, and
repeated relationships that embed trust in uncertain environments and provide sanction
mechanisms for misbehavior. Such traits are hard to construct yet crucial in many developed and
emerging economies for business success. The history of these connections stretches back to the
earliest of international exchanges (e.g., Aubet, 2001), and many studies continue to find
important roles for diasporas in trade flows, foreign investments, knowledge diffusion, and
similar.
       Over the last two decades, the Internet has also risen to be a potent force for global
economic exchanges. The Internet links customers and companies together worldwide, it
enables labor to be provided at a distance, it provides instant access to information about foreign
locations, and much more. How will the Internet and diaspora networks connect? On one hand,
the substantial improvements in connectivity and reduced frictions of the Internet may reduce the
importance of diaspora connections. On the other hand, the online capabilities may provide an
effective tool that complements traditional diaspora connections. For example, Saxenian (2006)
argues that ethnic connections and the more integrated world economy allow some countries to
leap-frog traditional development stages.
       To shed light on these important questions, we investigate the role of the Indian diaspora
for online outsourcing of labor needs to India using data from oDesk. oDesk is the world’s
largest online labor market, processing $30 million per month in contracts as of May 2012.
oDesk provides an online platform for companies to post job opportunities. Workers worldwide
can bid on these opportunities, and workers build public profiles of their past performance on
                                                     2
contracts. oDesk provides tools that aid companies in interviewing, monitoring, and paying
workers selected for outsourced jobs.
       The oDesk platform was founded in 2005, and today India is the largest country
destination for outsourced contracts with more than a third of the worldwide volume. We
investigate the role of the Indian diaspora in countries around the world for this performance
using both descriptive and analytical techniques. A key feature of our data development,
described in greater detail below, is that we identify company contacts located anywhere around
the world who are likely of Indian ethnicity using ethnic name matching procedures. For
example, individuals with the surnames Gupta or Desai are more likely to be of Indian ethnicity
than individuals with the surnames Ming or Hernandez. Our measures of diaspora-linked
outsourcing to India build upon this identification of ethnic Indians who are using oDesk.
       Our evidence points to the following key relationships, which both resemble and differ
from the prior work on diaspora networks:
          Ethnic Indians worldwide are more likely to contract with India when outsourcing
           than other non-ethnic Indian company contacts. The increase in likelihood is about 9
           percentage points, or 32%, and it is most prominent for companies outside of the
           United States. This higher likelihood is evident in multiple types of contracts,
           including contracts involving companies with varied experience on oDesk and
           contracts at different points in time.
          Even with this increased likelihood of outsourcing to India, diaspora connections
           played a very small role in India’s rapid development on oDesk. For example, ethnic
           Indians account for 3.9% of oDesk company users in the United States by contract
           volume, while 29% of outsourced contracts from the United States go to India. We
           repeatedly observe that the magnitude of diaspora-linked connections is too small to
           have accounted for much of India’s development on oDesk given the overall size of
           the platform.
          The higher likelihood for ethnic Indians outsourcing to India is increasing with time.
           Moreover, this propensity is increasing as company contacts develop experience on
           the platform. These patterns suggest that the higher propensity is not due to ethnic
           connections overcoming uncertain environments. Instead, utilization of ethnic

                                                    3
           connections increases with familiarity, suggesting a longer-term complementarity
           between online platforms and diaspora connections.
          Diaspora connections occur through the actions of many people in small ways and the
           extreme concentration of impact due to a few key people. We document below a
           fairly broad footprint of diaspora ties both across and within countries. We also show
           how a single ethnic Indian outsourced such a high volume of work that this
           individual’s operations exceeded that of any country except the top four nations.
          Diaspora connections provide cost advantages to the company contacts sending work
           to India relative to the other contracts that these company contacts form on oDesk.
           On the other hand, the workers in India are paid wages that are typical on oDesk for
           the type of work being undertaken in India.
          In addition to these analyses that examine evidence on connections within the oDesk
           data, we demonstrate how the broader Indian diaspora in a country (measured as
           migrants from India as a share of country population) systematically connects to a
           greater ethnic Indian use of oDesk and a larger share of contracts being sent to India
           from the country. This background connects studies that consider diasporas from a
           macro perspective (e.g., linking trade flows to diaspora shares by country) with
           studies that consider micro evidence (e.g., that international patent citations are more
           likely on ethnic lines).


       We find these results quite striking. As we describe in the next section, oDesk’s business
model focuses on reducing barriers to outsourcing work. oDesk seeks to minimize as many
frictions as possible—for example, the platform provides companies with knowledge of workers
for hire in India and their qualifications, provides a shared infrastructure for monitoring and
payments between companies and workers, and creates a labor market where workers are
building reputations that enable future work and higher wages. These frictions that oDesk
minimizes, of course, are frictions that diaspora networks have historically been used to
overcome. We thus view our results as a lower bound on the importance of diasporas, but also
perhaps a view as to what their role will be in the future as these online capabilities further grow.
The pattern of results predicts that diasporas will continue to use online platforms in an effective

                                                      4
manner, but that diasporas will not be responsible for a country’s overall success on the platform
(at least in countries of moderate to large size).
        Our work is related to several literature strands. It first contributes to a developing
literature that explores the operation of online labor markets. The closest related study is
Agrawal, Lacetera, and Lyons (2012), who find that workers from less-developed countries find
it more difficult to contract work with developed countries on oDesk. This is especially true for
initial contracts, and the disadvantage closes somewhat with the worker’s platform experience.
The authors suggest that some of this difficulty may be due to challenges companies in advanced
economies encounter when evaluating the experience of the workers abroad outside of the oDesk
platform. It is possible that diaspora connections help in this capacity.1
        Our work relates to research investigating the outsourcing of work from advanced
economies, the emergence of incremental innovation in developing countries, and connections
between immigration and outsourcing.2 More broadly, these findings contribute to
understanding the role of diasporas and ethnic networks in economic exchanges across countries.
Ethnic networks have been shown to play important roles in promoting international trade,
investment, and cross-border financing activity, with recent work particularly emphasizing the
role of educated or skilled immigrants.3 This work has further emphasized the role of diaspora




        1
           Other studies of oDesk labor contracts include Stanton and Thomas (2011) and Pallais (2011). Autor
(2001) and Horton (2010) review online labor markets. Montgomery (1991) models social networks in labor
markets. Beyond labor markets, Forman, Ghose, and Goldfarb (2009) study the interplay between local and online
consumer options. Freedman and Jin (2008) and Agrawal, Catalini, and Goldfarb (2012) study social networks in
online lending. A recent example of off-line work in this regard is Fisman, Paravisini, and Vig (2012).
         2
           For example, Feenstra and Hanson (2005), Liu and Trefler (2008, 2011), Amiti and Wei (2009), Blinder
and Krueger (2009), Ebenstein et al. (2009), Puga and Trefler (2010), Ottaviano, Peri, and Wright (2010), Mithas
and Lucas (2010), Harrison and McMillan (2011), and Tambe and Hitt (2012). Banerjee and Duflo (2000), Khanna
(2008), and Ghani (2010) consider aspects of these phenomena for India specifically. Wang, Barron, and Seidmann
(1997), Cachon and Harker (2002), and Novak and Stern (2008) provide related models of the sourcing choice.
         3
           Broad reviews of diaspora effects include Rauch (2001), Freeman (2006), Clemens (2011), Docquier and
Rapoport (2011), and Gibson and MacKenzie (2011). Evidence on foreign direct investment includes Saxenian
(1999, 2002, 2006), Arora and Gambardella (2005), Buch, Kleinert, and Toubal (2006), Kugler and Rapoport (2007,
2011), Bhattacharya and Groznik (2008), Docquier and Lodigiani (2010), Iriyama, Li, and Madhavan (2010),
Huang, Jin, and Qian (2011), Nachum (2011), Hernandez (2011), Javorcik et al. (2011), Rangan and Drummond
(2011), and Foley and Kerr (2012). Evidence on trade includes Gould (1994), Head and Ries (1998), Rauch (1999),
Rauch and Trindade (2002), Kerr (2009), Rangan and Sengul (2009), and Hatzigeorgiou and Lodefalk (2011).
                                                           5
connections in technology transfer.4 Our analysis is among the first to be able to study
outsourcing as a channel, and we derive evidence that links diasporas to both greater use of
oDesk by ethnic Indians in the country and greater flows of outsourced work to India.
        The next section of this paper describes the oDesk platform and our ethnic name
matching procedures used to identify the Indian diaspora. Section 3 provides a descriptive
analysis of the data for India to illustrate many of the above findings. Section 4 turns to more
analytical approaches to quantify placement propensities, wage effects, and the links of ethnic
Indians on oDesk to the broader Indian diaspora by country. The last section concludes.


2. oDesk Outsourcing Platform and Ethnicity Assignments
oDesk is a platform that connects workers who supply services with buyers who pay for and
receive these services from afar. Examples include data-entry and programming tasks that do
not require in-person interaction. The platform began operating in 2005, and hundreds of
millions of dollars of transactions have since occurred. The market is rapidly growing, and
oDesk is now the world’s largest platform for online outsourcing. There are other sites that
provide similar services, some of which pre-date oDesk’s founding, but oDesk’s expansion
mainly reflects increasing demand for online labor services over time. Statistics from
compete.com, a company that tracks Internet traffic, show that unique visits to oDesk and its four
largest competitor sites increased simultaneously in recent years. The rate of overall growth for
online outsourcing slowed with the financial crisis, but oDesk has continued to grow rapidly.
        The oDesk market is a unique setting to study the diaspora impact on economic
exchanges due to its recent emergence and exceptionally detailed records. One important feature
is that any worker can contract with any firm directly, and all work takes place and is monitored
via a proprietary online system. In exchange for a 10% transaction fee, oDesk provides a
comprehensive management and billing system that records worker time on the job, allows easy
communication between workers and employers about scheduled tasks, and takes random

        4
          Recent work includes Kapur (2001), Kapur and McHale (2005a,b), Agrawal, Cockburn, and McHale
(2006), MacGarvie (2006), Nanda and Khanna (2010), Oettl and Agrawal (2008), Kerr (2008), Agrawal et al.
(2011), and Foley and Kerr (2012). Singh (2005), Obukhova (2009), Choudhury (2010), and Hovhannisyan and
Keller (2010) study related forms of international labor mobility and technology diffusion, and Keller (2004)
provides a review. Marx and Singh (2012) consider knowledge flows and borders versus distance.

                                                            6
screenshots of workers’ computer terminals to allow monitoring electronically. These features
facilitate easy, standardized contracting, and any company and any worker can form electronic
employment relationships with very little effort.
       Some background about how workers post resumes and apply for jobs is necessary to
understand the setting.5 A worker who wants to provide services fills out an online profile
describing his/her skills, education, and experience. Workers can also take tests to certify
competence in specialized subject areas like web development, C++ programming, or database
administration. As a worker gains experience on the platform, his or her entire history of
employment, including wages and hours, is publicly observable. For jobs that have ended, a
feedback measure from previous work is publicly displayed. Figure 1 provides an example of a
worker profile from oDesk.
       On the buyer side of the market, a company or individual looking to hire fills out a
description for each job, including the skills required, an assessment of the expected duration,
and some preferred characteristics for a potential match. Historically most of the jobs posted
were contracts paying an hourly rate for technology or programming related skills such as
software or web development, but postings for administrative assistance, data entry, graphic
design, and smaller categories became more prevalent after the first few years of oDesk’s
operation. After a company posts a position, workers apply to the opening and bid an hourly
rate. After reviewing applications, the hiring contact at a firm sets up interviews. After this
process, the firm and selected worker agree to begin an employment relationship.
       We study the role of the Indian diaspora for facilitating oDesk contracts to India. oDesk
does not collect a person’s ethnicity or country of birth, so we use the names of company
contacts and workers to probabilistically assign ethnicities. This matching approach exploits the
fact that people with particular first names and surnames are likely to be of a certain ethnicity.
For example, individuals with surnames like Chatterjee, Gupta, or Patel are significantly more
likely to be Indian in ethnicity than individuals with surnames like Wang, Martinez, or Johnson.
       Our matching procedure exploits two databases originally developed for marketing
purposes by the Melissa Data Corporation and LSDI, common naming conventions, and hand-


       5
           This oDesk description follows closely from the original working paper of Stanton and Thomas (2011).

                                                             7
collected frequent names from multiple sources like population censuses and baby registries.
The process assigns individuals a likelihood of being Anglo-Saxon, Chinese, European,
Hispanic, Indian, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese. Kerr (2007, 2008) and Kerr and
Lincoln (2010) provide extended details on the matching process, list frequent ethnic names, and
provide descriptive statistics and quality assurance exercises.
       Several features of this work should be noted. First, some records will not be matched to
an ethnicity, either due to incomplete records for listed ethnicities (e.g., very obscure names) or
to uncovered ethnic groups (e.g., African ethnicities). Second, this approach can describe ethnic
origins, but it cannot ascertain immigration status. For example, a U.S.-based company contact
with the surname Singh will be assigned to be of ethnic Indian origin, but the approach cannot
say whether the individual is a first- or later-generation immigrant. Third, while we focus on the
Indian ethnicity, attempting to match on all nine ethnic groups is important given that some
names overlap across ethnicities (e.g., D’Souza in the Indian context due to past colonization).
Finally, while we use the terminology “Indian” for our ethnic assignment, it is worth noting that
the procedure more broadly is capturing South Asian ethnic origin. Names originating from
India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, etc. overlap too much to allow strict parsing.
       We assign ethnicities to company contacts undertaking hiring on oDesk, with a raw
match rate of 88%. This match rate is 89% when removing records that are either missing names
or have non-name entries in the name field (e.g., either the company is listed in the name field or
a bogus name like “test”). The four most common surnames linked with the Indian ethnicity are
Kumar, Singh, Ahmed, and Sharma.
       As a final note on our data, it is important to say more on the role of the company
contacts to which we have made ethnicity assignments. The company contact is the individual
within the firm that is undertaking the hiring and paying for the service. This is good for our
study in that we want to evaluate the role of ethnic connections in outsourcing decisions, and this
structure illuminates for us the person within the larger firm making the hiring choice. There is a
limitation, however, in that oDesk does not link these individual company contacts into larger
firms. Thus, we have multiple points of contact that are separately listed in the data for larger
firms. This structure limits our potential to describe the firm size distribution on oDesk, but for
most applications this has limited consequence.

                                                     8
3. Descriptive Features
We turn now to a descriptive analysis of the Indian diaspora’s role in outsourcing contracts to
India, to be followed in the next section with a more analytical approach. Our data begin at
oDesk’s founding in 2005 and run through August of 2010.
       We begin in Table 1 with the geographical distribution of the top 20 countries
outsourcing work to India on oDesk. The United States is by far the largest source of oDesk
contracts going to India, with 31,261 contracts over the five-year period. A majority of all
contracts on oDesk originate from the United States. The distribution of contract counts has a
prominent tail. The United States is followed by Australia, the United Kingdom, and Canada,
which combined equal about a third of the U.S. volume. Spain, the 10th largest country in terms
of volume to India, is responsible for 269 contracts, which is less than 1% of the U.S. volume.
Hong Kong, the 20th largest source, accounts for 125 contracts.
       Columns 4 and 5 show the share of contracts originating from each country that go to
India, both in total and relative to cross-border contracts only (i.e., excluding oDesk contracts
formed with workers in the source country). Contracts to India represent a 29% share of all
contracts originating from the United States and a 33% share of cross-border contracts. Across
the top 20 countries, India’s share of a country’s contract total volume ranges from 18% in
Switzerland to 55% in the United Arab Emirates (UAE). The unweighted average of the top 20
countries is 28%. The UAE is an exceptional case that we describe further below. The UAE is
responsible for 989 contracts to India, and India’s 55% share of contracts originating from the
UAE is 17% higher than the next highest share of 39% for Italy.
       The composition of the countries within Table 1 and their relative propensities to contract
with India provide some suggestive insights about the traits of countries outsourcing work to
India. First, distance to India does not have a visible role like it would in many international
exchanges, reflective of the online labor market platform. Second, most of the countries in the
top 20 have high income levels, perhaps indicating stronger potential cost savings from
outsourcing to India. Third, it is noticeable that most of the top countries have large Indian
diaspora populations, but there could be other factors that explain this association (e.g., English


                                                     9
language proficiency). We return below to a multi-variate analysis of contract flows to India by
country to quantify these features more systematically.
       Column 6 documents the share of company contacts in each country with an ethnically
Indian name, regardless of how they use oDesk, while column 7 provides the ethnic Indian
percentage for company contacts on contracts that are being outsourced to India. For the United
States, 3.9% of all company contacts who use oDesk are ethnically Indian, while the share is
4.6% for outsourced work to India.
       These numbers are very important for placing diaspora effects into context. As a first
comparison point, 0.9% of the U.S. population in the 2010 Census of Populations was born in
India. These numbers are not exactly comparable, as our measure is based off of ethnicity, rather
than country of birth, and includes South Asia more generally. Nonetheless, even after taking
these features into account, the role of Indians on oDesk is perhaps twice as strong as the overall
Indian population share. This matches popular perceptions that Indians are very active in high-
tech sectors that use oDesk and similar online tools.
       As a second comparison point, Kerr and Lincoln (2010) estimate the Indian share of U.S.
inventors to be about 5% in 2005 using patent records from the United States Patent and
Trademark Office. This second comparison point uses exactly the same name matching
approach as the current project. It thus suggests that Indians may use oDesk somewhat less as a
share of total users compared to their general work in high-tech sectors.
       Beyond the 3.9% share of U.S. company contacts that use oDesk, ethnic Indians account
for 4.6% of outsourced work to India from the United States. This higher use for India
specifically can be conveniently expressed as a ratio of 1.18 between the two shares. The higher
ethnic share for Indian-specific contracts generally holds, with 13 of the top 20 countries having
a ratio greater than one. The average ratio across all 20 countries is 1.30.
       Thus, the descriptive data suggest a special role for diaspora connections in sending work
to India. The next section more carefully quantifies this role when taking into account potential
confounding factors (e.g., the types of projects being outsourced), finding that the special role
persists. But, we also should not lose sight of the absolute quantity of the shares. Ethnic Indians
in the United States only account for about 5% of all of the nation’s outsourced work to India.
The average across the top 20 countries is 7%, falling to 3% when excluding the UAE. While

                                                     10
ethnic Indians are more likely to send work to India, the rise of India to be the top worker
country on oDesk has much broader roots than diaspora connections. With online platforms,
diasporas still matter, but the bigger message may be that they matter much less than they likely
did in the past for commencing trade or similar exchanges.
       Finally, column 8 of Table 1 lists the average hourly wage paid to Indian workers on
outsourced contracts. To reduce the impact of outlier wages, we take the average log wage and
express this in U.S. dollars. The average wage paid by companies in the United States on
contracts to India is $8.30 per hour. The highest observed average wage is $10.90 per hour for
Spain, the lowest is $4.60 per hour for New Zealand, and the average over the top 20 countries is
$8.40. As the average wage on oDesk for data entry and administrative support jobs is below
$3.00 per hour, the contracts being outsourced to India represent relatively skilled work that
involves programming and technical skills. The correlation of columns 4 and 8 is 0.5, indicating
that countries sending more of their work to India are also paying higher average wages. The
correlation of columns 6 and 8 is 0.2, indicating that greater ethnic Indian involvement in placing
work into India is correlated with higher average wages.
       Tables 2a and 2b provide a company-contact perspective, with the caveat noted earlier
that we observe company contacts that are not linked into larger firms. While we are not allowed
to disclose the identity of individual company contacts, we can provide some suggestive traits
about them. Beginning with U.S.-based companies in Table 2a, the 12 largest company contacts
in terms of outsourced work to India accounted for 708 of the United States’ 31,261 contracts to
India during this period. There is substantial heterogeneity in the geographic location of these 12
companies and the degree to which they typically utilize India for outsourcing. The largest U.S.
company contact sponsored 118 contracts, is located in Virginia, and 100% of the company’s
contracts have gone to India. In contrast, the third largest company contact is located in Florida,
with 73 contracts to India that represent only 26% of the company’s total contract volume. This
company contact footprint is thus very dispersed, with the largest company contact accounting
for only 0.4% of the United States’ outsourced work to India, although on absolute counts the
company contact is comparable to the total volume originating from Hong Kong. Finally,
echoing our earlier observation about the very broad roots of India’s success on oDesk, only one
of the 12 company contacts in Table 2a is of Indian ethnic origin.

                                                    11
       Our most striking descriptive statistic is given in Table 2b, which provides a similar list
to Table 2a for company contacts based outside of the United States. When discussing Table 1,
we noted at several points the exceptional performance of the UAE: it ranked fifth on the overall
country list, sent half its contracts to India, and over 90% of its company contacts were of ethnic
Indian origin. Table 2b reveals this to be in large part the consequence of a single company
contact that accounted for 906 of UAE’s 989 contracts to India. This one company contact sent
more work to India than the sum of the 12 largest company contacts in the United States! The
next largest company contact sent 68 contracts to India, 36% of total company’s contract
volume, and was located in the United Kingdom. Overall, there is again substantial
heterogeneity in Table 2b in how company contacts connected with India.
       While disclosure restrictions again prevent us from naming the UAE-based company
contact, its background is interesting for understanding its role. The company is the work of an
entrepreneur who uses oDesk for placing and managing outsourcing work. The entrepreneur is
of ethnic Indian origin, and much of the work is placed into India. Studies of diaspora networks
have speculated about the likely concentrated importance of single individuals (e.g., Kuznetsov
2009), and oDesk provides some of the first quantifiable evidence of this concentration. The 906
contracts facilitated by this individual alone are responsible for the UAE’s fifth-placed ranking,
and this company contact accounts for 2.4 times as many contracts as the Netherlands, the sixth-
ranked country.
       Table 3 provides descriptive statistics by types of jobs undertaken on oDesk. Panel A
reports contract counts, Panel B the distribution of job types, and Panel C the average hourly
wages paid. Columns 2-6 report traits on U.S.-based companies. The various columns describe
the behavior of ethnic and non-ethnic Indians who are hiring abroad in general (columns 3 and 4)
and for those hiring in India specifically (columns 5 and 6). Columns 7-9 provide similar detail
for companies located outside of the United States, excluding companies based in India itself.
       Panels A and B further confirm the earlier result that ethnic Indians disproportionately
hire workers in India, but that diaspora connections represent a small share of the contract
volume between India and the rest of the world. There are 109,722 contracts originating from
the United States, and 93,422 of these contracts involve hiring a worker abroad. Ethnic Indians
formed 3,516 contracts with workers abroad, of which 1,358 (38.6%) of these contracts involved

                                                    12
a worker in India. Company contacts in the United States not of Indian ethnic origin formed
90,906 contracts abroad, with 29,716 (32.7%) contracts outsourced to India.
         Panel B shows that companies tend to send relatively skilled jobs to India, in line with the
higher salaries noted in Table 1. The job types are listed in descending order of salary, and
column 2 provides the baseline point of comparison. Administrative support, the lowest skilled
task according to average wages, makes up 21% of the contracts originating from the United
States. 16% of the contracts that ethnic Indians send abroad are for administrative support jobs,
but only 11% of the jobs that ethnic Indians send to India involve administrative support.
Similarly, 21% of the contracts that non-Indians send abroad involve administrative support, but
only 10% of the contracts sent to India by company contacts of non-Indian ethnic origin involve
administrative support. A similar pattern holds for non-American companies.
         Much of the work sent to India is technical in nature. Among ethnic Indians in the
United States, web development makes up 42% of the contract volume sent abroad and over 55%
of the contract volume sent to India. Web development includes tasks like programming in Perl,
PHP, Python, or Java, website database development, and user interface programming and
implementation. This tendency to outsource skilled work to India is even more striking for non-
Indians in the United States who outsource 63% of their work to India for web development.
The increased likelihood of observing high-end skills-based contracts is also evident for non-
American companies, and is similarly extreme for non-ethnic Indians hiring in India.
         In short, while we continue to collect evidence that ethnic Indians disproportionately
select India as an outsourcing destination, there is not much evidence that these diaspora
connections shift the type of work being outsourced. Ethnic-based connections appear to follow
along the competencies of India’s workers, and company contacts who are not of Indian ethnicity
are also hiring at a rapid rate in India for technical tasks that require complex communication and
project management.6
         Panel C of Table 3 examines average wages paid. Ethnic Indians in the United States
who hire abroad pay about $7.00 per hour overall, compared to $6.30 per hour for non-Indians
hiring abroad. Part of this difference is explained by the skill composition of contracts. In the

         6
          One potential exception to this pattern is that ethnic Indians in the United States appear more likely to
outsource writing and translation work to India, but this difference is a small part of the total distribution.

                                                               13
highest-skilled job tasks, the wages paid abroad by ethnic Indians and non-Indians in the United
States are virtually identical. On contracts to India, however, ethnic Indians pay much lower
wages than their non-Indian counterparts. For companies in the United States, ethnic Indians
who hire in India pay about $7.80 per hour overall, compared to $8.40 for non-Indians. Some of
this difference could be due to the distribution of contract types, but the wage differential is also
apparent for the best-paid job categories as well. Indians from the United States who hire in
India pay about $10.50 per hour for web development work, while similar non-Indians pay about
$10.90 per hour. The difference is even more extreme, both in absolute and percentage terms, in
software development. A similar pattern holds for companies outside of the United States.


4. Empirical Analysis of Ethnicity and Outsourcing
The descriptive features of the data exhibit many of the key features of diaspora connections that
we observe, but the magnitudes have a sharper interpretation when quantified in more structured
econometric frameworks. Table 4 quantifies the greater propensity of ethnic Indians for choosing
India for outsourcing contracts, Table 5 considers the role of diasporas in gravity models taken
from the trade literature, and Tables 6 and 7 consider wage outcomes in greater detail.


Diaspora Ties and Outsourcing on oDesk
Table 4 presents linear probability models where the dependent variable is a binary indicator that
the chosen worker on a contract is located in India. The primary independent variable is the
probability, assigned from the ethnic name matching algorithm, that the company contact is of
ethnic Indian origin. Of our company contacts, 5.3% are linked to Indian names. Indian names
are fairly distinct, so that in 90% of these cases the ethnic assignment is unique to the Indian
ethnicity. In 10% of these cases, the Indian assignment overlaps with another ethnic group.
       The four panels split the sample by the type of company or job opening. Panel A
includes the entire sample of companies, excluding firms located in India. Panel B includes only
companies in the United States, while Panel C contains only companies outside of India and the
United States. Finally, Panel D takes the sample from Panel A, but conditions on whether a
worker from India applied for the job prior to the contract formation. To control for the
composition of work, the regressions include fixed effects for the year x job category of work.

                                                     14
       The first column is for all contracts regardless of type. In each of the four samples we
find a significant increase in the likelihood of selecting India as a destination for outsourcing
contracts when the company contact is of ethnic Indian origin. In the whole sample, an ethnic
Indian is nine percentage points more likely to select India as an outsourcing destination,
conditional on job type and year, than a company contact of another ethnicity. This represents a
32% increase in the likelihood of selecting India relative to the constant. This effect is stronger
outside of the United States than in the United States.
       Columns 2 and 3 split the sample by contracts during 2008 and earlier versus contracts
during 2009 and after. This partition looks at whether ethnic connections mattered more or less
in oDesk’s early development. The common pattern across this decomposition is that the Indian
placement effect appears to be growing over time, with the surprising corollary that the effect
was not significant economically or statistically for the United States in the very early days of
oDesk. This is further evidence that diaspora connections were not important for the launch of
India’s success on oDesk, despite their localized importance in directing work to India.
       Columns 4 and 5 split the sample by whether the job type is high-end or not, with high-
end being defined by having an average wage rate equal to or higher than web development in
Table 3 (i.e., networking and information systems, software development, and web
development). The patterns here are not consistent, reflective of Table 3’s finding that diaspora
groups do not substantially shift the types of contracts outsourced. There was not a strong role
for ethnicity in outsourcing high-end work from the United States, while more of a role was
evident at the low-end. The opposite is true for company contacts outside of the United States.
       Finally, columns 6 and 7 split the sample by whether the contract is the company
contact’s first contract on oDesk or not. These results suggest ethnicity’s role strengthens with
repeated use of the platform. This is quite interesting given that diaspora networks are often
thought of as providing a substitute for well-defined contracts and/or as a mechanism for
navigating uncertain environments. This rationale would have suggested that ethnic roles should
have been stronger in the early days of oDesk or when a company contact is first testing the
platform and uncertain about its strength. The fact that we find ethnicity ties instead matter more
in later years and in follow-on contracts suggests that the ethnic connection is more centered on
potential longer-run factors than these initial uncertainties. This is further striking given the

                                                      15
evidence from Agrawal et al. (2012) that workers in developing countries have an initial
disadvantage on oDesk; one may have expected that diaspora-based links could have provided a
fruitful opportunity to overcome the initial uncertainty about workers.
       Overall, the results strongly suggest there is positive ethnic bias in hiring. Pulling back
from the above partitions, a bigger message from Table 4 is that most every cut of the data finds
economically and statistically important effects.


Link to Broader Diaspora Connections
To this point, our analysis has only exploited data derived from oDesk itself, and yet at multiple
points we have framed our analysis in terms of the general diaspora literature. There remains
something of a gap as it could be the case that use of oDesk by ethnic Indians across countries
might be uncorrelated with the general Indian-ethnicity populations of countries. Rauch and
Trindade (2002), for example, relate trade flows to the general distribution of the ethnic Chinese
population across countries, rather than the greater likelihood that two observed traders are
Chinese.
       Table 5 closes this gap using empirical models similar to the gravity framework from the
trade literature. The dependent variable in columns 1-6 is the share of contracts originating from
the country on oDesk that are outsourced to India. We focus on shares of contracts, rather than
contract volumes, as the adoption of oDesk across countries as a platform for e-commerce is still
underway and somewhat idiosyncratic to date. Shares allow us to consider the choice of India
for outsourcing independent of this overall penetration of oDesk.
       The core dependent variable is taken from the World Bank’s Bilateral Migration and
Remittances 2010 database. This database builds upon the initial work of Ratha and Shaw
(2007) to provide estimates of migrant stocks by country. We form the Indian diaspora share of
each country’s population by dividing these stocks by the population levels of the country. We
complement this diaspora measure with distances to India calculated using the great circle
method, population and GDP per capita levels taken from the United Nations, and telephone
lines per capita in 2007 taken from World Development Indicators.
       We also calculate a more specialized control that is the fit of the country’s outsourcing
needs with the typical worker in India. We calculate this control by first measuring the share of

                                                    16
contracts outsourced from the country in each of the nine job categories given in Table 3,
independent of where the contract is filled. We likewise measure the distribution of oDesk work
performed in India across the nine job categories, independent of where the company contact is
located. We then calculate the sum of the squared deviations of these two distributions to
measure how closely the work typically filled in India matches the needs of a given country. We
subtract this sum of deviations from one, so that positive values represent a better fit, and we
transform the measure to have unit standard deviation to aid interpretation.
       Column 1 presents our base estimation. We have 92 observations, and we weight by the
log number of worldwide contracts formed on oDesk. The first row shows the connection of
oDesk outsourcing to the diaspora population share, which is quite strong. A 1% increase in the
Indian diaspora share of a country is associated with a 1% increase in the share of oDesk
contracts outsourced to India. The country-level placement of oDesk contracts to India
systematically followed the pre-existing levels of Indian diaspora communities.
       Looking at the other covariates, we find that distance does not matter in the oDesk
context like it does in many estimates of economic exchanges. In fact, the share of contracts sent
to India increases with distance from India. The overall fit of a country’s outsourcing needs with
the skillsets of Indian workers predicts greater shares of work are sent to India. There does not
appear to be a systematic link beyond the diaspora share to country population, and the strength
of telephone penetration does not predict higher or lower connections to India. We likewise
found similar weakness to Internet penetration measures, but they were not as uniformly
available. Finally, countries with higher GDP per capita send less of their work to India
conditional on the other covariates.
       Many countries on oDesk have very few contracts, which can generate noisy share
estimates. Our main estimations thus weight by contract volume to focus attention on better
measured data and more meaningful observations; we utilize log weights to not overly
emphasize the United States experience in particular. Columns 3 and 4 show similar results
when we weight by log country population or when we exclude the weights. In both cases, the
coefficients decline somewhat and the standard errors grow given the greater emphasis placed on
noisy outcomes, but the role of diasporas remains economically and statistically significant.



                                                     17
Column 5 shows similar results when adding a control for the total count of contracts on oDesk
by the country worldwide.
        Column 6 tests whether this connection is simply following on existing business
relationships that countries have with India. We measure the extent to which India is an
important trading partner of the country by the total volume of trade in 2007 between India and
the country divided by the focal country’s GDP. Introducing this as a control does not affect our
results. Column 7 finds similar results when examining the dollar share of contracts being sent
to India rather than the count share. The coefficient declines but remains economically and
statistically important.
        Column 8 provides an important connection between Tables 4 and 5. The dependent
variable is the share of company contacts using oDesk in the country that are of ethnic Indian
origin (independent of whether or not the work is contracted with India). There is a very strong
connection between an increase in diaspora shares of the country population generally and
increases in the share of oDesk company contacts that are of Indian ethnic origin.
        We have tested the robustness of this diaspora finding in several ways. First, the results
are not overly-dependent upon a single country, and we find very similar results when excluding
the United States, Pakistan, and similar. Excluding the UAE has the largest effect, resulting in a
point estimate of 0.878 (0.660), which is not very surprising given that the Indian diaspora’s
share of 35% in the UAE is by far the largest, twice that of the next-highest states of Qatar (18%)
and Oman (17%). As a second approach, we find a point estimate of 1.629 (0.654) when
winsorizing diaspora shares to Oman’s value to cap the UAE’s extreme value. The role of the
diaspora community is also very similar when including a control for English language
proficiency, which we are able to assemble for about half of the countries in our sample.
        Using the three partitions discussed earlier, the diaspora coefficient is 0.893 (0.263) for
2008 and prior, 1.085 (0.240) for 2009 and later, 0.798 (0.238) for high-end contracts, 0.592
(0.113) for low-end contracts, 0.448 (0.232) for initial contracts, and 1.134 (0.334) for
subsequent contracts. The effect is again evident in all six groups, with the most important
difference being the greater role in subsequent contracts versus initial oDesk work. This suggests
that online platforms become more useful to diasporas with familiarity and that there may exist a
long-term complementarity.

                                                     18
Estimated Wage Effects with Ethnic-based Connections
Our final analysis focuses on wage rate effects due to diaspora connections. We take two
perspectives in these calculations. Table 6 first examines whether diaspora-linked contracts
differ from the typical contract formed with workers in India. This approach corresponds to the
perspective of the Indian worker. Table 7 takes the second perspective of the company contact.
Do diaspora connections reduce the wages that company contacts need to pay for a given job
type compared to their typical alternatives?
       The outcome variable in Panel A of Table 6 is the log wage rate of the worker. The core
independent variable is the likelihood that the company contact abroad is of Indian ethnicity. We
include in these regressions fixed effects for year x job type x country of company contact. We
thus identify, for example, whether ethnic-based contracts outsourced from the United States to
India in “web development” in 2008 paid a lower average wage than similar contracts formed by
U.S. company contacts not of Indian ethnicity. This strict regression framework isolates the
variation around the ethnic connections, removing aggregate differences across countries and
outsourcing job types.
       The point estimates are all negative, suggesting modestly lower wages. The estimated
coefficient in column 1 suggests that a typical $10 per hour contract would be paid about $9.76
with an ethnic-based connection. These effects, however, are not statistically different from
zero. The one exception is high-end work, which has the largest point decline and is precisely
estimated.
       Panel B of Table 6 takes an alternative route where we compare the wage rate paid to the
selected worker to the median proposal made by other workers that bid on the same job
opportunity via oDesk. This is a very attractive baseline of comparison as the bids made by
other workers are informative about how the work opportunity and its technical difficulty were
perceived. It may be, for example, that there is heterogeneity in project types among “web
development” that we miss in Panel A. By comparing selected bids to the set of proposals that
company contacts received, we better isolate the potential ethnic role in wage determination.
       The estimates in Panel B further weaken the case that workers in India are paid
differently on diaspora-based contracts than usual. High-end contracts remain the most likely

                                                   19
candidate, but these effects are quite small. Most variations suggest less than a 1% differential in
diaspora-linked outsourcing. We find similar results to these in variants that control for past
performance ratings (in a smaller sample that conditions on being an experienced worker).
       Table 7 repeats the specifications from the perspective of the company contact outside of
India. Our sample is all of the contracts formed worldwide by ethnic Indians working as
company contacts outside of India. We then compare the wages paid on these contracts to
investigate if there is a differential for work outsourced to India. We include in these regressions
fixed effects for year x job type x country of company contact. We thus identify, for example,
whether ethnic Indians in the United States who outsourced contracts to India in “web
development” in 2008 paid a lower average wage than similar contracts formed when
outsourcing to countries other than India.
       The effects in Table 7 are much stronger than in Table 6. Panel A finds lower wages
across all variants for work outsourced to India compared to what ethnic Indians abroad normally
pay. The estimates, of course, could be overstated due to the underlying heterogeneity in the
type of work sent to India. Panel B identifies, however, that these lower wages persist even after
comparing the wage to the median proposal bid received.
       To summarize, the wage estimations suggest that diaspora-linked contracts to India
provide lower costs to the ethnic Indians living abroad than what they typically pay for work.
This wage rate is lower in absolute terms and relative to the pool of received bids for work. On
the other hand, diaspora-linked contracts have minimal wage effects for the workers in India.
The main effect of diasporas on outsourcing in the Indian context appears to be the advantageous
placement of contracts to India, where workers are paid the typical wage rate for their efforts.


5. Conclusions
Diaspora-based exchanges have been important for centuries, but the online world reduces many
of the frictions these networks solved. This study investigated the importance of Indian diaspora
connections on the oDesk platforms for outsourcing. Our work finds strong evidence that
diasporas still matter and influence economic exchanges, even when many frictions are
minimized. In fact, our case study suggests more often than not that diaspora use increases as
familiarity with the platform increases. This suggests a longer-term complementarity between

                                                    20
diaspora networks and online tools that may aid the persistence of these networks. On the other
hand, the oDesk evidence also makes clear that the role of diaspora networks should not be
overstated. While they contributed to India’s success on oDesk, diaspora connections were
clearly not a driving force in India becoming the top destination for oDesk contracts.



References
Agrawal, Ajay, Christian Catalini, and Avi Goldfarb, “Friends, Family, and the Flat World: The
      Geography of Crowdfunding”, NBER Working Paper 16820 (2012).
Agrawal, Ajay, Iain Cockburn, and John McHale, “Gone But Not Forgotten: Knowledge Flows, Labor
      Mobility, and Enduring Social Relationships”, Journal of Economic Geography 6:5 (2006), 571-
      591.
Agrawal, Ajay, Devesh Kapur, John McHale, and Alexander Oettl, “Brain Drain or Brain Bank? The
      Impact of Skilled Emigration on Poor-Country Innovation”, Journal of Urban Economics 69
      (2011), 43-55.
Agrawal, Ajay, Nicola Lacetera, and Elizabeth Lyons, “How Do Online Platforms Flatten Markets for
      Contract Labor?”, Working Paper (2012).
Amiti, Mary, and Shang-Jin Wei, “Offshoring of Services and Productivity: Evidence from the US”, The
       World Economy 32:2 (2009), 203-220.
Arora, Ashish, and Alfonso Gambardella, From Underdogs to Tigers? The Rise and Growth of the
       Software Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel, (Oxford, UK: Oxford University
       Press, 2005).
Aubet, Maria, The Phoenicians and the West: Politics, Colonies, and Trade (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
       University Press, 2001).
Autor, David, “Wiring the Labor Market”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 15:1 (2001), 25-40.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo, “Reputation Effects and the Limits of Contracting: A Study of the
       Indian Software Industry”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115:3 (2000), 989-1017.
Blinder, Alan, and Alan Krueger, “Alternative Measures of Offshorability: A Survey Approach”,
        Working Paper (2009).
Bhattacharya, Utpal, and Peter Groznik, “Melting Pot or Salad Bowl: Some Evidence from U.S.
       Investments Abroad”, Journal of Financial Markets 11:3 (2008), 228-258.
Buch, Claudia, Jörn Kleinert, and Farid Toubal, “Where Enterprises Lead, People Follow? Links Between
       Migration and German FDI”, European Economic Review 50:8 (2006), 2017-2036.
Cachon, Gérard, and Patrick Harker, “Competition and Outsourcing with Scale Economies”, Management
       Science 48 (2002), 1314-1333.
Choudhury, Prithwiraj, “Internal Labor Markets and Knowledge Creation in Multinationals”, Working
      Paper (2010).
Clemens, Michael, “Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?”, Journal of
      Economic Perspectives 25:3 (2011), 83-106.

                                                     21
Docquier, Frédéric, and Elisabetta Lodigiani, “Skilled Migration and Business Networks”, Open
       Economies Review 21:4 (2010), 565-588.
Docquier, Frédéric, and Hillel Rapoport, “The Economics of the Brain Drain”, Journal of Economic
       Literature, forthcoming (2011).
Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, and Shannon Phillips, “Estimating the Impact of
       Trade and Offshoring on American Workers Using the Current Population Surveys”, NBER
       Working Paper 15107 (2009).
Feenstra, Robert, and Gordon Hanson, “Ownership and Control in Outsourcing to China: Estimating the
        Property Rights Theory of the Firm”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120:2 (2005): 729-762.
Fisman, Raymond, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikrant Vig, “Cultural Proximity and Loan Outcomes”,
       Working Paper (2012).
Foley, Fritz, and William Kerr, “Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm Activity”, Management
        Science, forthcoming (2012).
Forman, Chris, Anindya Ghose, and Avi Goldfarb, “Competition Between Local and Electronic Markets:
       How the Benefit of Buying Online Depends on Where You Live”, Management Science 55:1
       (2009), 47-57.
Freedman, Seth, and Ginger Zhe Jin, “Do Social Networks Solve Information Problems for Peer-to-Peer
      Lending? Evidence from Prosper.com”, Working Paper (2008).
Freeman, Richard, “People Flows in Globalization”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 20:2 (2006), 145-
       170.
Ghani, Ejaz (ed.) The Services Revolution (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2010).
Gibson, John, and David McKenzie, “Eight Questions about Brain Drain”, Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 25:3 (2011), 107-128.
Gould, David, “Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for U.S. Bilateral Trade
       Flows”, Review of Economics and Statistics 76 (1994), 302-316.
Harrison, Ann, and Margaret McMillan, “Offshoring Jobs? Multinationals and U.S. Manufacturing
        Employment,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 93:3 (2011), 857-875.
Hatzigeorgiou, Andreas, and Magnus Lodefalk, “Trade and Migration: Firm-Level Evidence”, Working
       Paper (2011).
Head, Keith, and John Ries, “Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric Evidence from Canada”,
       Canadian Journal of Economics 31:1 (1998), 47-62.
Hernandez, Exequiel, “Immigrant Social Capital and Firm Strategic Heterogeneity: Effects on Foreign
       Entry and Firm Performance”, Working Paper (2011).
Horton, John, “Online Labor Markets”, Working Paper (2010).
Hovhannisyan, Nune, and Wolfgang Keller, “International Business Travel: An Engine of Innovation?”,
      Working Paper (2010).
Huang, Yasheng, Li Jin, and Yi Qian, “Does Ethnicity Pay? Evidence from Overseas Chinese FDI in
       China”, Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming (2011).
Iriyama, Akie, Yong Li, and Ravi Madhavan, “Spiky Globalization of Venture Capital Investments: The
        Influence of Prior Human Networks”, Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal 4 (2010), 128-145.
Javorcik, Beata, Çağlar Özden, Mariana Spatareanu, and Cristina Neagu, “Migrant Networks and Foreign
        Direct Investment”, Journal of Development Economics 94:2 (2011), 231-241.
                                                     22
Kapur, Devesh, “Diasporas and Technology Transfer”, Journal of Human Development 2:2 (2001), 265-
       286.
Kapur, Devesh, and John McHale, “Sojourns and Software: Internationally Mobile Human Capital and
       High Tech Industry Development in India, Ireland and Israel,” in Arora, Ashish, and Alfonso
       Gambardella (eds.) Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and Growth of the Software Industry in Some
       Emerging Economies, (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2005a).
Kapur, Devesh, and John McHale, Give Us Your Best and Brightest: The Global Hunt for Talent and the
       Developing World (Washington, DC: Center for Global Development/Brookings Institution
       Press, 2005b).
Keller, Wolfgang, “International Technology Diffusion”, Journal of Economic Literature 42:3 (2004),
        752-782.
Kerr, William, “The Ethnic Composition of US Inventors”, HBS Working Paper 08-006 (2007).
Kerr, William, “Ethnic Scientific Communities and International Technology Diffusion”, Review of
       Economics and Statistics 90:3 (2008), 518-537.
Kerr, William, “Heterogeneous Technology Diffusion and Ricardian Trade Patterns”, Working Paper
       (2009).
Kerr, William, and William Lincoln, “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms and U.S.
       Ethnic Invention”, Journal of Labor Economics 28:3 (2010), 473-508.
Khanna, Tarun, Billions of Entrepreneurs: How China and India Are Reshaping Their Futures—and
       Yours (Boston, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008).
Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, “International Labor and Capital Flows: Complements or
       Substitutes?”, Economics Letters 92:2 (2007), 155-162.
Kugler, Maurice, and Hillel Rapoport, “Migration, FDI and the Margins of Trade”, Working Paper
        (2011).
Kuznetsov, Yevgeny, “Why is Diaspora Potential so Elusive? Towards a New Generation of Initiatives to
       Leverage Countries’ Talent Abroad”, Working Paper (2009).
Liu, Runjuan, and Daniel Trefler, “Much Ado About Nothing: American Jobs and the Rise of Service
       Outsourcing to China and India”, NBER Working Paper 14061 (2008).
Liu, Runjuan, and Daniel Trefler, “A Sorted Tale of Globalization: White Collar Jobs and the Rise of
       Service Offshoring”, NBER Working Paper 17559 (2011).
MacGarvie, Megan, “Foreign Students and the Diffusion of Scientific and Technological Knowledge to
      and from American Universities”, Working Paper (2006).
Marx, Matt, and Jasjit Singh, “Geographic Constraints on Knowledge Spillovers: Political Borders vs.
       Spatial Proximity”, Working Paper (2012).
Mithas, Sunil, and Henry Lucas, “Are Foreign IT Workers Cheaper? U.S. Visa Policies and
       Compensation of Information Technology Professionals”, Management Science 56 (2010), 745-
       765.
Montgomery, James, “Social Networks and Labor-Market Outcomes: Towards and Economic Analysis”,
      American Economic Review 81:5 (1991), 1408-1418.
Nanda, Ramana, and Tarun Khanna, “Diasporas and Domestic Entrepreneurs: Evidence from the Indian
       Software Industry”, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 19:4 (2010), 991-1012.


                                                     23
Nachum, Lilach, “But How Does Distance Affect FDI? And Why Does It Matter?”, Working Paper
      (2011).
Novak, Sharon, and Scott Stern, “How Does Outsourcing Affect Performance Dynamics? Evidence from
       the Automobile Industry”, Management Science 54 (2008), 1963-1979.
Obukhova, Elena, “Does Brain Circulation Promote International Development? High-Skilled Migration
      and Organizational Performance”, MIT Working Paper (2009).
Oettl, Alexander, and Ajay Agrawal, “International Labor Mobility and Knowledge Flow Externalities”,
        Journal of International Business Studies 39:8 (2008), 1242-1260.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco, Giovanni Peri, and Greg Wright, “Immigration, Offshoring, and American Jobs”,
        NBER Working Paper 16439 (2010).
Pallais, Amanda, “Inefficient Hiring in Entry-Level Labor Markets”, Working Paper (2011).
Puga, Diego, and Daniel Trefler, “Wake Up and Smell the Ginseng: The Rise of Incremental Innovation
       in Low-Wage Countries”, Journal of Development Economics 91:1 (2010), 64-76.
Rangan, Subramanian, and Aldemir Drummond, “The Problem of Control and the Role of Home--Host
       Ties in Explaining Multinationals' Foreign Operations, Competitiveness, and Performance”,
       Global Strategy Journal 1 (2011), 362-376.
Rangan, Subramanian, and Metin Sengul, “The Influence of Macro Structure on the Foreign Market
       Performance of Transnational Firms: The Value of IGO Connections, Export Dependence, and
       Immigration Links”, Administrative Science Quarterly 54 (2009), 229-267.
Ratha, Dilip, and William Shaw, “South-South Migration and Remittances”, World Bank Working Paper
        102 (2007).
Rauch, James, “Networks Versus Markets in International Trade”, Journal of International Economics
       48:1 (1999), 7-35.
Rauch, James, “Business and Social Networks in International Trade”, Journal of Economic Literature
       39:4 (2001), 1177-1203.
Rauch, James, and Vitor Trindade, “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade”, Review of
       Economics and Statistics 84:1 (2002), 116-130.
Saxenian, AnnaLee, Silicon Valley's New Immigrant Entrepreneurs (San Francisco, CA: Public Policy
       Institute of California, 1999).
Saxenian, AnnaLee, The New Argonauts (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).
Saxenian, AnnaLee, with Yasuyuki Motoyama and Xiaohong Quan, Local and Global Networks of
       Immigrant Professionals in Silicon Valley (San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of
       California, 2002).
Singh, Jasjit, “Collaborative Networks as Determinants of Knowledge Diffusion Patterns”, Management
        Science 51:5 (2005), 756-770.
Stanton, Christopher, and Catherine Thomas, “Landing the First Job: The Value of Intermediaries in
        Online Hiring”, Working Paper (2011).
Tambe, Prasanna, and Lorin Hitt, “Now IT's Personal: Offshoring and the Shifting Skill Composition of
       the U.S. Information Technology Workforce”, Management Science 58 (2012), 678-695.
Wang, Eric, Terry Barron, and Abraham Seidmann, “Contracting Structures for Custom Software
      Development: The Impacts of Informational Rents and Uncertainty on Internal Development and
      Outsourcing”, Management Science 43 (1997), 1726-1744.
                                                     24
Figure 1: Example of a worker profile in oDesk
               Table 1: Country distribution of companies hiring developers in India
                                                                                                       Share of
                                                       India's share of   Share of                     company      Average wage
                            Number of India's share of   total cross-     company                   contacts hiring in US dollars
                             contracts total contracts border contracts contacts with                in India with     paid on
                            with worker originating      originating    Indian ethnic                Indian ethnic contracts with
  N          Country          in India  from country    from country        name                         name       worker in India
 (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)               (7)                (8)
  1    United States             31,261          0.285             0.329              0.039              0.046               8.3
  2    Australia                  4,162          0.287             0.293              0.033              0.029               8.3
  3    United Kingdom             3,583          0.280             0.290              0.065              0.079               7.7
  4    Canada                     2,921          0.285             0.294              0.065              0.082               8.1
  5    UAE                          989          0.545             0.546              0.906              0.941              10.3
  6    Netherlands                  384          0.297             0.299              0.026              0.013               8.2
  7    Germany                      360          0.227             0.230              0.020              0.024               7.9
  8    France                       310          0.264             0.270              0.017              0.018               8.2
  9    Ireland                      305          0.300             0.301              0.029              0.059              10.2
  10   Spain                        269          0.237             0.243              0.010              0.019              10.9
  11   Italy                        232          0.375             0.387              0.010              0.011              10.5
  12   Sweden                       219          0.270             0.275              0.026              0.014              10.6
  13   Israel                       216          0.229             0.233              0.035              0.079               6.8
  14   Belgium                      170          0.276             0.278              0.023              0.038               8.7
  15   Switzerland                  170          0.184             0.184              0.008              0.024               8.8
  16   New Zealand                  165          0.198             0.198              0.038              0.012               4.6
  17   Singapore                    159          0.212             0.215              0.068              0.038               5.7
  18   Denmark                      149          0.246             0.247              0.004              0.017               8.3
  19   Norway                       135          0.325             0.325              0.010              0.000               8.3
  20   Hong Kong                    125          0.282             0.286              0.014              0.000               7.3
Notes: Table describes the country distribution and traits of companies hiring workers in India. Ethnicities are estimated through
individuals' names using techniques described in the text. Average wages are calculated by transforming the average of log wages into
levels.
         Table 2a: Largest US companies hiring developers in India
                             India's share of total
      Number of contracts    contracts originating    Company contact has
N     with worker in India      from company           ethnic Indian name         US State
(1)           (2)                     (3)                     (4)                    (5)
 1            118                    1.00                    No             Virginia
 2             94                    0.98                    No             California
 3             73                    0.26                    No             Florida
 4             62                    0.93                    No             Virginia
 5             53                    1.00                    No             Connecticut
 6             51                    0.98                    No             Wisconsin
 7             46                    0.38                    No             Florida
 8             45                    0.68                    Yes            New York
 9             44                    0.39                    No             California
10             42                    0.36                    No             Nevada
11             40                    0.56                    No             Arizona
12             40                    0.63                    No             California



      Table 2b: Largest non-US companies hiring developers in India
                             India's share of total
      Number of contracts    contracts originating    Company contact has
N     with worker in India      from company           ethnic Indian name      Primary country
(1)           (2)                     (3)                     (4)                    (5)
 1            906                    0.58                    Yes            United Arab Emirates
 2             68                    0.36                    No             United Kingdom
 3             58                    0.53                    No             United Kingdom
 4             46                    0.84                    No             Italy
 5             45                    0.34                    No             Australia
 6             44                    1.00                    No             Netherlands
 7             42                    0.14                    No             Spain
 8             40                    0.38                    No             Australia
 9             39                    0.87                    No             United Kingdom
10             29                    0.31                    No             Australia
11             29                    0.32                    No             United Kingdom
12             29                    0.63                    No             Denmark
                                         Table 3: Distribution of oDesk job types and wage rates paid
                                                                                                                              Companies outside of the United States,
                                                                Companies in United States                                              excluding India
                                                                      Non-ethnic                 Non-ethnic                                                Non-ethnic
                                                      Ethnic Indians Indians who Ethnic Indians Indians who                              Ethnic Indians Indians who
                                                      who are hiring  are hiring who are hiring are hiring in                            who are hiring are hiring in
           Job category                  Total           abroad         abroad         in India     India                      Total        in India          India
                (1)                       (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)                (7)              (8)              (9)
                                                                                          Panel A. Observation counts
Total count                              109,722             3,516           90,906             1,358           29,716            58,338             1,719           13,443
                                                             Panel B. Distribution of job types (ordered by average wage as shown in Panel C)
Networking & inform. systems                     2%               2%               2%               2%               1%                 2%               1%               0%
Software development                             7%               9%               7%               9%               8%                 8%              38%               8%
Web development                                 40%              42%              42%              56%              63%                38%              40%              67%
Design & multimedia                              9%               8%               8%               6%               6%                10%               4%               0%
Writing & translation                           10%               9%               8%               6%               3%                11%               2%               4%
Business services                                2%               1%               2%               1%               1%                 2%               2%               1%
Customer service                                 1%               1%               1%               0%               0%                 1%               3%               0%
Sales & marketing                               10%              11%              10%               9%               7%                10%               4%               9%
Administrative support                          21%              16%              21%              11%              10%                19%               6%              10%
                                                                                   Panel C. Mean hourly wage paid to worker
Total                                         7.0                 7.0              6.3              7.8              8.4                6.8              9.0              8.0
Networking & inform. systems                 14.9                13.5             13.5             11.2             11.2               13.7              8.9             11.3
Software development                         14.9                13.5             13.5             11.3             12.9               13.6             10.8             11.9
Web development                              12.2                11.0             11.0             10.5             10.9               11.3             10.3             10.6
Design & multimedia                           9.0                 9.0              8.2              9.6              9.2                9.2              8.5              8.9
Writing & translation                         5.5                 5.5              4.5              4.9              4.8                5.5              4.3              4.4
Business services                             5.0                 4.1              3.7              5.0              4.4                5.5              6.3              5.7
Customer service                              4.1                 3.0              3.3              3.0              4.8                5.4             11.3              4.2
Sales & marketing                             4.1                 4.1              3.7              4.5              4.2                4.1              4.3              4.3
Administrative support                        2.5                 2.2              2.2              2.3              2.4                2.2              2.6              2.2
Notes: Wage rates are calculated through average log wages paid to workers and are expressed in dollars. Sample includes contracts with ethnic name matches and identified
job category classifications. Sample splits in columns 3-6 and 8-9 exclude company contacts for which a partial Indian ethnicity assignment is made.
                              Table 4: Selection of India by ethnic origin of company contacts
                                                Total         2008 and        2009 and        High-end         Low-end          Initial       Subsequent
                                               sample           prior           later         contracts        contracts       contracts       contracts
                                                 (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)
                                                             Dependent variable is a (0,1) indicator for choosing a worker in India
                                                                Estimates include fixed effects for year x job type of contracts
                                                                        Panel A: Total sample, excluding Indian companies
Probability that hiring contact is of           0.090           0.044           0.101            0.111           0.066           0.061           0.095
ethnic Indian origin                           (0.033)         (0.022)         (0.038)          (0.049)         (0.015)         (0.012)         (0.039)
Constant                                        0.279           0.371           0.251            0.417           0.153           0.317           0.269
                                               (0.002)         (0.005)         (0.002)          (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.003)
Observations                                   168,060         39,888          128,172          80,295          87,765          35,856          132,204
                                                                         Panel B: Companies located in the United States
Probability that hiring contact is of           0.049           0.026           0.056            0.028           0.071           0.051           0.047
ethnic Indian origin                           (0.014)         (0.029)         (0.014)          (0.021)         (0.015)         (0.015)         (0.016)
Constant                                        0.283           0.375           0.251            0.422           0.154           0.318           0.273
                                               (0.003)         (0.007)         (0.003)          (0.005)         (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.004)
Observations                                   109,722         28,083           81,639          52,662          57,060          23,541           86,181
                                                               Panel C: Companies located outside of the United States and India
Probability that hiring contact is of           0.131           0.074           0.141            0.192           0.056           0.082           0.137
ethnic Indian origin                           (0.046)         (0.034)         (0.051)          (0.055)         (0.022)         (0.018)         (0.049)
Constant                                        0.273           0.363           0.250            0.406           0.152           0.313           0.262
                                               (0.004)         (0.008)         (0.004)          (0.007)         (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.004)
Observations                                   58,338          11,805           46,533          27,633          30,705          12,315           46,023
                                                                Panel D: Total sample conditional on a worker in India applying
Probability that hiring contact is of           0.098           0.026           0.115            0.088           0.119           0.074           0.096
ethnic Indian origin                           (0.048)         (0.019)         (0.055)          (0.060)         (0.032)         (0.015)         (0.050)
Constant                                        0.629           0.778           0.578            0.738           0.460           0.554           0.658
                                               (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.005)         (0.003)         (0.004)
Observations                                   75,147          19,107           56,040          45,723          29,424          20,538           54,609
Notes: Contract level regressions estimate propensities to select a worker in India by the ethnic origin of the company contacts. The dependent variable is
(0,1) for selecting a worker located in India. Panel A documents the whole sample, Panel B focuses on US company contacts only, and Panel C considers
company contacts in any other country besides the United States and India. Panel D considers cases where a worker from India applies for the position.
Column headers indicate sample composition. Initial and subsequent contracts are from the perspective of the company contact. Regressions are unweighted,
include fixed effects for year x job category, and cluster standard errors by originating company. The reported constant is the mean of the fixed effects.
                         Table 5: Estimations of contract volumes formed on oDesk with workers in India
                                                 Dependent variable is share of oDesk contracts formed with workers in India                  DV is India's    DV is share
                                                Base       Including      Weighting Unweighted          Adding         Adding                    share of      of company
                                             estimation     distance         by log     estimation    worldwide      trade with               dollar value    contacts with
                                                           covariates     population                    oDesk           India                 of contracts    Indian ethnic
                                                              only                                     contracts       control                 for country        name
                                                  (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)
Indian diaspora share of                        1.086           0.727            0.817           0.717           1.131            0.999           0.683           2.596
country population                             (0.198)         (0.157)          (0.376)         (0.429)         (0.221)          (0.234)         (0.354)         (0.193)
Indicator for geographical distance             0.071           0.041            0.114           0.110           0.069            0.077           -0.033          0.005
to India of 5,000-10,000 kilometers            (0.030)         (0.026)          (0.046)         (0.047)         (0.031)          (0.033)         (0.056)         (0.058)
Indicator for geographical distance             0.095           0.088            0.129           0.119           0.119            0.102           0.058           -0.073
to India of >10,000 kilometers                 (0.029)         (0.030)          (0.045)         (0.046)         (0.027)          (0.033)         (0.063)         (0.047)
Log population                                  -0.009                           -0.013          -0.013          0.010            -0.009          0.011           0.001
                                               (0.007)                          (0.010)         (0.010)         (0.008)          (0.007)         (0.013)         (0.007)
Log GDP per capita                              -0.041                           -0.049          -0.044          -0.008           -0.041          0.010           -0.079
                                               (0.022)                          (0.024)         (0.027)         (0.025)          (0.023)         (0.039)         (0.034)
Log telephone lines per capita                  0.004                            -0.031          -0.036          0.005            0.004           -0.057          0.053
                                               (0.034)                          (0.043)         (0.043)         (0.030)          (0.034)         (0.055)         (0.041)
Overall fit of project types with               0.078                            0.013           0.004           0.085            0.075           0.014           -0.032
India's developer profile                      (0.039)                          (0.057)         (0.058)         (0.039)          (0.040)         (0.057)         (0.082)
Log count of oDesk contracts                                                                                     -0.027
worldwide                                                                                                       (0.009)
Trade with India as share of GDP                                                                                                  0.660
                                                                                                                                 (1.046)
Notes: Country-level regressions estimate traits associated with a larger share of work being contracted to India. Regressions contain 92 observations, weight by log
number of worldwide contracts formed on oDesk, and report robust standard errors.
                      Table 6: Wage rate effects within India due to ethnic-based contracts to India
                                                    Total         2008 and        2009 and       High-end        Low-end          Initial      Subsequent
                                                   sample           prior           later        contracts       contracts       contracts      contracts
                                                     (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)
                                                                         The sample is contracts formed with workers in India
                                                           Estimates include fixed effects for year x job type of contracts x company country
                                                                             Panel A: DV is log hourly wage paid to worker
Probability that contract is ethnic-based,          -0.024          -0.017          -0.027          -0.037         0.003           -0.031          -0.025
derived from name classification                   (0.019)         (0.028)         (0.023)         (0.021)        (0.037)         (0.020)         (0.025)
Observations                                       47,729          14,902          32,827          33,982          13,747         11,481          36,248

                                                        Panel B: DV is percentage differential between accepted contract and median proposal
Probability that contract is ethnic-based,          -0.007          -0.009          -0.007          -0.013         0.004           -0.012          -0.004
derived from name classification                   (0.007)         (0.008)         (0.009)         (0.009)        (0.013)         (0.009)         (0.010)
Observations                                       47,727          14,902          32,825          33,980          13,747         11,491          36,236
Notes: See Table 4. The sample includes contracts formed between a non-Indian company contact and a worker in India. Regressions are unweighted, include
fixed effects for year x job category x company country, and cluster standard errors by originating company. Observation counts are different from Table 3
because probabilistic matches are included in the sample that were excluded in the descriptive tabulations.
                 Table 7: Wage rate effects comparing ethnic Indians hiring in India and elsewhere
                                                  Total         2008 and       2009 and          High-end    Low-end        Initial     Subsequent
                                                 sample           prior          later           contracts   contracts     contracts     contracts
                                                   (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)         (5)           (6)              (7)
                                                               The sample is contracts formed with ethnic Indian company contacts
                                                         Estimates include fixed effects for year x job type of contracts x company country
                                                                           Panel A: DV is log hourly wage paid to worker
(0,1) indicator that worker is in India           -0.154          -0.099         -0.168            -0.195     -0.084        -0.127         -0.163
                                                 (0.044)         (0.040)        (0.050)           (0.049)    (0.047)       (0.036)        (0.053)
Observations                                      8,132           1,552          6,580            4,436       3,696         1,687             6,445

                                                     Panel B: DV is percentage differential between accepted contract and median proposal
(0,1) indicator that worker is in India           -0.022          -0.035         -0.019            -0.026     -0.015        -0.047         -0.012
                                                 (0.009)         (0.014)        (0.010)           (0.012)    (0.014)       (0.015)        (0.009)
Observations                                      8,132           1,552          6,580            4,436       3,696         1,687             6,445
Notes: See Table 6. The sample excludes contracts involving company contacts located in India.
