                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS ON CORPORATE GOODNESS

                                            Harrison Hong
                                           Jeffrey D. Kubik
                                         Jose A. Scheinkman

                                        Working Paper 18476
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18476


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




Hong and Scheinkman acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation through grants
SES-0850404 and SES-07-18407. We thank Joshua Margolis, Dirk Jenter, Jeffrey Wurgler and seminar
participants at St Gallen, Shanghai Advanced Institude of Finance, NBER Corporate Finance Summer
Institute, Swedish Institute for Financial Research, and AFA Meetings helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Harrison Hong, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jose A. Scheinkman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Constraints on Corporate Goodness
Harrison Hong, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jose A. Scheinkman
NBER Working Paper No. 18476
October 2012
JEL No. G30,G32,G39

                                             ABSTRACT

An influential thesis, dubbed “Doing well by doing good,” argues that corporate social responsibility
is profitable. But heterogeneity in firm financial constraints can induce a spurious correlation between
profits and goodness even if the motives for goodness are non-profit in nature. We use two identification
strategies to show that financial constraints are indeed an important driver of corporate goodness. First,
during the Internet bubble, previously constrained firms experienced a temporary relaxation of their
constraints and their goodness temporarily increased relative to their previously unconstrained peers.
Second, a constrained firm's sustainability score increases more with its idiosyncratic equity valuation
and lower cost of capital than a less-constrained counterpart. In sum, firms are more likely to do good
when they do well.


Harrison Hong                                       Jose A. Scheinkman
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Princeton University                                Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue                                  Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
Princeton, NJ 08540                                 and NBER
and NBER                                            joses@princeton.edu
hhong@princeton.edu

Jeffrey D. Kubik
Maxwell School
Syracuse University
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244
jdkubik@maxwell.syr.edu
1.        Introduction

Many firms, especially large corporations, annually invest significant resources on corporate
social responsibility practices such as cleaner environmental technology, employee and com-
munity development programs and philanthropic endeavors. In 2009, Intel allocated $100
million for global education programs and energy conservation efforts such as the purchase of
renewable energy certificates. In 2007, General Electric gave $160 million to community and
employee philanthropic programs and earmarked billions more for developing eco-friendly
products. Most famously, Google in the mid-2000s initiated a 1% project that would take
1% of its profits and invest it in socially responsible projects that had both philanthropic
and profit interests.1 Moreover, many corporations increasingly use evaluation systems and
compensation programs that include the social performance of firms (see, e.g., Kaplan and
Norton (1996)).
       There is a large management literature going back many years that examines the rela-
tionship between corporate social responsibility and financial performance. It has focused on
why such practices might be positive net present value (NPV) similar to standard forms of
corporate investments like capital expenditures or research and development (R&D). Many
theories have been developed to rationalize such a profit angle to sustainability.2 This profit
motive for corporate social responsibility, dubbed ”Doing well by doing good”, is highly
influential with both practitioners and policy makers and has some empirical support (Heal
(2005), Margolis, Elfenbein, and Walsh (2007)). But these empirical studies in the literature
are cross-firm in nature and suffer from potential omitted variables problems.
   1
      This program has subsequently been folded into their other social responsibility practices. See Delevingne
(2009) for a more detailed description of such projects.
    2
      For reviews of these strands of theories, see Benabou and Tirole (2010). A number of theories of profits
from goodness implicitly rely on the idea that firms are well-positioned to deliver warm-glow feelings (Becker
(1974) and Andreoni (1989)) to consumers. See for instance Besley and Ghatak (2005) for a model which
includes such strategic complementarities involving goodness in the production function. See Baron (2001)
for a model of strategic deterrence of regulation through using corporate goodness. Other reasons for why
goodness pays is that is improves employee efficiency, lessens conflicts among stakeholders, mitigates litigation
risk, deters potential regulation, signals product quality or as investor relations in dealing with product or
capital market boycotts by socially responsible consumers or investors.



                                                       1
       One important source of these omitted variables involves heterogeneity in firm finan-
cial constraints that might create a spurious correlation between financial performance and
goodness. For example, firms that are less financially constrained can have better financial
performance because they can invest. Even if firm goodness spending is driven by altruistic
or agency reasons as opposed to a profit motive, goodness spending could also be limited by
the degree of the firm’s financial slack, thereby potentially inducing a relationship between
firm financial performance and goodness. Therefore, the question of whether financial con-
straints drive corporate goodness is a fundamental one since a strong relationship would call
into question the methods the literature uses to measure whether goodness leads to higher
profits.
       In this paper, we show that financial constraints are indeed an important driver of cor-
porate social responsibility. We first develop a simple model of financial constraints and
investments in capital and corporate goodness to illustrate the potential relationships be-
tween these and other variables of interest in a setting where the firm’s motive for goodness
can be profit or non-profit driven.3 The key prediction of this model is that regardless of the
motive for goodness spending, less constrained firms spend more on capital and goodness.
The beneficial impacts of financial constraints on higher capital investment and higher firm
profits have already been documented elsewhere (see, e.g.,Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003)
and Campello and Graham (2007)).
       The focus of our paper is hence to establish a causal link that less financially constrained
firms are more socially responsible. We test this prediction using data on firm scores of
corporate social responsibility provided by Kinder, Lydenberg and Domini (KLD) and stan-
dard measures of financial constraints from the literature. Companies are evaluated based
on a number of criteria, including community relations, employee relations, diversity of the
   3
    Non-profit motives for corporate responsibility include the firm acting as a delegated philanthropist when
the firm faces a lower cost for giving than shareholders or agency rationales in which managers consume
corporate goodness as a perk or use it to entrench themselves by currying favor with important stakeholders.
The perspective in Friedman (1970) is that corporate goodness is managerial entrenchment in which managers
use corporate cash to further their own interests, whether it be for their own philanthropy or to entrench
themselves further. See Tirole (2001) for a discussion of how goodness is related to governance.


                                                      2
workforce, environmental protection, product quality and governance. Our sample consists
of S&P 500 firms observed yearly from 1991 to 2008. Firms are scored in terms of concerns
and strengths for these six criteria.
       We consider two measures of corporate concerns and strengths. The first is the simple
sum of the scores for strengths and concerns. The second is based on a factor analysis of these
scores. Factor analysis points toward putting an equal weight on the various criteria but zero
weight on governance strenghs. This analysis suggests that each of the categories is likely to
carry information about the responsibility of the firm and should be used in combination.
We then take the difference between strengths and concerns (using both the simple sum
scores and the factor scores) to be the measures of a firm’s goodness. We measure a firm’s
financial constraint using a variety of measures from the literature including the Kaplan and
Zingales (1997) score, share repurchases and bond ratings.
       We find that less financially constrained firms indeed have higher goodness scores, using
both of our measures of corporate goodness and all of our financial constraint measures.
But there is still the question of whether this strong correlation is causal. We consider two
identification strategies.
       Our first identification strategy builds on Campello and Graham (2007) who argue that
the Internet bubble relaxed financing constraints even for non-technology firms. They show
that even non-technology firms received excessively high valuations and that those that were
constrained issued equity to finance capital expenditures and to elevate their cash holdings.4
If there is a causal connection between financial constraints and corporate goodness, then we
expect that during the Internet bubble of 1996-2000 previously constrained non-technology
firms would increase their corporate goodness relative to other non-technology firms com-
pared to other periods in our sample.
   4
     We interpret our quasi-experiment regarding the rise and fall of internet valuations following Campello
and Graham (2007) as a bubble. However, it does not matter for us whether the rise of market valuations
was due instead to more rational motives such as time varying risk aversion that lowered the required rate
of returns for equities. Indeed, Pastor and Veronesi (2006) argue that time varying equity premium might
have played an important role in driving these valuations. The key is that the market equity risk premium
changed and made it cheaper for firms to raise financing during the Internet period.


                                                     3
   Our identification strategy differs from Campello and Graham (2007) in terms of the
set-up and its emphasis that this convergence in goodness scores was indeed temporary and
occurred during the Internet period. Therefore, we are able to rule out alternative expla-
nations related to coincident trends. We conduct a variety of robustness checks, including
showing this result for all of our financial constraint measures.
   One way to gauge the economic significance of our finding is to compare the sensitivity
of goodness to constraints with the corresponding sensitivities for capital expenditures and
R&D. Using the same identification strategy, we find that sensitivity for goodness is higher
than for these other standard investments.
   Our second identification strategy, originally developed by Baker, Stein, and Wurgler
(2003) in the context of corporate investments, is that a constrained firm’s stock price, as
measured by its log market-to-book ratio, has a bigger influence on its investment activity
than for unconstrained firms. For an unconstrained firm such as Google who have billions in
cash, its stock price level is irrelevant for its investments in goodness since these companies
do not need to issue equity to fund these investments. But for constrained firms, its stock
price is crucial as a low stock price or higher cost of capital due to idiosyncratic reasons will
lead the firm to not under-take investments in goodness that it otherwise would if it were
unconstrained.
   We show that this is indeed true in the data. Constrained firms’ corporate goodness scores
increase more with its idiosyncratic stock valuation than unconstrained firms. We make sure
to purge out common shocks to the cost of capital using time dummies. Corporate goodness
for constrained firms is also more sensitive to stock valuation than is the case for capital
expenditures or R&D spending. In other words, this second identification strategy yields
very similar results as the first strategy. This consistency of results across the two strategies
is reassuring.
   In sum, we conclude that firms are more likely to do good when they do well. Hetero-
geneity of firm financial constraints is an important source of omitted variables bias in the


                                               4
large and growing literature on ”Doing well by doing good”. Importantly, it is not enough
to simply try to control for financial constraints on the right-hand side since there are mea-
surement error issues with such a crude strategy. Rather, our paper suggests that a clear
identification strategy is crucial to understanding other fundamental questions on the nexus
of corporate social responsibility and firm financial performance. There may very well be a
causal relationship between goodness and profits but instruments for goodness need to be
found.
     Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we present a simple model of a manager’s
capital and goodness choices in the presence of financial constraints and an exogenously given
utility or objective function. In Section 3, we describe the data. We present the empirical
results in Section 4 and conclude in Section 5. Details of the proofs for the model are in the
Appendix.



2.       Model

We develop a static model of the firm’s choices of capital (K) and goodness (G). The firm’s
output is solely a function of capital and is given by the production function αf (K). f (K)
is a neoclassical production function with the following properties: f 0 (0) = ∞, f 0 (K) > 0,
and f 00 (K) < 0. α is a technology parameter that captures the productivity of capital. For
simplicity, we assume that the cost of one unit of capital is 1 and that the cost of one unit of
goodness is also 1. Then let Γ denote the amount of cash needed to finance investments in
capital and goodness (i.e., the firm faces the financing constraint K + G ≤ Γ). A low Γ is a
proxy for a firm that has little cash, that finds it difficult to raise funds in debt markets, and
that is more equity dependent. As we elaborate on below, we can think of Γ as being shifted
by either aggregate shocks such as the Internet bubble or idiosyncratic shocks which made
financing more accessible (i.e. a higher Γ) through excessively high valuations that the firm




                                                5
can then exploit by issuing over-priced equity.5
       The firm derives utility over profits and the amount spent on goodness G given by the
following utility function:
                                        u(αf (K) − K − G, G)                                            (1)

We assume that u is increasing in each argument and that D2 u is a negative definite matrix.
This utility function is a flexible form meant to capture varied motives for goodness; it can
be interpreted as the utility function of shareholders or the manager. Under a non-strategic
(i.e. non-profit related) motivation, u is the utility that shareholders or the manager get
from delegated giving; under an agency interpretation, u is the utility that the manager
derives from giving or perhaps from entrenchment. Importantly, u can also be interpreted as
providing the payoffs for the firm from investing in goodness for strategic or profit reasons.
       A benchmark case is where u(·, ·) = f (K) − K − G + v(G) and v(G) satisfies the following
properties: v 0 (0) < ∞, v 0 (G) > 0 and v 00 (G) < 0. The firm derives the net benefit v(G) − G
from goodness that can be interpreted as either dollars to the bottom line under a profit-
motive interpretation or as private benefits to the manager under an agency interpretation.
       We will also place a limit on the degree substitution between profits and goodness in the
utility function by assuming that
                                                u12 ≥ u11 .

Note that we assume the usual nice properties regarding utility function and hence u11 < 0.
u12 measures the substitutability of profits and goodness. If u12 > 0, then goodness and
profits are complements; while if u12 < 0 then profits and goodness are substitutes. If
u12 = 0, then profits and goodness are separable in the utility function of the firm.6
   5
     This point has been already formalized in Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003) and we use the simplest
model for expositional reasons.
   6
     It is easiest to think of our setting as one in which goodness and profits complements, but we do allow
for substitution, provided it is not too strong.




                                                     6
   The firm then has the following constrained optimization problem:


                                   max u(αf (K) − K − G, G)                                 (2)
                                    K,G



subject to
                                            K +G≤Γ                                          (3)

and
                                               G≥0                                          (4)

Because f 0 (0) = ∞, we know that the optimal K is greater than zero whenever Γ > 0 and
so there is no need to impose a non-negativity condition on K. But we do need to impose
a non-negativity condition on G because a firm with a financial constraint may potentially
want to choose a negative G to loosen that constraint. In fact, we assume that u2 (·, 0) is
finite; so whenever Γ is small, the firm would be tempted to choose a negative G.
   The solution has three regions defined by the level of cash Γ. The first region, Region
1, is given by Γ ≥ ΓF B , where ΓF B is the level of cash that finances the first-best levels of
investments in capital and goodness and where the firm is unconstrained (i.e., the constraint
given by equation (3) is not binding). Let the optimal unconstrained solution be denoted by
(K F B , GF B ). The solution K F B satisfies the following equation:


                                          αf 0 (K F B ) = 1                                 (5)


Equation (5) is the familiar first-order condition that the marginal product of capital equal
                                                                                      00
to the marginal cost of capital, which we assume is equal to 1. And because f < 0, we
know that K F B is unique.
   Furthermore, if


                   −u1 (αf (K F B ) − K F B , 0) + u2 (αf (K F B ) − K F B , 0) > 0         (6)


                                                  7
then GF B > 0 solves


       −u1 (αf (K F B ) − K F B − GF B , GF B ) + u2 (αf (K F B ) − K F B − GF B , GF B ) = 0.   (7)


Equation (7) gives the first-order condition that determines GF B . It states that at the
unconstrained solution, the marginal benefit of goodness (u2 (αf (K F B ) − K F B − GF B , GF B ))
equals the marginal cost of goodness (u1 (αf (K F B ) − K F B − GF B , GF B )), which is simply
the lost marginal utility of profit. We will assume that inequality (6) holds; otherwise there
is no investment in goodness at the first best. The negative definiteness of D2 u guarantees
that GF B is unique. The first-best level of cash is then given by


                                       ΓF B = GF B + K F B .                                     (8)


   We will now consider the solution when the financial constraint is binding. If Γ < ΓF B ,
then inequality (3) binds. The solution then is further characterized by a unique cut-off
value Γ∗ < ΓF B . The second region, Region 2, is defined by Γ∗ < Γ < ΓF B . Here, financial
constraints bind but G > 0, G = Γ − K and an increase in Γ leads to an increase in both K
and G. The third region, Region 3, is defined by Γ ≤ Γ∗ . In this region, financial constraints
bind and G = 0. An increase in Γ only leads to an increase in K and no change in G.
Intuitively, because the marginal product of capital is infinite at zero, a very constrained
firm will spend its resources on capital and nothing on goodness. Only when its financial
constraint is not very binding will it consider then spending an extra dollar on goodness. As
Γ increases and the firm has more financial resources, it begins to spend on goodness.
   These results are summarized in the following Proposition, the proof of which we complete
in the Appendix.

Proposition 1. For an unconstrained firm, Γ > ΓF B , the firm invests in the first best levels
of capital and goodness. There exists a unique cut-off value Γ∗ such that for Γ∗ < Γ < ΓF B ,
G > 0, G = Γ − K and G and K increase with Γ and for Γ ≤ Γ∗ , G = 0 and only K

                                                 8
increases with Γ.

A firm’s financial constraint status is one of the key parameters of our model. Proposition
1 provides a complete guide to how all the variables of interest vary with this parameter.
Using Proposition 1, we have the following predictions.

Prediction 1. Less financially constrained firms spend more on goodness.

Notice that this prediction holds regardless of the motive for goodness.
   We will test this prediction using measures of corporate goodness and standard measures
of financial constraints. We will start by examining simple correlations between firm financial
constraints and corporate goodness. Then we will help determine the causal relationship
between these constraints and goodness using the two identification strategies.

Prediction 2. When financing constraints ease, the increase in the goodness of financially
constrained firms should be bigger than unconstrained or less-constrained firms.

   The reason is simply that unconstrained firms have already made their first-best levels of
investments in goodness and hence even if their constraints loosened, they would not change
their investments. This is consistent with Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003) and Campello
and Graham (2007) who find that unconstrained firms did not change their investment levels
nor issue more equity during the Internet period. Indeed, the comparison still holds if we
compared constrained versus less constrained firms as less constrained firms would need to
increase their investments in goodness by proportionally less than constrained ones who are
very far from the first best.
   In the first identification strategy, we measure the easing of financial constraints using
the Internet bubble which temporarily eased constraints and ease of equity issuance for
all firms. One can think of this as an aggregate shock to financial constraints. In the
second identification strategy, we think of the exogenous shock to firm constraints as being
idiosyncratic having to do with firm level sentiment which made it cheaper for particular
firms to issue equity.

                                              9
     Finally, we prove a proposition that speaks to the potential importance of heterogeneity
of financial constraints in the data to induce a spurious correlation between goodness and
profits. We show in our model that even if the motives for the managers for goodness are
agency based, goodness and profits can covary with financial constraints.

Proposition 2. Assume that Γ < Γ∗ . Let


                                       π = αf (k) − K − G


be the the profits and the manager’s utility is given by U = π + v(G). That is all the benefits
of goodness accrue to the manager. In this pure agency-based setting for goodness spending,
assuming
                                                    00
                                   0            v
                                  v (Γ − K(Γ)) 00       > 1,
                                              αf + v 00

less financially constrained firms, i.e. higher Γ firms, have higher profits and goodness spend-
ing.

     The condition in the proposition is that the rate at which the marginal product of capital
                      00
falls (captured by f ) is not too large relative to the rate at which the marginal private
                                          00
benefit of goodness falls (captured by v ). As long as there are still high marginal product
to spending on K, then as Γ increases, the firm spends more on G and the firm profit still
rises.



3.       Measures of Goodness and Financial Constraints

3.1.     Data

Our study uses data from three main sources. Ratings of corporate social responsibility
are from the Kinder, Lydenberg, Domini, & Co. (KLD) database. Stock prices and shares
outstanding are from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), and all accounting


                                               10
variables are from Compustat. KLD’s coverage of S&P 500 firms starts in 1991; our analysis
uses KLD information for S&P 500 firms from 1991 to 2008.
   The KLD ratings are built on a point-by-point assessment of companies along a number
of dimensions. We focus on ratings in six KLD categories: Community Activities, Diver-
sity, Employee Relations, Environmental Record, Products, and Corporate Governance. To
understand how these ratings are calculated, we will describe how KLD measures a firm’s
rating for the Communities Activities and Environmental Record categories. KLD classifies
four Community Activities strengths: “Charitable Giving’, “Innovative Giving”, “Support
for Housing”, and “Other Community Strengths”. A firm gets a score of one if they perform
well in a particular criterion and zero otherwise. There are also four Community Activities
concerns: “Investment Controversies”, “Negative Economic Impact”, “Tax Disputes”, and
“Other Community Concerns”. A firm gets a score of 1 if they have a problem in one of these
four sub-categories and zero otherwise. For example, if a company has no strengths or con-
cerns, it receives a Community Activities strength and concern score of zero. Alternatively,
if it performs “Charitable Giving” and “Innovative Giving” but also has “Tax Disputes”, its
strengths score is 2 and concerns score is 1.
   For Environmental Record, there are five components of strengths: “Delivers Products or
Services that Help Protect the Environment”, “Strong Pollution Prevention Program”,“Uses
Recycled Materials or Major Player Recycling Industry”, “Energy Efficiency Leader” and
“Other Strengths”. The potential of one point for each strength means a firm can have a
minimum score of zero to a maximum score of 5. There are six components of concerns:
whether a firm has “Hazardous Waste Sites or Waste Management Violations”, “Environ-
mental Regulation Violations (Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, et al.)”, “Manufacturer of
Ozone-Depleting Chemicals”, “Emissions of Toxic Chemicals (from TRI reports)”, “Man-
ufacturer of Agricultural Chemicals” and “Other Concerns”. One point for each concern
means that a firm can have a minimum score of 0 to a maximum score of 6. Ratings for the
other categories are calculated similarly.


                                                11
       The scores from these six categories for a firm are summed to arrive at a yearly measures
of Total Strengths and Total Concerns. We only use scores for sub-categories that were
available throughout our sample period.7 For example, there is a Community Activities
subcategory called “Indigenous Peoples Relations” that was introduced in 2000. We omit it
to allow scores to be comparable over time. There are also two additional categories tracked
by KLD beyond the six we consider: Human Rights and Controversial Business. There are
no Human Rights subcategories available throughout our sample period so we again omit it
to keep our measures comparable over time. Controversial Business pertains to whether the
firm is in a controversial line of business. Because there is little a firm can do to change its
line of business, we also exclude it from our analysis.


3.2.       Factor Analysis and Alternative Measures of Goodness

In addition to Total Strengths and Total Concerns, we also construct Factor Score Strengths
and Factor Score Concerns by performing factor analysis on the scores from the six compo-
nents of the KLD ratings described above and taking the first factor score for strengths and
concerns. Total Strengths and Total Concerns puts equal weight across the six categories.
There is no reason to think that the categories need to be equal weighted. Factor analysis is
one way to let the data speak.8 Table 1 reports the factor loadings from the factor analysis
that is used to construct the Factor Score Strengths and Factor Score Concerns.
       Panel A reports the results for strengths. The factor analysis places a zero weight on
the corporate governance strengths and shifts the remaining weight fairly equally across the
remaining five categories, with Diversity strengths getting the most weight (0.33) and the
remaining categories receiving a weights between about 0.20 and 0.25. The zero loading on
corporate governance is interesting since it says that at least in the domain of strengths,
corporate governance is different from the other attributes.
   7
     We have also done our empirical work including sub-categories that are added or deleted during our
sample period. We obtain very similar results using these alternative corporate goodness measures.
   8
     We have also tried a closely related approach of principal components analysis and found similar results.



                                                     12
   Panel B reports the results for concerns. Here, factor analysis places roughly equal weight
across all six categories. Corporate Governance and Diversity concerns get the lowest weight
of 0.18 and 0.19 respectively; Product concerns get the highest at 0.26. But the deviation
from equal-weighting is very slight in terms of concerns. As we show below in our empirical
analysis, using raw KLD scores or factor scores yield for the most part similar results.
   We follow the literature and take the difference between strengths and concerns (using
both the simple sum scores and the factor scores) to be the measures of a firm’s goodness.
Raw Goodness is strengths minus concerns using the raw KLD data. Factor Score Goodness
is the strengths minus concerns using the factor scores.


3.3.    Measures of Financial Constraints

The literature has many established ways to measure a firm’s financial constraint. All the
measures are meant to capture the equity dependence of firms, but no measure is perfect.
Our strategy involves trying several financial constraint proxies. The first is the Kaplan and
Zingales (1997) index that is a weighted score that accounts for a variety of firm charac-
teristics including variables such as firm cash, cashflow, leverage and a firm’s productivity
measured by a firm’s market-to-book ratio. Following Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003), we
construct the five variable KZ Score for each firm/year as the following linear combination:


KZScorei,t = −1.002CFi,t /Ai,t−1 − 39.368Di,t /Ai,t−1 − 1.315Ci,t /Ai,t−1 + 3.139Bi,t + 0.283Qi,t


where CFi,t /Ai,t−1 is cash flow (Compustat Item 14+Item 18) over lagged assets (Item 6);
DIVi,t /Ai,t−1 is cash dividends (Item 21+Item 19) over assets; Ci,t /Ai,t−1 is cash balances
(Item 1) over start-of-the-year book assets (Item 6); book leverage, denoted by BLEVi,t ,
which is total debt divided by the sum of total debt and book equity ((Item 9+Item 34)/(Item
9+Item 34+Item 216)) measured at fiscal year-end, and Tobin’s Q is the market value of
equity (price times shares outstanding from CRSP) plus assets minus the book value of 16


                                               13
equity (Item 60+Item 74) all over assets. We winsorize the ingredients of the index before
constructing it.9
       This score measures a firm’s equity dependence as captured by its cash and leverage
ratios and also a firm’s productivity. More productive firms (α in our model) will be more
constrained (i.e. they are less likely to be in the unconstrained region) all else equal because
their first-best level of capital investment will be higher. A worrisome aspect of this measure
is that it uses a firm’s market-to-book ratio as a proxy for a firm’s average productivity
from Q-theory. But this is difficult since the market-to-book ratio also captures potential
mispricings. This interpretation is potentially problematic in our setting because earlier
work argues that the demand for goodness on the part of socially responsible investors has
a price effect in the direction of depressing the valuations of bad companies in favor of good
companies (see, Heinkel, Kraus, and Zechner (2001), Hong and Kacperczyk (2009), Hong and
Kostovetsky (2009)). As such, we also consider two other measures of financial constraints.
       Our second financial constraint measure is an indicator for whether or not a firm en-
gages in stock repurchases: No Repurchase Indicator. We calculate a firm’s repurchases as
expenditure on the purchase of common and preferred stocks (Compustat Item 115) minus
preferred stock reduction (the first difference of Item 10). We then construct a dummy vari-
able equal to one if the firm has no repurchases.10 Firms that engage in equity repurchases
are presumably less equity dependent and hence less financially constrained.
       Our final measure of firm financial constraints is a firm’s average bond rating.11 A lower
bond rating forces a firm to be more equity dependent and hence more financially constrained.
Using data from Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch, we take all of the bonds issued by a
   9
     For some firm/year observations, one or more of the five components used to construct the KZ score
will be missing. In those circumstances, we use a firm’s KZ score from the previous year. We obtain similar
results if we drop these observations instead of using previous values of the KZ score.
  10
     We parameterize the variable to turn on when a firm has no repurchases instead of when a firm has
repurchases to standardize all of our financial constraint variables so that higher values correspond to more
constrained firms.
  11
     The idea behind using bond rating in the literature is that the firm has a target optimal capital structure.
A low bond rating means that the firm has inadvertently migrated toward excessive leverage and financial
distress. The firm hence has a strong need for equity in order to remedy the problem.



                                                       14
firm and assign a numerical score to its rating from Moody’s.12 For each year, we take the
average of these numerical scores and merge these averages with the KLD data set.13 We
can confidently merge about three-quarters of the KLD sample with bond information, so
analysis using bond ratings will use a smaller data sample than the rest of the analysis.14


3.4.       Summary Statistics

Table 2 provides the summary statistics on our variables of interest for the sample of S&P
500 firms from 1991 to 2008. We start with the KLD measures. The means of Total Strengths
and Total Concerns are about 2 and 1.6 respectively. Figure 1 shows the time trend of these
averages; both are increasing over time. Raw Goodness has a mean of .41 with a standard
deviation of about 2.4. Figure 2 shows the trend in Raw Goodness over time. It increases
during the early part of the sample, peaking in the late nineties and then it starts declining
and even becomes negative the last two years of the sample. Our analysis below differences
out this aggregate trend and hence it is not crucial to our analysis. But it is interesting to
note in passing that the aggregate goodness measure peaks during the Internet period when
financial constraints were looser, consistent with the premise of our natural experiment. We
also show the means of the factor score variables, which have similar time trends to the raw
KLD measures.
       The second part of Table 2 presents the summary statistics of the three financial con-
straint measures. In this data set, the financial constraint information is calculated using
firm information from the year before the KLD score.15 For all three measures, firms with
  12
      Lower quality ratings are assigned higher numerical scores. AAA bonds are 2; AA1 bonds are 3; AA2
bonds are 4; AA3 bonds are 5; A1 bonds are 6; A2 bonds are 7; A3 bonds are 8; BAA1 bonds are 9; BAA2
bonds are 10; BAA3 bonds are 11; BA1 bonds are 12; BA2 bonds are 13; BA3 bonds are 14; B1 bonds are
15; B2 bonds are 16; B3 bonds are 17; CAA1 bonds are 18 ; CAA2 bonds are 19; CAA3 bonds are 20; CA
bonds are 21; C bonds are 22; D bonds are 23.
   13
      We have also used the maximum and minimum bond rating for the firm in a year instead of the average
and obtain similar results to what is reported.
   14
      We first try to match bond ratings to KLD observations using CUSIPs. For KLD observations that are
not matched with bond information at this point, we then try to find their bond information matching on
firm name. Some observations are missing bond information because the firm had no outstanding bonds at
the time and others are missing because they were missed using this procedure.
   15
      In other words, the financial constraint measures are lagged one year.

                                                   15
higher values are considered more constrained.



4.      Empirical Results

4.1.     Financial Constraints and Corporate Goodness

We begin our empirical work by taking a detailed look at how firm goodness varies with
financial constraints. Our model predicts that goodness should increase as firms become
less constrained. We examine the results of OLS regressions of firm goodness on our three
standard measures of financial constraints. These results are presented in Table 3. In Panel
A of Table 3, the dependent variable of the regressions is Raw Goodness; Factor Score
Goodness is the dependent variable in the regressions presented in Panel B. Besides the
financial constraint measures, also included in the regression specification are Year Effects,
Fama-French 49 Industry Effects and in the even-numbered columns Market Capitalization
Quintile Effects.
     We start by looking at how firm goodness varies with KZ Score in the first two columns of
Panel A. In column (1), the coefficient on KZ Score is negative a statistically different from
zero, indicating that more constrained firms have less corporate goodness. The magnitude of
the coefficient suggests that easing a firm’s constraint with a one standard deviation decline
in KZ Score (-1.24) is associated with a .16 increase in Raw Goodness. There are several
ways to describe the size of this increase in Raw Goodness. For example, it is about 7% of the
standard deviation of Raw Goodness (2.42); also, it is about 15% of the standard deviation
of the yearly change in Raw Goodness (1.12). In column (2), Market Capitalization Quintile
Effects are added to the regression specification; the relationship between KZ Score and Raw
Goodness is almost identical to column (1), suggesting that our results are not being driven
by comparing relatively large and small S&P 500 firms.
     The financial constraint measure in the next two columns is No Repurchase Indicator. In
column (3) of Panel A, there is a negative and statistically significant relationship between


                                              16
this constraint measure and Raw Goodness. The coefficient suggests that a firm doing no
repurchases the previous year has a Raw Goodness score that is about .23 lower than other
firms. This is about 10% of a standard deviation of Raw Goodness and about 20% of a
standard deviation of the yearly change in Raw Goodness. When Market Capitalization
Quintile Effects are added to the specification in column (4), the estimated relationship
between No Repurchase Indicator and Raw Goodness is slightly smaller but similar to column
(3).
   The financial constraint of the final two columns is Average Bond Rating. In column
(5), there is a negative and statistically significant relationship between bond rating score
and Raw Goodness. The size of the coefficient indicates that a one standard deviation
improvement in bond rating quality (-2.90) is associated with a .45 increase in Raw Goodness.
This is about 19% of a standard deviation of Raw Goodness and about 37% of a standard
deviation of the yearly change in Raw Goodness. This relationship is qualitatively unchanged
when Market Cap Quintile Effects are added to the regression specification in the final
column.
   Panel B of Table 3 is identical to Panel A, except that the dependent variable is Factor
Score Goodness instead of Raw Goodness. The pattern of results is very similar to Panel A.
Using all the different financial constraint measures, the results suggest that more financially
constrained firms have lower Factor Score Goodness. The magnitudes of these relationships
are also very similar to Panel A.
   Taken together, Table 3 shows that financially constrained firms have less corporate
goodness. However, this does not necessarily mean that financial constraints are causing
firms to produce less goodness. Other unobserved factors might be causing some firms to
be financially constrained and to have relatively little corporate goodness. Establishing
causality is a ubiquitious issue in the corporate responsibility literature. We next turn to
a natural experiment that we will argue will help us determine whether there is a causal
relationship between financial constraints and corporate responsibility.


                                              17
4.2.       First Identification Strategy: Sensitivity of Goodness over

           the Dot-Com Period by Financial Constraint Status

To determine the causality of the relationship between financial constraints and corporate
goodness, we need to find some exogenous variation in the financial constraints that firms
face and observe how this variation alters their corporate goodness decisions. Our first
candidate for this exogenous variation is the Internet bubble of the late 1990s. As argued in
the Introduction and the Model sections, during this period, it was easier for firms that were
constrained to raise funds only with equity to raise capital. Therefore, if there is a causal
relationship between financial constraints and corporate goodness, we expect that during
this period the negative relationship between financial constraints and corporate goodness
should be smaller than other periods. We now examine this relationship between the Internet
bubble and sensitivity of financial constraints and corporate goodness using the KLD data
set.
       Because our data sample is from 1991 to 2008, we have KLD information for S&P 500
firms before, during and after the tech bubble. We construct a difference-in-difference esti-
mator comparing the sensitivity of financial constraints and corporate goodness during the
bubble to the sensitivity during the periods before and after the bubble. To do this, we
need to classify firms as constrained or not based on criteria that will not change over time
because of the Internet bubble. We construct measures of firm financial constraints based on
their constraint measures during 1991 and 1992: the first two years of our data. That is, we
will classify a firm over the entire sample based on their financial constraint measures during
these two years, making this classification time invariant.16 We create three measures. Initial
KZ Score is the average KZ Score of a firm during 1991 and 1992. Initial No Repurchase
Indicator is a dummy variable equal to one if the firm did not have a repurchase in either of
those years. Finally, Initial Bond Rating is the average numerical rating of the firm’s bonds
  16
    Therefore, our sample for the diff-in-diff estimation will only include firms that we observe in 1991 and/or
1992.



                                                      18
in 1991 and 1992.
       Table 4 shows summary statistics of the diff-in-diff data set. The sample includes S&P
500 non-technology firms that have observations in 1991 or 1992. We drop technology firms
from the sample because we worry that the Internet bubble might have affected the corporate
goodness of technology firms for reasons other than changes in their financial constraints.17
The summary statistics of the diff-in-diff sample is similar to the full sample presented in
Table 2.
       In Table 4, we also report the summary statistics for two measures of firm investment
we use at the end of the paper as a benchmark for how sensitive firm goodness scores are to
financial constraints. The first measure is the standard measure of capital investment, which
is simply Capital Expenditure (Compustat Item 128) divided by last year’s (once lagged)
Capital Stock (Compustat Item 8). The second measure is just R&D spending by the firm
(Compustat Item 46) measured in millions. Both of these variables are winsorized at the 1%
level by year. The mean capital expenditure 0.19 with a standard deviation of 0.14. The
mean R&D spending is 343 million dollars with a standard deviation of 614 million dollars.
       The regression specification we estimate with this sample is one of our measures of cor-
porate goodness on a measure of initial financial constraint, a dummy variable for the ob-
servation being during the Internet bubble, an interaction of these two variables and year
and firm fixed effects.18 Because the initial financial constraint variable is time invariant
and the Internet bubble dummy has no cross-sectional variation, they cannot be uniquely
identified when year and firm fixed effects are included in the specification. The coefficient
of interest is on the interaction of the initial financial constraint variable and the Internet
bubble dummy; it shows how the relationship between financial constraints and corporate
goodness is different during the Internet bubble compared to the rest of the sample.
       Table 5 shows the diff-in-diff regression results for both of our measures of corporate
  17
     We classify technology firms based on SIC codes. Firms with three digit SIC codes of 355, 357, 366, 367,
369, 381, 382 and 384 are considered technology firms.
  18
     The Internet bubble period is defined as observations from 1996 through 2000.



                                                     19
goodness and the three measures of initial financial constraints. As before, Panel A shows
the results with Raw Goodness as the dependent variable. The results in Panel B with Factor
Score Goodness as the dependent variable are similar. The first column uses Initial KZ Score
as the financial constraint measure. The coefficient on the interaction term is positive and
statistically significant from zero, indicating that more financially constrained firms have
higher corporate goodness scores during the Internet bubble compared to other firms than
other periods in the data sample. The magnitude of the interaction term is similar in size
but opposite signed to the average relationship between KZ Score and Raw Goodness shown
in Table 3, suggesting that the negative effect of KZ Score on corporate goodness is roughly
eliminated during the Internet bubble when traditional financial constraints are relatively
unimportant.
       Column (2) shows the results when the financial constraint measure is Initial No Repur-
chase Indicator. As in column (1), the coefficient on the interaction term is positive and
statistically significant, showing that firms that did not repurchase have higher corporate
goodness scores compared to other firms during the Internet bubble compared to other pe-
riods. Again, the coefficient on the interaction is roughly similar in size but opposite signed
to the average effect of no repurchases on corporate goodness shown in Table 3, indicating
that during the Internet bubble this constraint did not lower corporate goodness. Finally,
column (3) shows the results using Initial Bond Rating as the measure of financial con-
straint. It shows a very similar pattern to the results using the other two financial constraint
measures.19
       These diff-in-diff results are consistent with a causal relationship between financial con-
straints and corporate goodness. When constraints exogenously relaxed for firms during
the Internet bubble, more-constrained firms increased their corporate goodness relative to
less-constrained firms compared to other time periods. However, there are some important
  19
   We have also estimated these regressions using as the dependent variable the six components of the
goodness measure separately. Not surprisingly, the results are less precise than when we use all of the
goodness components together. But we find positive coefficients on the interaction terms for all of the
goodness components except for corporate responsibility.


                                                  20
assumptions we must make to interpret the diff-in-diff results as causal that we will now ex-
amine. The most important assumption of this methodology is that there is no other reason
why more financially constrained firms have more corporate goodness relative to other firms
during the Internet bubble compared to other periods besides the direct effect of the easing
the importance of financial constraints during the bubble. There are a few simple stories
that can be told in which this assumption might not hold; however, we are fortunate to have
data to help determine whether these alternative stories are important.
   One potential problem that is a concern when using a diff-in-diff methodology is that the
treatment and control groups might have different pre-existing time trends in the outcome
variable. In our context, it might be worrisome if more financially constrained and less-
constrained firms have differently evolving trends in corporate goodness over the period
of our sample. For example, if technology was changing so that corporate goodness was
increasing for more financially constrained firms over time relative to other firms, then a
diff-in-diff estimator might be capturing that pre-existing time trend instead of the causal
effect of the bubble.
   Another potential problem with the diff-in-diff strategy involves attrition. Our sample
consists of S&P 500 firms with KLD and financial constraint information in 1991 or 1992.
Some of those firms disappear later in the sample. If there is differential attrition across
treatment and control groups that changes the average corporate goodness for those groups,
then the diff-in-diff estimator could be picking up this attrition effect instead of the causal
effect of easing financial constraints. For example, it might be that more financially con-
strained firms that spend a lot of resources on corporate goodness are financially vulnerable,
increasing the likelihood that they disappear later in the sample. Also, the Internet bubble
might alter these attrition probabilities.
   Luckily, our data set allows us to determine how important these potential problems
might be. Our data sample spans both sides of the Internet bubble; that is, we have a
period before the Internet bubble (1991-1995), a period during the bubble (1996-2000) and a


                                              21
period after the bubble (2001-2008). Therefore, we can calculate two diff-in-diff estimators.
The first compares the sample before the Internet bubble to the Internet bubble; the sec-
ond compares the Internet bubble period to the post-bubble period. If the Internet bubble
estimator is measuring a causal effect of easing financial constraints on corporate goodness,
then we expect these two diff-in-diff estimators to produce similar estimates. If these poten-
tial problems are important, we expect the two estimators to produce substantially different
results.
   To see this, consider the example where there are different pre-existing trends in cor-
porate goodness between more financially constrained and less-constrained firms: corporate
goodness is growing over time for more financially constrained firms compared to others
for reasons we cannot measure. The diff-in-diff estimator comparing the pre-bubble sample
to the bubble sample would produce a positive estimate of corporate goodness during the
bubble for financially constrained firms compared to others because of this time trend even
if there is no causal impact of the Internet bubble on corporate goodness. However, the
diff-in-diff estimator comparing the bubble sample to the post-bubble sample would produce
the opposite estimate. The time trend would cause the corporate goodness of financially
constrained firms to be lower compared to other firms during the Internet bubble.
   The attrition argument is a little more complicated. Consider the story where more
financially constrained firms that produce a lot of corporate goodness are financially vul-
nerable and this vulnerability is less important during the Internet bubble. The diff-in-diff
estimator comparing the Internet bubble to the later sample might be problematic. After
the Internet bubble ends, these vulnerable firms are more likely to disappear, decreasing the
average corporate goodness of more financially constrained firms after the Internet bubble
even if individual firms do not change their behavior. However, this should not be a problem
for the diff-in-diff that compares the pre-bubble sample to the bubble sample. During the
pre-bubble period, vulnerable firms are leaving the sample, decreasing the average corporate
goodness of financially constrained during this period. But when this attrition ends during


                                             22
the Internet bubble, this should not increase the average corporate goodness of financially
constrained firms (there is no sample replacement). If we observe an increase in corporate
goodness for more financially constrained firms compared to other firms during the bubble
compared to earlier, it cannot be driven by this type of attrition.
   Table 6 presents the estimates of the two diff-in-diffs. We estimate them using both
of our corporate goodness measures and all three of our financial constraint measures. The
odd-numbered columns show the diff-in-diff comparing the pre-bubble sample to the Internet
bubble (Early). The even-numbered columns present the diff-in-diff using the Internet bubble
and the post-bubble samples (Late). For all of the different combinations of goodness and
financial constraint measures, the estimates from the two diff-in-diffs are very similar. Not
surprisingly, the estimates of the coefficients of the interaction of financial constraints and
the Internet bubble indicator are less precise than those presented in Table 5 because of
the smaller sample size. But there is no evidence of systematic differences between the
two diff-in-diff estimators consistent with concerns that our results are being driven by pre-
existing trends or sample attrition, buttressing the argument that the diff-in-diff estimators
are measuring a causal effect.
   We plot how the goodness scores evolve for our two groups, the initial constrained versus
the unconstrained, using the three different measures of financial constraints, KZ in Figure
3, repurchases in Figure 4 and bond ratings in Figure 5. One can see that the growth of the
goodness scores for the initially constrained group grows much faster than the unconstrained
group in the Internet period and then drops much faster after the Internet period. The
figures for KZ and bond ratings show the temporary convergence of the goodness scores of
constrained and unconstrained firms during the Internet period, very much consistent with
our theory.
   Note that the pattern associated with repurchases differs from the KZ and bond rating
measures. Using the latter two measures, the KLD scores of the constrained group are
typically below the unconstrained group. Their scores converge during the internet bubble.


                                              23
But in the case of repurchases, the KLD scores of these two groups are similar in the non-
internet periods and the KLD scores of the constrained group somewhat rise above that
of the unconstrained during the internet period. It is difficult to speculate on why the
repurchase measure gives rise to these differences in the non-internet periods. Our diff-in-
diff exercise indeed takes out the level differences and only focuses on how their difference
varies in internet versus non-internet periods. As such, we draw the same conclusions from
these figures from the perspective of our identification strategy.


4.2.1.   Comparison to Capital Investment and R&D Spending

Having established the sensitivity of corporate goodness to financial constraints, we want in
this section to benchmark this sensitivity by looking at how firm capital and R&D spending
changed using the same quasi-experiment. These diff-in-diff results using the two investment
variables above as dependent variables are reported in Table 7.
   Panel A reports the results for capital expenditures. For KZ, the coefficient of interest is
0.004. We obtain a similar number using the No Repurchase measure financial constraint,
which implies an increase of about 3% relative to the mean investment expenditures for
financially constrained firms compared to unconstrained firms during the bubble period.
But neither estimate is statistically significant. When we use bond rating measure, the
estimate is essentially zero. In sum, we find evidence consistent with the literature that
financial constraints matter for investments in terms of the sign of the estimates, but our
estimates are naturally smaller than those in the literature because we focus just on very
large S&P500 firms.
   Panel B reports analogous results for R&D development. Here the results are much
stronger. Using the No Repurchase measure, we obtain a coefficient of 48.8 and the coeffi-
cient is marginally statistically significant. Here a financially constrained firm raised R&D
spending by nearly fifty million dollars compared to unconstrained firms during the bubble
period. This is around 14% of the mean R&D spending of firms in the sample, which is quite


                                              24
a sizeable number. So in the dimension of R&D spending, we find much more sensitivity
to financial constraints. The figures are somewhat smaller for the other financial constraint
measures but they all point to financial slack during the Internet Bubble Period resulting in
higher R&D expenditures for constrained firms compared to unconstrained ones.
   These findings point to how sensitive corporate goodness scores are to financial slack
when benchmarked to sensitivities of investment and R&D spending. Even for very large
firms, financial slack matters much more for corporate social responsibility than it does for
investment and R&D spending. This suggests that such goodness expenditures are not core
to the firms’ themselves but are plausibly interpreted as off-sets. This evidence is consistent
with our model.


4.3.    Second Identification Strategy: Sensitivity of Goodness to

        Firm’s Stock Price by Financial Constraints Status

Our second identification strategy is to compare the goodness sensitivity of constrained versus
less-constrained firms’ goodness scores to their stock prices. We expect a constrained firm’s
goodness score to increase more with its stock price, as measured by log of the firm’s market-
to-book ratio, than for a less-constrained firm. We implement this test by expanding the
regression specification of Table 3, which simply compared the goodness scores of constrained
versus less-constrained firms, to include as independent variables the firm’s log market-to-
book ratio and this ratio interacted with the financial constraint status of the firm. The
coefficient in front of this interaction term is our coefficient of interest: it measures whether
there is a differential effect of stock price on contrained firms versus other firms.
   The regression specification includes both year effects and firm fixed effects. The year
effects distinguish this identification strategy which focuses on firm level variation net of
aggregate variation in stock market valuations from the previous identification strategy which
focuses just on aggregate time series variation. The stock fixed effects deal with potential
heterogeneity in a firm’s market-to-book ratio which might pick up permanent differences

                                               25
unrelated to sentiment which we expected to be mean reverting. This is similar to the
specification used in Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003).
       The results are presented in Table 8, where we estimate the findings for our three measures
of financial constraints status. In Panel A, we use raw goodness as the dependent variable.
In the firm column, we show the baseline regression with just log of market-to-book as the
independent variable. We see that firms with higher market-to-book have higher goodness
scores. A one-standard deviation move in log of market-to-book, which is 0.83, yields a
movement in Raw Goodness of around .08, which is around 4.5% of the standard deviation
of Raw Goodness.
       In column (2), we include the KZ score and the KZ score interacted with log of market-
to-book. The coefficient on the interaction term is the one of interest. It is .226 with a
t-statistic of over 2. This means that among financial constrained firms, the effect of stock
prices on Raw Goodness is roughly double the average effect. Or put another way, all of the
relationship between stock prices and Raw Goodness measured in the first column is being
driven by constrained firms as measured by KZ Score.
       Similar results hold for the other two measures of financial constraints. The result is not
statistically significant for No Repurchases but is statistically significant for Bond Rating.
In Panel B, we repeat the same exercise using Factor Score Goodness on the left hand side.
The results are very similar to those in Panel A.20



5.        Conclusion

We develop a simple model to understand how corporate goodness varies with financial
constraints. Regardless of the motive for goodness spending, the model predicts that less
financially constrained firms ought to spend more on goodness. We confirm this prediction
using two identification strategies and find that goodness spending is much more sensitive
  20
     We have also estimated the same regression specifications as in Table 9 using as the dependent variable the
six different components of the goodness scores. The results are similar to those from the first identification
strategy: across almost all categories with the exception of corporate governance we get similar signs.

                                                      26
to financial slack than is the case for capital and R&D expenditures. These findings are
important in that they show that the large literature on ”Doing well by doing good” suffers
from an omitted variables bias due to heterogeneity in firm financial constraints.
   The challenge is then to identify clearly the potential motives for goodness spending.
One strand of work that is consistent with our findings is to relate an agents’ preferences for
socially responsible actions to their Democratic political affiliation (see Hong and Kostovet-
sky (2012) and DiGuili and Kostovetsky (2012)). But these political affiliations need not
imply an agency problem since Democratic managers who undertake more goodness may
believe these types of investments are profitable. Another recent strand tries to more cleanly
identify an agency motive using the 2003 Dividend Tax Cut and close governance votes (see
Cheng, Hong, and Shue (2012)). This early work suggest that this line of research is likely
to be fruitful.




                                              27
References

Andreoni, J., 1989, “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian
  Equivalence,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(1), 1447–1458.

Baker, M., J. C. Stein, and J. Wurgler, 2003, “When Does The Market Matter? Stock Prices
  And The Investment Of Equity-Dependent Firms,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  118(3), 969–1005.

Baron, D. P., 2001, “Private Politics, Corporate Social Responsibility, and Integrated Strat-
  egy,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 10(1), 7–45.

Becker, G., 1974, “A Theory of Social Interaction,” Journal of Political Economy, 82, 1063–
  1093.

Benabou, R., and J. Tirole, 2010, “Individual and Corporate Social Responsibility,” Eco-
  nomica, 77, 1–19.

Besley, T., and M. Ghatak, 2005, “Competition and Incentives with Motivated Agents,”
  American Economic Review, 95(3), 616–636.

Campello, M., and J. Graham, 2007, “Do Stock Prices Influence Corporate Decisions? Evi-
  dence from the Technology Bubble,” Nber working papers, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Cheng, I.-H., H. Hong, and K. Shue, 2012, “Do Managers Do Good with Other Peoples’
  Money?,” working paper, Princeton Universoty.

Delevingne, L., 2009, “Surprising Survivors: Corporate Do-Gooders,” CNNMoney.com.

DiGuili, A., and L. Kostovetsky, 2012, “Are Red or Blue Companies More Likely to Go
  Green? Politics and Corporate Social Responsibility,” Working papers, University of
  Rochester.


                                             28
Friedman, M., 1970, “The Social Responsibility of Business Is To Increase Its Profits,” New
  York Times Magazine, pp. 122–126.

Heal, G., 2005, “Corporate Social Responsibility—Economic and Financial Perspectives,”
  Geneva Papers, 30, 387–409.

Heinkel, R., A. Kraus, and J. Zechner, 2001, “The Effect of Green Investment on Corporate
  Behavior,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 36(04), 431–449.

Hong, H., and M. Kacperczyk, 2009, “The price of sin: The effects of social norms on
  markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 93(1), 15–36.

Hong, H., and L. Kostovetsky, 2009, “Red and Blue Investing: Values and Finance,” forth-
  coming Journal of Financial Economics.

         , 2012, “Red and Blue Investing: Values and Finance,” Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics, 103(1), 1–19.

Kaplan, R. S., and D. P. Norton, 1996, “Using the Balanced Scorecard as a Strategic Man-
  agement System,” Harvard Business Review, January-February.

Kaplan, S. N., and L. Zingales, 1997, “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful
  Measures of Financing Constraints,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 169–
  215.

Margolis, J., H. Elfenbein, and J. Walsh, 2007, “Does It Pay To be Good? A Meta-Analysis
  and Redirection of the Relationship between Corporate Social and Financial Performance,”
  Harvard Business School Working Paper.

Pastor, L., and P. Veronesi, 2006, “Was there a Nasdaq bubble in the late 1990s?,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 81(1), 61–100.

Tirole, J., 2001, “Corporate Governance,” Econometrica, 69(1), 1–35.


                                            29
                                            Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1. What determines the cut-off level of financial constraint at which
the firm will invest its first dollar in goodness? It has to be the point where the firm is
indifferent between allocating a dollar to goodness or allocating it to capital at Γ = Γ∗ and
G = 0. Put differently, the cut-off value Γ∗ solves the following equation


                   −u1 (αf (Γ∗ ) − Γ∗ , 0)αf 0 (Γ∗ ) + u2 (αf (Γ∗ ) − Γ∗ , 0) = 0,         (9)


where the first term is minus 1 times the marginal benefit of a dollar allocated to capital and
the second term is the marginal benefit of allocating a dollar to goodness. Because f 0 (0) = ∞
and u2 (·, 0) < ∞ the left-hand side of equation (9) equals −∞ at Γ∗ = 0. In addition, from
the assumption expressed by (6), the left-hand side of (9) is positive at Γ∗ = K F B < ΓF B .
Furthermore, differentiating the equation (9) with respect to Γ∗ one obtains


                                                                            00
              −u11 (αf 0 (Γ∗ ) − 1)αf 0 (Γ∗ ) + u21 (αf 0 (Γ∗ ) − 1) − u1 αf (Γ∗ ) > 0,


because αf 0 (Γ∗ ) > 1 and u11 < u12 . Hence there is a unique Γ∗ < K F B < ΓF B such that
equation (9) holds.
   Moreover, in Region 2 an increase in Γ leads to an increase in both output and goodness.
In fact, here G = Γ − K and thus


                u1 (αf (K) − Γ, Γ − K)αf 0 (K) − u2 (αf (K) − Γ, Γ − K) = 0               (10)


Thus
                      ∂K              (−u11 + u12 )αf 0 − u22 + u21
                         =−                                                       .       (11)
                      ∂Γ    u11 α2 (f 0 )2 − u12 αf 0 − u21 αf 0 + u22 + u1 αf 00

Notice that the first four terms of the denominator forms a quadratic form:


                                  (−αf 0 , 1) ∗ D2 u ∗ (−αf 0 , 1)0 < 0

                                                   30
Because D2 u < 0, it follows that the first four terms are less than zero and so is the fifth
term u1 αf 00 by concavity of the production function. Now consider the numerator. Because
αf 0 ≥ 1 and u11 < u12


                     (−u11 + u12 )αf 0 − u22 + u21 > −u11 + u12 − u22 + u21 > 0


again from using
                                       (1, −1) ∗ D2 u ∗ (1, −1)0 < 0.

Hence we have 0 <        ∂K
                         ∂Γ
                            .   Furthermore using αf 0 > 1 and again the inequality u11 < u12 , we
can show that
                                                   ∂K
                                                      < 1.
                                                   ∂Γ

This is equivalent to showing that


                  u11 α2 (f 0 )2 − u12 αf 0 − u21 αf 0 + u22 < (u11 − u12 )αf 0 + u22 − u21


(i.e. the denominator is bigger in absolute value than the numerator, or that the denominator
is more negative than the numerator). This in turn is equivalent to


                                    (u11 αf 0 − u21 )αf 0 < u11 αf 0 − u21 ,


which follows from our assumption that u11 − u21 < 0.
   To summarize, Γ ≤ Γ∗ defines Region 3. In this region, the optimal K = Γ and the
optimal G = 0, since the right hand side of (9) is negative. Region 2 is defined as Γ∗ < Γ <
ΓF B . In this region financial constraints bind, but G > 0 and an increase in Γ leads to an
increase in both output and goodness. Finally, Region 1 is where Γ ≥ ΓF B , and firms choose
the first best.
Proof of Proposition 2. The financing constraint is:


                                                      31
                                          G + K ≤ Γ.                                        (12)

   The interesting portion is where the constraint (12) is binding. In this portion, managers
solve


                             max U = max αfk − γ + v(Γ − k)                                 (13)
                              k≤Γ        k≤γ

                                               dπ
   If the solution is K = Γ then obviously     dK
                                                    > 0. So we may as well assume that Γ is large
enough so that the solution to the managers problem entails K < γ. In this region,


                                U = αf (K) − Γ + v(Γ − K),                                  (14)


                                    π = U − v(Γ − K), and                                   (15)

                                     αf 0 (K) = v 0 (Γ − K).                                (16)

   Furthermore, writing K(Γ) for the solution, the envelope theorem guarantees that


                                    dU
                                       = −1 + v 0 (Γ − K(Γ))
                                    dΓ

and thus



                                                              
                  dπ          0               0             dK
                     = −1 + v (Γ − K(Γ)) + v (Γ − K(Γ)) 1 −
                  dΓ                                        dΓ
                                                00
                                            v
                     = −1 + v 0 (Γ − K(Γ)) 00       ,                                       (17)
                                          αf + v 00

where the last equality follows from (16) and the implicit function theorem.
   Notice that as Γ → Γ∗ then v 0 (Γ − K(Γ)) → 1. Thus for Γ close to Γ∗ profits decline with
an increase in Γ. However away from Γ∗ profits increase with Γ whenever v 00 is large relative


                                                32
to f 00 , that is whenever the marginal product of capital falls sufficiently slower relative to
the speed at which the marginal benefit of goodness to mangers falls.




                                              33
        Table 1: Factor Loadings of the
    First Factor of Strengths and Concerns

The entries are the factor loadings on the components of
strengths and concerns from factor analysis. These loadings
are used to create the variables Factor Score Strengths and
Factor Score Concerns.


Panel A: Strengths

Total Environmental Strengths                     .19
Total Corporate Governance                       -.01
Strengths
Total Community Strengths                        .20
Total Diversity Strengths                        .33
Total Product Quality Strengths                  .21
Total Employee Relation Strengths                .23




Panel B: Concerns

Total Environmental Concerns                     .21
Total Corporate Governance                       .18
Concerns
Total Community Concerns                         .23
Total Diversity Concerns                         .19
Total Product Quality Concerns                   .26
Total Employee Relation Concerns                 .22




                            34
                    Table 2: Summary Statistics of Main Data Set
The entries are summary statistics of the data set used to measure the relationship between firm
financial constraints and corporate goodness. The sample consists of yearly observations of S&P 500
firms from 1991 to 2008 that can be matched to corporate responsibility information from KLD and data
from Compustat and CRSP to calculate financial constraint information. There are 6798 observations.
Total Strengths is the sum of strengths a firm has in a year (measured consistently across years). Total
Concerns is the sum of concerns a firm has in a year (measured consistently across years). Raw
Goodness is the difference of Total Strengths and Total Concerns. Factor Score Strengths is the first
factor score from a factor analysis of the components of strengths. Factor Score Concerns is the first
factor score from a factor analysis of the components of concerns. Factor Score Goodness is the
difference of Factor Score Strengths and Factor Score Concerns. For the other investment measures,
Capital Investment is a firm’s capital expenditure in a year divided by its capital stock the previous
year. Research and Development is the firm’s spending on R&D during the year in millions. KZ Score is
a linear combination of a firm’s cash flow, dividends, cash balances, book leverage and Tobin’s Q
measured the previous year. Higher KZ Score is associated with more financial constraints. No
Repurchase Indicator is a dummy for the firm not having any repurchases the previous year. Average
Bond Rating is the average Moody rating of the firm’s bonds the previous year. Higher values are
associated with lower credit quality. Log(Market to Book) is the logarithm of the firm’s market to book
ratio the previous year. Standard deviations are in brackets.
                                                              th                              th
                                             Mean        25        Percentile   Median   75        Percentile
                                              (1)                   (2)          (3)                (4)
Raw KLD Measures
Total Strengths                              1.99                    0            1                  3
                                            [1.99]
Total Concerns                               1.62                    0            1                  2
                                            [1.91]
Raw Goodness                                  .37                   -1            0                  2
                                            [2.39]
Factor Scores of KLD Measures
Factor Score Strengths                        -.01                 -.67          -.13               .29
                                             [.67]
Factor Score Concerns                         .02                  -.47          -.19               .35
                                             [.76]
Factor Score Goodness                         -.03                 -.52          .03                .43
                                             [.87]
Other Investment Measures
Capital Investment                            .23                   .12          .19                .28
                                             [.20]
Research and Development                    335.8                  29.1         118.6              372.0
                                           [601.2]
Financial Constraint Measures
KZ Score                                      .86                   .26          .85               1.45
                                            [1.24]
No Repurchase Indicator                       .33
Average Bond Rating                          8.46                  6.83          8.00              10.00
                                            [2.94]
Log(Market to Book)                          1.01                   .42          .93               1.48
                                             [.83]




                                                    35
Table 3: OLS Estimates of the Relationship between Financial Constraints
                       and Corporate Goodness
The entries are OLS regression coefficients measuring the relationship between financial
constraints and corporate goodness. In Panel A, the dependent variable of the regressions is
Raw Goodness; the dependent variable in Panel B is Factor Score Goodness. In the first two
columns, the financial constraint measure is KZ Score. The financial constraint measure in
columns (3) and (4) is No Repurchase Indicator, and Average Bond Rating is the financial
constraint measure of the last two columns. Year Effects and Fama-French 49 Industry
Effects are included in all the specifications. Also, Market Cap Quintile Effects are included
in the specifications shown in the even-numbered columns.            Standard errors are in
parentheses and are clustered to account for the potential correlation of multiple
observations of the same firm across years.
Panel A: Raw Goodness
                                  KZ Score           No Repurchase            Bond Rating
                                (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)          (5)       (6)
Financial Constraint           -.130      -.112       -.225     -.169        -.156     -.150
Measure                       (.046)     (.045)      (.089)    (.086)       (.028)    (.033)

Year Effects                    Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes
Industry Effects                Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes
Market Cap Quintile             No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Effects
Observations                   7500      7500         7922      7922         5904      5904




Panel B: Factor Score Goodness
                                  KZ Score           No Repurchase            Bond Rating
                                (1)      (2)          (3)     (4)             (5)      (6)
Financial Constraint           -.063      -.061       -.055     -.053        -.052     -.064
Measure                       (.017)     (.016)      (.032)    (.032)       (.011)    (.012)

Year Effects                    Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes
Industry Effects                Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes
Market Cap Quintile             No        Yes          No        Yes         No         Yes
Effects
Observations                   7500      7500         7922      7922         5904      5904




                                             36
   Table 4: Summary Statistics of Bubble Difference-in-Difference
                             Sample

The entries are summary statistics of the data set used to estimate how the tech bubble
affected the relationship between financial constraints and corporate goodness. The sample
consists of yearly observations of non-tech S&P 500 firms from 1991 to 2008 that have
observations in 1991 and/or 1992 and can be matched to corporate responsibility information
from KLD and data from Compustat and CRSP to calculate financial constraint information.
Raw Goodness and Factor Score Goodness are defined as before. For the other investment
measures, Capital Investment is a firm’s capital expenditure in a year divided by its capital
stock the previous year. Research and Development is the firm’s spending on R&D during
the year. The financial constraint measures are measured in 1991 and 1992. Initial KZ Score
is the average KZ Score of the firm during those two years. Initial No Repurchase Indicator is
a dummy variable for the firm having no repurchases in either 1991 or 1992. Initial Bond
Rating is the average bond rating of the firm during those two years. Standard deviations
are in brackets.

                                        Mean           25th        Median          75th
                                                    Percentile                  Percentile
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)
Goodness Measures
Raw Goodness                             .39            -1             0             2
                                       [2.44]
Factor Score Goodness                    .01           -.48           .03           .57
                                        [.88]

Other Investment Measures
Capital Investment                       .19           .12            .17           .24
                                        [.14]
Research and Development                 343            25            92            326
                                        [614]

Financial Constraint Measures
Initial KZ Score                        .48            -.04           .50          1.18
                                       [1.29]
Initial No Repurchase                   .55
Indicator
Initial Bond Rating                     7.45           5.86          7.03          9.00
                                       [2.83]




                                               37
Table 5: The Effect of the Tech Bubble on the Relationship between
          Financial Constraints and Corporate Goodness

The entries are OLS regression coefficients measuring how the tech bubble affected the
relationship between financial constraints and corporate goodness.            In Panel A, the
dependent variable of the regressions is Raw Goodness; the dependent variable in Panel B
is Factor Score Goodness. Financial Constraint is one of the three measures of the firm’s
initial financial condition: Initial KZ Score, Initial No Repurchase Indicator and Initial Bond
Rating. Bubble Indicator is a dummy that the observation is between 1996 and 2000.
Because Year Effects and Firm Fixed Effects are included in the regression specifications,
the coefficients for Bubble Indicator and the initial financial state of the firms are not
uniquely identified. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered to account for the
correlation of observations of a firm over time.

Panel A: Raw Goodness
                                              KZ Score           No            Bond Rating
                                                             Repurchase
                                                  (1)            (2)                 (3)
Financial Constraint × Bubble                    .165           .285                .102
Indicator                                       (.050)         (.144)              (.032)

Year Effects                                     Yes              Yes                Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                               Yes              Yes                Yes
Observations                                    5039             5288               3999




Panel B: Factor Score Goodness
                                              KZ Score           No            Bond Rating
                                                             Repurchase
                                                  (1)            (2)                 (3)
Financial Constraint × Bubble                    .056           .097                .040
Indicator                                       (.018)         (.053)              (.012)

Year Effects                                     Yes              Yes                Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                               Yes              Yes                Yes
Observations                                    5039             5288               3999




                                             38
              Table 6: Robustness Checks of the Difference-in-Difference Estimates

The entries are coefficients of OLS regressions measuring how the tech bubble affected the relationship between financial
constraints and corporate goodness using different samples. The regressions are identical to those presented in Table 5
except that the results shown in the odd-numbered columns include observations from 1991 to 2000 (Early) and the results
shown in the even-numbered columns include observations from 1996 to 2008 (Late). Standard errors are in parentheses
and are clustered to account for the correlation of observations of a firm over time.

Panel A: Raw Goodness
                                                KZ Score                 No Repurchase                Bond Rating
                                             Early     Late              Early     Late             Early     Late
                                              (1)       (2)               (3)       (4)              (5)       (6)
Financial Constraint × Bubble                .152      .172              .335      .252             .100      .094
Indicator                                   (.056)    (.100)            (.164)    (.228)           (.036)    (.061)

Year Effects                                  Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
Observations                                 3386         2826          3543         2971           2689        2242


Panel B: Factor Score Goodness
                                                KZ Score                 No Repurchase                Bond Rating
                                             Early     Late              Early     Late             Early     Late
                                              (1)       (2)               (3)       (4)              (5)       (6)
Financial Constraint × Bubble                .046      .068              .137      .058             .044      .033
Indicator                                   (.019)    (.037)            (.060)    (.087)           (.013)    (.023)

Year Effects                                  Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes
Observations                                 3386         2826          3543         2971           2689        2242

                                                          39
Table 7: The Effect of the Tech Bubble on the Relationship between
               Financial Constraints and Investment

The entries are OLS regression coefficients measuring how the tech bubble affected the
relationship between financial constraints and investment. In Panel A, the dependent
variable of the regressions is Capital Investment; the dependent variable in Panel B is
Research and Development. Financial Constraint is one of the three measures of the firm’s
initial financial condition: Initial KZ Score, Initial No Repurchase Indicator and Initial Bond
Rating. Bubble Indicator is a dummy that the observation is between 1996 and 2000.
Because Year Effects and Firm Fixed Effects are included in the regression specifications,
the coefficients for Bubble Indicator and the initial financial state of the firms are not
uniquely identified. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered to account for the
correlation of observations of a firm over time.

Panel A: Capital Investment
                                              KZ Score           No            Bond Rating
                                                             Repurchase
                                                  (1)            (2)                 (3)
Financial Constraint × Bubble                    .004           .005                .000
Indicator                                       (.004)         (.011)              (.002)

Year Effects                                     Yes              Yes                Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                               Yes              Yes                Yes
Observations                                    4872             5034               3612




Panel B: Research and Development
                                              KZ Score           No            Bond Rating
                                                             Repurchase
                                                  (1)            (2)                 (3)
Financial Constraint × Bubble                    6.6            48.8                11.8
Indicator                                       (18.9)         (34.0)               (5.8)

Year Effects                                     Yes              Yes                Yes
Firm Fixed Effects                               Yes              Yes                Yes
Observations                                    2722             2745               1956




                                             40
 Table 8: OLS Estimates of the Relationship Between Firm Market to Book
      and Corporate Goodness For Firms with High and Low Financial
                               Constraints
The entries are OLS regression coefficients measuring the relationship between firm market
to book and corporate goodness. In Panel A, the dependent variable of the regressions is
Raw Goodness; the dependent variable in Panel B is Factor Score Goodness. Log(Market to
Book) is the logarithm of the firm’s market to book ratio the previous year. High Firm
Financial Constraint Indicator is a dummy variable for firms with high financial constraint
using three measures. In column (2), firms in the top half of the KZ Score (without Tobin’s
Q) distribution are defined as having high financial constraints. In column (3), firms with no
repurchases the previous year are defined as having high financial constraints. In column
(4), firms with non-investment grade bond ratings are defined as having high financial
constraints. All specifications include a full set of firm fixed effects and year effects.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered to account for the potential correlation
of multiple observations of the same firm across years.
Panel A: Raw Goodness
                                                    KZ Score          No             Bond
                                                                  Repurchase        Rating
                                        (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)
Log(Market to Book)                    .130           -.031          .090            .158
                                      (.054)         (.068)         (.066)          (.076)
High Firm Financial Constraint                        -.504          -.133           -.419
Indicator                                            (.121)         (.075)          (.185)
Log(Market to Book)×                                  .226           .059            .225
High Firm Financial Constraint                       (.082)         (.067)          (.114)
Indicator
Observations                           8579          7997            7706            5704


Panel B: Factor Score
Goodness
                                                    KZ Score          No             Bond
                                                                  Repurchase        Rating
                                        (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)
Log(Market to Book)                    .037           -.016          .029            .044
                                      (.021)         (.026)         (.025)          (.030)
High Firm Financial Constraint                        -.176          -.036           -.168
Indicator                                            (.046)         (.025)          (.070)
Log(Market to Book)×                                  .071           .012            .078
High Firm Financial Constraint                       (.032)         (.025)          (.044)
Indicator
Observations                           8579          7997            7706            5704




                                               41
        Figure 1: Time Trend of Corporate Strengths and Concerns

The figure shows the time trend in the yearly average Total Strengths and Total Concerns of
S&P 500 firms between 1991 and 2008.


   3




  2.5




   2
                                                                                 Strengths
                                                                                 Concerns
  1.5




   1




  0.5
    1991    1993    1995    1997    1999     2001   2003   2005    2007
                                     Y ear




                                             42
                                       Figure 2: Time Trend of Corporate Goodness

The figure shows the time trend in the yearly average Raw Goodness of S&P 500 firms
between 1991 and 2008.


                              1



                            0.8
  R aw G oodness M easure




                            0.6



                            0.4



                            0.2



                              0



                            -0.2
                               1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
                                                                         Y ear




                                                                      43
Figure 3: Trends in Average Corporate Goodness by Initial KZ Score

The figure shows the time trend in the yearly average of corporate goodness for two groups
of firms. The first group is firms in the bottom half of the Initial KZ Score distribution. These
are relatively unconstrained firms. The second group is firms in the top half of this
distribution; these are relatively constrained firms.


    1

  0.8

  0.6

  0.4

  0.2
                                                                                  Low K Z Firm s
    0
                                                                                  H igh K Z Firm s
  -0.2

  -0.4

  -0.6

  -0.8

    -1
     1991   1993    1995    1997    1999      2001   2003   2005   2007
                                      Y ear




                                                44
         Figure 4: Trends in Average Corporate Goodness by Initial
                               Repurchases

The figure shows the time trend in the yearly average of corporate goodness for two groups
of firms. The first group is firms with a value of zero for Initial No Repurchase Indicator.
These are relatively unconstrained firms. The second group is firms with a value of one for
this variable; these are relatively constrained firms.


    1


  0.8


  0.6


  0.4

                                                                      Firm with R epurchases
  0.2
                                                                      Firm with N o R epurchases

    0


  -0.2


  -0.4


  -0.6
     1991   1993   1995   1997   1999     2001   2003   2005   2007
                                  Y ear




                                                  45
   Figure 5: Trends in Average Corporate Goodness by Initial Bond
                               Rating

The figure shows the time trend in the yearly average of corporate goodness for two groups
of firms. The first group is firms in the bottom half of the Initial Bond Rating distribution.
These are relatively unconstrained firms. The second group is firms in the top half of this
distribution; these are relatively constrained firms.




    1



  0.5



    0
                                                                             H igh Bond R ating
                                                                             Low Bond R ating

  -0.5



   -1



  -1.5
     1991   1993   1995   1997   1999      2001        2003   2005   2007
                                   Y ear




                                                  46
