                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH AND
                   CHANGES IN THE TERMS OF TRADE
                       IN JAPAN AND THE U.S.




                         Catherine Morrison


                          W. Erwin Diewert




                      Working Paper No. 1848




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             March 1986




Research support from the National Science Foundation, Grant #SES—
8420937 is gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in
                                       Productivity. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper #1848
                                                         March 1986




   Productivity   Grth and Uanges in    the Tents of Trade   in Japan   and   the   U.S.




                                       ABSTRACT



      In   this paper we employ a recently proposed procedure (Dlewert and
                                                                                Morrison
 {1985]) for adjusting real domestic product and productivity for changes in a

country's terms of trade. We apply this procedure to a comparison of two major

industrialized countries, the U.S. and Japan. The approach is based on

assessing the impact on, alternatively, production or final sales to domestic

purchasers, of changes in terms of trade and the balance of payments Uefirit in

a consistent accounting framework. This treatment of international trade a1lows

for comparative statics analysis based only on production theory. The

comparison is carried out for a relatively
                                             open economy, Japan, with an economy
that may not be as vulnerable to terms of' trade changes, the U.S. for the years

1967 to 1982.




Catherine Morrison                                W. Erwin Diewert
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Tufts University
                                                  University of British Coiuipb! a
Medford, Massachusetts, 02155
                                                  Vancouver, B.C.. Canada, VGT 1Y2
(617)—381—3560
                                                  (604)—223-2544
 Introducti on


        Changes in the terms of trade or the deficit have long been recognized to
 have a     potential impact on production and productivity in an open economy. This

 impact has, however, proved difficult to          measure   precisely, particularly within
 the context of the theory of the producer which generally provides the basis for

 analysis of production arid thus productivity.

        Diewert and Morrison [1985 have recently proposed an index number method

 for measuring changes in production, input use, and terms of trade                  and thus

 ultimately productivity and "welfare              in   response   to changes in domestic and

international input and output prices and technology. This development is based

on production theory where the objective function is taken to be real product or

sales, and the effect of changes in the terms of trade is              analogous   to technical
change or total factor productivity change.

       It is possible within this consistent accounting framework to assess the

effects on domestic real output of changes in the terms of trade and the impact

on final sales to domestic purchasers of changes in the balance of payments

deficit. Combining these impacts results in a measure of welfare change

including changes in       both   domestic productivity and in international economic

conditions.

       It is also possible to isolate the component indexes which are combined to

compute the productivity and terms of trade indexes. The impact of changes in

variables which are      exogenous   to the firm can be represented       as individual   price

or quantity indexes within this structure, and thus the individual effects on

the   production process can be assessed.

       In   this   paper we use the framework developed in Diewert and Morrison [i985

to consider the differential impact        of   terms of trade or deficit fluctuations on
                                           2


production and productivity in    a   relatively "closed economy     (the U.S. ) as
compared to a relatively open economy (Japan),
      The paper proceeds as follows. In Secti on Ii we out.I me the fundamentals
of the Diewert—Morrison (1985] approach to measurement of product price and
input   quantity indexes, productivity, terms of trade        adjustment, and "welfare,
and relate it to typical productivity measurement theory and techniques.              In

Section III we table our Japanese data for the years 1967--1982. In section IV,

we present our productivity and terms of trade adjustment indexes for Japan.               In

section V. we table our U.S. data, while section VI presents our U.S. indexes.

In section VII, we compare our Japanese and American results. Section VIII

concludes.



II.   The Treatment of' Changes i nTe   rms of Trade   W   I thinaProductiv

      Measurement Framework


        Modeling the production process of firms within an open economy must take
into account not only choices between different domestic inputs in producing
domestic    output, but also the choice between using imported inputs (commodity or

merchandise imports) and/or producing export goods. More than one type of

output must therefore be defined in order to capture the impact on the economy

of the firm's production choices in response to changing domestic and foreign

economic conditions. In this paper we recognize three classes of (net) output

quantities: (i) sales to domestic purchasers (consumption goods, investment

goods, and sales to the government sector), represented by the vector d with

prices Pd and thus total value p.y=Vd; (ii) sales to foreign purchasers

(commodity or merchandise exports), x and Px with value y.p=V; and (iii)

purchases of foreign inputs (commodity or merchandise imports),               and Pm with

(negative) value YmPm=Vm. The impact of foreign trade, therefore, is
                                          3

 represented by the extent of export production and import use by the production
 sector in   addition   to domestic production and input use. Note that we are
 assuming   that all merchandise trade passes through the home country's private

 production sector.

      Within this structure, the effect of changes in export or input prices can

 be assessed similarly to changes in total factor productivity. In analysis of

 production taking into consideration only domestic production and input use, it

 is standard to represent total factor productivity as the impact of a change in

 technology ——   represented by an increase in a time counter t    on production.

 This measure must, of course, adjust any total change in output for the

accompanying changes in input use. The result of increased productivity from an

 improvement in technology (technical change) can be interpreted either as a

potential decrease in input use required for a given production level, or an

increase in output at a constant level of input use, given a constant price of

output (production). A productivity improvement can therefore be thought. of as

an increase in "welfare' for the economy, since more output is potentially

available using the same amount of input.

     Similarly, if the price of an exported good increases, given the use of

domestic inputs, then the same trade deficit can be maintained while consumption

is increased; fewer resources may be devoted to producing exports or imports may

be increased. In either case domestic production        and thus welfare   will

increase. Thus a favorable change in the terms of trade (i.e., an increase in

export prices relative to import prices) is similar to an increase in total

factor productivity. In the remainder of this section we shall indicate how the

independent impact of this international trade effect can be measured, using

techniques that are analogous to traditional productivity measurement methods.

    More specifically, changes in both domestic and international exogenous

choice variables facing producing firms affect observed productivity measures.
                                          4


The structure within which to analyze production and resulting productivity and

'welfare' must therefore include these components of the total productivity

"picture'. We assume that the economy's period t private gross domestic product

function or p duct     function gt   may be defined for each period t as




1) gt(p,v) E maxy{p.Y       (y,v)cft}



where p = (px,pm,pd)T >>       is a (hypothetical) positive vector of net output

prices that private producers face, N=X+M+D, P is a vector of X export prices,

p a vector of M import prices, Pd a vector of D product prices, y is a

corresponding vector of production quantities y=(yx,Yin'Yd)' and vO        is   a non-

negative vector of J primary inputs that are available to producers for each

period t.

      Jf gt satisfies the usual regularity properties and producers are

competively profit-maximizing, then by Hotellings's lemma the amounts of output

produced and inputs used are derivable as         =   g/p   for n a domestic or

exported good, -y=g/p for in an imported good, and Wj =          g/vj   for j=l,...,

where Wj is the unit price of input j. Note that this is quite a general

structure; in contrast to the usual framework, imports and exports are treated

explicitly, and can be interpreted as inputs or outputs since they are net

outputs. The product function gt is the basis of the first approach to

characterizing the impacts of terms of trade on productivity or welfare; the

sales approach, within which the impacts of the deficit can also explicitly be

assessed, will be outlined below.

       Indexes such as productivity indexes and terms of trade indexes are based

on   aggregating   the individual impacts of different price and quantity changes on

the product function g. More specifically, the standard productivity definition

is based on the domestic impact         in terms of production or sales     of a
                                                5

 change in technology, given all exogenous variables constant.            Formally, this

 can be expressed for the production approach by defining a standard theoretical

 productivity index as:

         t
 2) R (p,v)
                       t
                      g (p,v)/g
                                 tH!
                                       (p,v)


 Rt is therefore the percentage increase in output, given p and v, that can be

 produced by the period t technology set as compared to the period t—l technology

 set.


        To motivate the formulation of the productivity problem based on Rt and its

extension to include terms of trade impacts it is useful to reformulate this

definition of productivity for the moment in terms of more standard productivity

literature and notation. To calculate the change in output Rt, or equivalently

the growth rate in Rt, it is necessary to isolate pure technical change from

other observed changes in prices and quantities of inputs and outputs.              In

general in the productivity literature, therefore, product:ivity growth

measurement is carried out by taking the total output change between two periods

(the change in product value deflated by the change in output price) and

dividing -         normalizing    or deflating —- by the changes in individual input

levels, to determine the increase in output produced for a given amount of input

use. Thus if productivity is defined as the aggregate output (Q)            to   aggregate

input (V) ratio (each aggregate being some kind of share--weighted sum),

increases in productivity can be calculated as (Qt/Vt)/(Qt1/Vtl), or

(Qt/Qti)/(Vt/Vt—l)             In proportional terms this is often written as
             --
(dlnQ/dt          dlnV/dt)   or Q/Q--V/V. Note that the adjustment of the total change

in Q    accomplished    by subtracting dlnV/dt accounts for only a portion of the
total   change     based on g; the total change in g would also be a result of changes

in   the terms of trade.
                                                   6

     The linkage between the Rt specification and typical productivity

accounting methods can formally be motivated using                 the   product function written

to include explicitly the dependence ant. I.e., If grg(p,v,t)=g(p,p,py,v,t),

then in Rt(p,v)=Iri R(p,v,t) can be represented by ln g/t, where:


     dg      g dp                   g dp           g dPd           g dv. g
3)
     dt      p x dt                 p dt
                                      in
                                                   p d dt          v. dt
                                                                     j
                                                                               t

The independent impacts of productivity and terms of trade changes on the total

change in product are therefore separately identifiable and Interpretable.

Characterization of productivity requires isolating the t impact, or


     g dg      r
                   g dpX                    g dpm r g dpd            r
                                                                          g dv.3
                                      114         11)
     t dt                     dt               dt     d dt                v. dt


which, using Hotelling's lemma, dividing by g, and using (.) to denote the time

derivative, can be written as


             g 1      g            'Xp X pX        y15 p15 p15     'dd    d        WV
5) in R =          = —    -                   +.                   ____   —         3

             tg g                    g p               g             g d            g V.


where terms 2, 3 and 4 on the right hand side of expression (5) are generally

implicit in the construction of PQ which deflates g to generate constant dollar

product Q.

      Note that if                                         is interpreted as the value of the one

product (or aggregated product) Q, p•Q, this expression is the basis for

the usual Q/Q—V/V categorization of productivity. In this case, V/V is the

share—weighted index of the Vj inputs (the last term in (5)), the shares are in

terms of Q, and the deflation of total product by all components of its price is

explicit in the calculations.
                                             7

       In   the   expanded form for in Rt given in (5) —-   in   contrast to the usual
 lnQ/t measure           the dependence on productivity measurement of changes in

 and m is explicitly included. The change in product Rt is thus purged of these

 effects and is a pure technical change measure.

      Note that the right hand side of (5) allows us to independently assess the

 impacts of changes in productivity and in the terms of trade. The in Rt measure

 can be augmented by a component based only on terms of trade changes, in At to

 yield the following expression for in Wt:


                       gi                -
 6) ln Rt÷ in At          + EXX                      -_     in          or   =   AtRt
                                                                    ,
                       tg     g                  g


 where international trade impacts are represented by At, and Wt captures

productivity plus the effects on consumption of terms of trade changes. This

indicator more closely reflects "welfare" than a typical productivity measure

since increasing consumption is possible from increasing export prices relative

to import prices.

     Development of productivity and terms of trade indexes Rt and At and

ultimately the combined "welfare" index Wt, requires development of all the

component indexes of (3). These indexes can be interpreted as individual

comparative statics indexes representing the separate impacts of changes in each

of the components of the productivity expression —-- and their individual

elements -— on production.

     Returning to a more formal treatment of the problem of computing

productivity and welfare indexes including terms of trade effects, we define

output and input price indexes between periods t—l and t using the reference

period r technology set (representing alternatively t or t-l).

     First, to define a real product index (to capture the "Q's") it is

necessary to define output price indexes to deflate the total change in value of
                                                                     8

output between periods t--l and t. For each net output good n the individual

output price effect in terms of the reference input vector v is defined as:


7)
        r =       rti
                 g (p1
                                    t-l t t—l                        t-l
                                                                 .,p ,v)/g (p
                                                                                  r t—l ,v)

which    is equal to the proportionate increase in period r nominal product if the

price of net output n were changed from period t-l to period t prices but

technology, other output prices and the primary input vector v were held

constant at their period t-l levels. Thus this number has a global comparative

statics interpretation;                         (7) indicates the impact on production if only one

output price (Pi) changed, ceteris_paribus.

        Diewert [1983] has shown that if gr is defined as the following translog

product function,

             t                          N        r                           N
      r
                                                amp                                      anPn1
                                                                                  ...N
8) ing (p,v) & +                                             +   (1/2)

                           M        r                            M       M                         M             M
                                                +    (1/2)                                    +
                                                                                                  L1 Em=l
                         Em=i. BlflV                                             S1lnv11nv1                          1nmlflPnlflVm


 which is explicitly or implicitly often used as the basis for productivity

analysis, and there is competitive profit-maximization behavior in each period,

then certain indexes such as (7) can be calculated as translog indexes using

observable data. More specifically, define the commodity n period t Laspeyres

price effect, PtLn, by (7) where rt—1 and vEv (so we are using the period t—

1 input vector and the period t--l technology as reference quantities) and define

the commodity n period t Paasche price effect,                                           by (7) where rt and vEvt

(so the period t input vector and the period t technology are used as reference

quantities). Then Diewert and Morrison [1985] show that the following global

comparative statics result holds:

            t     t        1/2     =b
9)     (P        P                               where
            Ln    Pu   )
                                        n   ,




in b        —          ,       t
                 (l/2)L(P1v0 p •z
                                   t t t nt-lyt—l/p tl t—i
                                                 )     .y )]ln(p
                                                                t                                 /p
                                                                                                       t—l
                                                                                                             )
                                                                      9



  Note that h may he empirically calculated.

         Similar individual comparative statics effects can be defined for inputs.

 The input quantity effect for input j, Qt, is defined as:


 10) Q.
          r           r     t—1          t—l    t     t—1
                                                                 . . ,vt—l )/gr (p,v t1
                  g (p,v1         ,.
                                             1,v.,v.        ,



 This index represents the proportionate change in private product due to a

 change in the mth primary input between period t-1 and t, given fixed output

 prices, other primary inputs, and technology.                                    Assuming that gr is transiog and
 there is competitive profit maximizing behavior, Diewert and Morrison {19851

 show that


 i)       t  t 1/2
        (Q .0 .)
          L3 P
                               = 1:.      wnere,

               t
in c. = (1,2)(w.v./w
                  /
                     •v         ttt       ) +   (w.
                                                    t-1V.t-- /wI t—l
                                                                   •v
                                                                      tI )lln(v./v.
                                                                               t t—1

and where QLjt, the input j Laspeyres quantity effect, is defined by (10) for

rt-1 and pptl and Q1t, the input j Paasche quantity effect, is defined by

(10) for rEt and ppt

        A theoretical period t aggregate output price index, using the input vector

v and the period r technology set as reference quantities, may be defined by:


12) p (p
        r t-1 t                        r t       r t1
                      ,p ,v)       g (p ,v)/g (p                ,v)


Define PtL by (12) where rEt-I and vEvtl and ptp by (12) where rEt and vEvt.

Then assuming (8) and maximizing behavior, Diewert and Morrison {1985] show

that:



13)
         ttl/2            = b E          t-I 'pt,yt-i,yt)                     wnere
                                  P0(p                                    ,




in b          N
                  i(1/2nyn/
                                  tttt                 t-1 t-1 t-l t—1 )]ln(pt /pt-l
                                                                n
                                                   10

Note that fl bnb, so that the individual, price effects can simply be

combined to determine the aggregate price change for total product.

       Since P0 is empirically calculable this is an important result; this index

can be used to deflate the total change in output value between period t--l. and t

to derive the implied output quantity change index as:

       —      —      t'-l ,pt,yt-t,yt)          t t t—1 t-1
                                              p •y /p   .y
                                                                     t"-i    t t-1 t
                                                                            ,p ,y     ,y )
14) Q0 =      Q0(p                                            P0(p


                                         —
                                         =
                                                        .     .
                                             a/b where a s detined as p .y /p
                                                                             t      t t_i t_i
                                                                                         •y


Thus, the real change in output dlnQ/dt between period t—l and t                             the value

change divided by the aggregate price change                  can be approximated by in Q0.

       The individual comparative statics effects in terms of input use can also

be used to define the aggregate input quantity index dlnV/dt. The basis for

this aggregate index is more formally defined as:


           r t—1 t               r    t   r     t-l
15) Q (v          ,v ,p)        g (p,v )/g (p,v

Define QtL by (15) where rEt—i and pEpt and Qtp by (15) where rEt and pEpt.

Then assuming (8) and maximizing behavior, it can be shown that:


           t t 1/2                    t—-l t t—i t
16)                    C E              ,w ,v     ,v
                                Q0(w

                                t t t t          t—l t-i t—i  tl              t t—l
in c        L.1(l/2)[(w,v./w .v ) ÷ (w. v. 1w              •v      )]ln(v./v.


so that fl' cj =-          c.    We can approximate din V/dt by in Qo

       Thus, in summary, the component comparative statics indexes, b and cj

can be combined to generate Q0 and Q which in turn can be used to compute the

productivity measure Rt                                      a/bc, where Rt is defined as in
                                       (R R)-'2 = Q0/Q0
(5), g is approximated by the transiog function in (8), and the Paasche and

Laspeyres indexes               and     are based on the reference price and quantity

vectors (pt,vt) and (ptl,pt'l) in definition (2) respectively.1
                                                        11




        The individual impacts of changes in the prices of internationally traded

 goods can be computed similarly to the comparative statics indexes above.                                        In

 particular, the comparative statics impacts of P and m are structurally

 identical to the output price effects for the P and p components of the set of

 bn indexes.

        Theoretical indexes that capture the aggregate effects of changes in export

 and import prices respectively may be defined by

         r       t     t—l                 r    t             r         t-l
 17)                         ,v)       g (PP.P.v)/g                           ,p,v)            and

         r           t t—1                 r        t         r               t—l
                             ,v)       g                          d'x'm ,v)

 respectively. Define the Paasche export price and import price indexes, })t

and Ptpm, by using definitions (17) with rEt and all reference price and

quantity vectors taken to be the period t observed vectors.                                  Similarly, define

the Laspeyres export and import price indexes, PtLx and PtLm, by using (17) with

rEt-i and all reference vectors set equal to their period t-i levels. As usual,

assuming that the translog form (8) holds and assuming maximizing behavior, we

may derive the following equalities which express the aggregate impacts of

changes in export and import price respectively:

         t 1/2
18) (p
     Lx P)
        Px

             x       t t t t                                                         t—l
where ln d E.1(l/2)[(py/p •y )                      ÷ (p.
                                                       t—1        t—1
                                                                        /p
                                                                          t—1
                                                                                •y
                                                                                                t
                                                                                           )]ln(pjp
                                                                                                     t--i
                                                                                                            )   , and,

19)          mm'12 =   e



where   in e =                     t
                 L. 1(u/2)[(p.y./p 1'
                                       t       tt   ÷
                                                        mi
                                                             t—1 t1 t-l t-1
                                                                  mi "
                                                                                                t
                                                                                           1mimit_i)
                                                  12




      A theoretical. index that captures the combined effects of changes in both

export and import prices in period t may be defined by

                                                                       Define the

usual Paasche and Laspeyres special cases of this family of indexes, Atp and

AtL, by setting r equal to t or t—1 and taking reference price and quantity

vectors to be period t or t-l vectors respectively. Assuming (8) and maximizing

behavior, we may compute the index At which represents the impact of all changes

in   the       terms of trade by


20) At            (/)i/2 d/e,

where d and e are the indexes of the impacts of export and import price changes,

on private product defined above by (5).

       As outlined above (see (6)), the index At can be used as an adjustment

index to add the impacts of terms of trade changes to technical change effects

to obtain a "welfare" change index allowing for both domestic and international

exogenous changes between periods t-i and t. The welfare change measure Wt can

be defined more formally by:

           t             t       t t      t--l         t—l t—l
21) W (Pdv)             g                        d'x ,p          ,v)



Following the reasoning developed in Diewert and Morrison [l985j and the

translog—based indexes developed above, for this function, as for Rt and At, a

geometric mean of the Paasche and Laspeyres indexes Wp and WtL, can be

calculated from observable data assuming maximizing behavior and the translog

functional form (8). This implies in the current context that the geometric

mean of Wp and wtL can simply be computed by combining the Rt and At indexes:


22) (WW)1"2 =               (
                                ad     (RtRt)l/2(AtAt)l/2 E
                                                      13



          The entire development of productivity and "welfare indexes including

 terms of trade changes to this point has been based on the product function.

 This is a useful framework that is analogous to the typical production function

 approach but expanded to include international price changes. This framework is

 not amenable, however, to consideration of the impacts of changes in the balance

 of trade deficit or surplus over time. This interesting addition to the current

 framework can be accomplished by using an alternative function as a basis for

analysis, the private domestic sales function:


23) st(pdpxpmvvO) =
                                          yyydd               d,yx,_ym,t;

                                                    p.y +
                                                            v0 > 0)

        This function is attractive because it depends on not only all the variable

which are arguments of the product function, but also on the merchandise trade

deficit v0 ——      the value of imports less the value of exports (if v0<0, —v0 is
the trade surplus) --          that   the private production sector is assumed to incur.

The s function reveals how much domestic output the economy can produce in time

t, given the availability of the vector of inputs v, the prices of exports and

imports, P and Pm and the ability to have a balance of trade deficit v0 E

ptm•ytm        pt<.yt     It may even more closely represent short                run   welfare changes

than the product function since it directly captures the amount domestic

purchasers receive.2           Note, however, that the long run effect of a deficit will

generally be opposite to the short run effect; i.e., current deficits may have

to be     paid back in the future.
      Given the     definition of v0, profit maximizing behavior and constant returns

to scale, it must he true that:


24)
      t
          (pt d' t x' trn" t   t      =   t     t
                                              d d =
                                                      tt       t
                                                              V0 =    W
                                                                          t t 4 V0t
                                                                           •V
                                                    14




    The deficit v0 functions in a similar way to a primary input: a bigger

deficit (holding other things constant) will lead to a bigger equilJhrium value

of domestic sales. It therefore can explicitly be incorporated in a development

of a "welfare' expression analogous to (6) hut with s instead of g and an extra

term depending on v0,       st/v.dv/dt, appended in the expression representing

the total change in sales analogously to (3). Then, (5) becomes:




                                                                                             V.
                t S   S        S
                                                           m              d              S        S



where the extra component of the total sales change indicates the new possible
source of "welfare" change in addition to the previous productivity and terms of

trade effects, the deficit effect.

    More formally, in this framework the productivity index is defined

analogously to the product function case but including v0 and expressed in terms

of domestic output. The productivity index Rt(p,v) becomes Rt*(p,v,vO)

st(p,v,v0)/st(p,v,v0). Following procedures elaborated above, we can use this

definition to calculate a translog index of productivity between two periods t

and t—i (in which the deficit has the same sign) which is the geometric mean of

the theoretical Paasche and Laspeyres productivity indexes:

      t t 1/2 = a* * * *
26) (RL R )       /b c0c
                                   —   t
                                       R       ,   where
                                                            *    t t t—l t-1
                                                           a =— PdYd/Pd

                          t t t t          +
                                                   t—l t—1 t—1 t—1             t t-1
in b* =                                              "n d 'd ))in(p/p

in c = (1/2)[(v0t         tt   4
                                   (v0
                                       t—l t—I t—l
                                               'd    •d
                                                                 t   t_i
                                                            )]ln(v0 /v0    )    , and,

            3             t t t t                t-1 t-1 t—i t—i  t  t-1
in c*   =                                  ÷   (w, v. 'd d )lin(v, /v,
            E.i(l/2fl1(w.v.Ipd*Yd)
                                                     15




 Clearly b* and c are made up of components bn* and Cj* exactly analogous to b

 and cj above:


 27) (Pt*t*l/2
                  *                              N    *       *
         p
       Ln Pn  )= b                          so   n  b     b           and,
                  n                     ,
                                                 n=l n            ,




         t t 1/2       *                         M    *       *
 28) (QQ)          =c                       so fl1 c =    C




      In addition, in this case the deficit effect is c0*, which is equal to:



 29) LoPO
         t t 1/2   =
                           *
                               =
                                    t
                       Co          Q0


 (29) is thus a comparative statics index representing the proportionate change

 in private domestic sales from a change in the private sectors balance of

 trade deficit from v to v, with output, export and import prices,

technology, and primary inputs constant. Note that when the deficit is equal to

zero, pd.yd=w.v for each period and c'0 will be equal to one so that;        the indexes
from the product and sales approach will be identical. Thus, if the deficits

are small in periods t and t-l, the indexes for the two approaches will be

close.

      A problem exists for implementation of these indexes, however, if v and

v1 are of opposite signs, because in c0 is not defined in this case. As

developed in Diewert and Morrison {l985], a first order approximation approach

can be developed and used as an alternative when the deficit changes sign over

the sample period. The basic idea of the approximation approach is as follows.

Using the first derivatives of the sales function evaluated at the period t data

point, the first order approximations to the theoretical Paasche and Laspeyres

indexes can be computed and then used to form the geometric mean of the linear

approximations. For example, for the index Rt, the approximation can be written

as:
                                                                 16




    —t   —t--t 1/2                                           .         .       .         —t —t
30) R = (RLRP)            ,   where the approximation indexes RLRPare defined as


      —t
      RL
         tt t    d'd
                               t—1 -       t       + w
                                                         t •(vt—1          -   vt ) + (v0
                                                                                         t-..l    -    t t—l t—l
                                                                                                      vo)]/pd ''d

      —tt t t—1 t—i
      5 dd'd 'd
                                        t—1
                                               .(p
                                                     t   -
                                                             p
                                                                 t—l
                                                                       )       w
                                                                                   t—l   t   -              t
                                                                                                 v t—l ) + (v0 - v0 )]
                                                                                                                  t—1



An analogous procedure can be carried out for any other index that is desired.

This nonparametric approach, discussed in more detail in                                          Diewert   and Morrison

l985], will be used in section VII for purposes of comparison since, as we

shall see in sections IV and VI, these indexes are nearly identical for those

years in which no sign change in the deficit existed.

           Terms of trade adjustment indexes can be defined for the sales approach

analogously to the productivity indexes. Assuming that the sales function in

each period is translog (where the quadratic coefficients are constant across

time) and assuming maximizing behavior in all periods, we can show that a

geometric mean of the Laspeyres and Paasche theoretical sales function terms of

trade adjustment indexes is equal to an index number At* that can be evaluated

empirically; i.e., we have


31)
             t t 1/2 = d*/e*           A
                                        t      ,    where
           (AL A )

                  N
       *                         t      t t                      t-
ind          =
                 Ei i(1/2)[(piyxj/Pd•Yd)             +
                                                                               'd •d ))ln(p./p. ) , and,

                  N
       *                         t         t t                   t—1 t—1 t—1 t1                        t    t—1
in    e      =
                 E 1(1/2flI(p.v/P.Y)                 +
                                                             mi        mi "id '1d )]ifl(Pmi/Pmi

Clearly these indexes are analogous to those developed for the product approach

and pose no sign change difficulties. Again, if the deficit is zero the index

d*/e* is identical to the product function adjustment index d/e in which the

deficit is not taken into account. The interpretation also is analogous.
                                                17




        The Rt* and At* indexes capture the aggregate impact of changes in domestic

 and foreign exogenous variables, respectively, similarly to Rt and At with the

 product approach. These indexes can thus again be combined to determine the

 total impact of domestic and international fluctuations on productivity            to

 derive "welfare change indexes including the impact of terms of trade changes:

          t' t' 1/2
 32) (WL W )          = (a
                          *     ***     **
                              /b c0c )(d /e )
                                                     t t' 1/2 t t 1/2 At =t t
                                                = (RL R )   (AL   A )   =R      W



Again, if c0*=1 this index will be identical to Wt from (22). The Wt* index

captures the combined comparative statics effect on private domestic sales of

changes in export prices, import prices and technology, holding constant

domestic output prices, primary inputs and the balance of trade deficit.

        Using the sales approach, impacts from the balance of trade deficit can

also be isolated and used to define an additional indicator of welfare. Since

ptyt +    v0t     pdtydt, a bigger deficit increases the equilibrium value of

domestic sales just like increasing production or a higher relative export

price. These independent effects are explicitly identified in the sales

function framework, and can thus be combined to obtain a combination 'welfare"

index   augmented also by      changes in the deficit.

        In this   context the concept of "welfare' includes the effects of increases
in the deficit which cause 'exogenous" increases in domestic sales and thus
consumption similarly to a short run increase in total factor productivity. The
deficit   effect therefore becomes a third component of the welfare index that

appends the changes in the deficit to the changes in total factor productivity

and prices of exports and imports captured by the Wt and Wt* measures.       Assuming

Ii) a translog sales function, (ii) that the balance of trade deficit has the

same sign in periods t-l and t, and (iii) maximizing behavior, we may derive the

following equalities:
                                                 18




        t t 1/2 = (a* /b*c0c
33) (TL T )
                          **
                             )(d
                                      */c*)c0*        T



                             i/2 AtAt 1/2 t t 1/2
                    —
                    -   RtRt
                         L       L P    L0PO
                   —            1/2    t t 1/2
                                      L0P0
    Note that the development of         the     saies indexes as translog approximations

has been based on the assumption that the productivity index Rt is defined for

all data points (i.e., we have implicitly assumed that the trade deficit has the

same sign in all periods). The approximation given in (30) can be substituted

for the Rt* .ndex if    this   is not the case.            It is also   possible,   in order to

make the analysis more consistent, to carry out approximations to te other

indexes which make up the welfare indexes. Unfortunately, the multiplicative

properties of the indexes         both in      terms      of the multiplication of the

component "comparative statics" indexes into the productivity index and of                      the
multiplication of the aggregate indexes to derive welfare measures                        do not

carry    through exactly if the first. order approximation approach                 is used.   This

may not be a problem for empirical implementation since the indexes should be

very closely comparable by the quadratic approximation lemma of Denny and Fuss

{1983a][l983b]. This hypothesis will he assessed below for the available data

points.



III. The    Janese_Data

        The Japanese data used for this study were developed from the Economic

Statistics Annual from the Research and Statistics Department of the Bank of

Japan.     The data required are the prices and quantities of output (value added),

labor, capital, exports and imports for each calendar year. The capital and
                                       19




 labor series were generated from data on gross fixed capital formation,

 operating surplus, consumption of fixed capital, compensation of employees, and

 number of employees. Value added was then computed as the sum of the values of

 capital and labor. The export and import data, since they are the focus of this

 empirical illustration, were generated from more detailed value and "quantum"

 data for six different types of exports and seven imports. This will allow us

 to assess the impact of the energy price shock in the early 1970's.

     More specifically, the data on capital was constructed by using a benchmark

capital level (for 1966) supplied by John Helliwell and his associates at the

University of British Columbia and based on OECD data, and then using the

investment data from the Bank of Japan series on gross fixed capita] formation

along with a 12.5% rate of depreciation to construct the capital quantity

series. The total value of capital (WK.VK=VX) was assumed to be the sum of the

operating surplus plus the consumption of fixed capital. The price of capital

was then computed as VK/VK. Bank of Japan series were also available for total

compensation of employees (wL.vL=VL) and the number of employees (vL), which

were used to compute a price of labor as WL=VL/VL.3

     The export and import data, as mentioned above, included the value of six

exports and eight imports plus totals. The export data encompassed separate

information on food, textiles, chemicals, non-metallic minerals, metal and metal

products, and machinery and equipment. The import data included food, textiles,

metals, mineral fuels, other raw materials, chemicals, and machinery and

equipment. The prices of each component were computed by dividing each value by

the "quantum" indicator, which is described by the Bank of Japan as the total

value divided by the unit value. The resulting prices were used to calculate

aggregate prices for exports and imports by using a translog aggregation

procedure. The resulting total values for exports and imports did not exactly
                                         20




coincide with the full totals due to a small miscellaneous component which was

not   provided   with a quantum index. The quantities (or quantum values) were

therefore regenerated by using the aggregated prices (P and Pm) along with the

full total values of exports and imports (V and Vm) to compute the constant

dollar quantity indexes y and Ym4

       Finally, value added (p.y) was calculated as       = VL-VK and the

corresponding price (p) assumed to be equal to the implicit GDP deflator

provided by the Bank of Japan. Absorption could then be calculated as

VsVyVx+Vm and the price calculated implicitly as a translog index of the

prices of these components of absorption. These data may be found in Table 1.



IV. Japanese Indexes of Product   ivi and     'Welfare   Chane   and_Their
       The empirical results to be discussed in this section include (1)

individual comparative statics price and quantity indexes b and Cj (and b*,

C*j) for Japan; (ii) combined indexes of different arguments of the product (and

sales) functions a,b,c,d e (a*,b*,c*,c0*,d*,e*) for Japan; and the combined

productivity and welfare indexes for the translog product approach and the

translog and nonparametric sales approaches Rt,At,Wt,R*t,A*t,W*t,T*t,Rt,At,Wt,

and Tt. The indexes are presented as percentage changes and therefore vary

around one; to see growth rates more clearly it is obviously straightforward

simply to subtract 1.0 from all components of the indexes.

       To begin the discussion of impacts on production from changes in input use,

domestic prices and the terms of trade it is useful first to summarize the

information available from the raw data. Many interesting trends emerge simply

from consideration of the Japanese data (see Table 1). For example, over the

relatively short time span considered --      the raw data are for 1966-82 —- the

price of labor increased dramatically while the number of employees stayed
                                          21




 relatively constant. Compensation per employee increased by at least a factor

 of seven during this time period while the number of employees increased by only

 20%. By contrast, the data indicate that the capita] rental price increased by

 approximately two times and the stock level by close to three times.5 During

 the same time span output increased substantially; value added in constant

dollars increased by a factor of almost three. The corresponding price of

output also increased to approximately 275% of its value in the beginning of

the sample.

     The pattern of prices of traded goods is particularly interesting. The

unit price of exported goods from Japan only doubled during this time period.

The price 0. imported goods, however, provides a strong contrast to this.

Although the price of some imported goods was actually falling slightly in the

early 1970's, from 1972 to 1982        in response to dramatic increases in costs of

raw materials and especially fuel --     the   price of imported goods increased by a

factor of four. Since these price trends are so different and international

trade is fairly substantial in Japan, explicit consideration of terms of trade

adjustments should have a relatively large impact. on indexes for Japan. In

addition, the balance of payments, VmVx, is increasingly negative over this

period; the value of exports becomes larger over time.

     Information on single determinants of production trends is evident from the

individual comparative statics indexes in Table 2. For example, cL in Table 2

shows the impact on the change in product from increasing the use of labor.

This index indicates that increases in the labor input have contributed to a

greater product in all but two years       1974 and 1975 when labor growth actually
reversed —-   but   the effect is negligible. By contrast, the contribution of

increases in the capital stock represented by CX is quite high; in 1970—74 in

particular around 5% of product growth can be attributed to an increase in
                                        22



available   capital. Similar trends for domestic sales are evident from c1* and

CK*.

       The impact of changes in prices are also provided by the individual

comparative statics terms b5, b, and bm for the product approach and b*s, b*x,

and b*m for the sales approach. b5 indicates the increase in the value of

product attributable purely to domestic sales price increases. This index

increased by a positive but decreasing proportion from about 7.7% in 1967 to .8%

in 1982. The price effects b*s, which indicate the increase in the value of

domestic sales due to domestic sales price increases, follow an analogous

pattern.

       Looking at the effects b, the changes in the price of exports caused

increased total value of product for most years. However, in some years

1968, 1971, 1972, 1976, 1977 and 1978        changes in the price of exports

contributed to a very small decrease in product value. The b*x impacts are

analogous.

       The impacts of import price changes on product and sales, the bm and b*m,

respectively, are particularly interesting.       The substantial increase in import

prices during the two energy crises leads to decreases in output for many years.

This is particularly true for 1974, where the increase in the import price alone

would have caused a 7% decrease in total product if not attenuated by changes in

other determinants of the product level. Note, however, that later -       in   1977

and 1978 —— a slight increase in product could be attributed to import price

changes; the aggregate price of imported goods actually declined in this period

due partly to a drop in total fuels imported. The trends in bm* are very

similar to those for b.

       The combined indexes a,b,c,d and e (a*,b*,c*,d*,e* and c0*) are reported in

Table 3. The a index is straightforward. It reveals the total percentage
                                         23




 change in product (or, for a*, domestic sales --   both in terms of value) from
 the previous year. The b index shows the amount that can be attributed to the

 change in all components of the p vector; P5, P, and m• It therefore combines

 all the b information from above. This index can be interpreted analogously to

 its component indexes. For example, the first energy price shock ——    in   terms of
 increases in      —— appears to have a large effect on the value of production,

 but the impact was delayed until 1975 instead of 1974 because ba and b

counterract the import component for 1974. The c index is similar; it shows

that the combined effect on changes in product of capital and labor increases

has been quite substantial. This is intuitively reasonable since input use is

the major determinant of production growth. Finally, the d index represents

only the impact of changes in the prices of exports; it is equal to b (and d*

equal to bx*). The import index, similarly, is the bm (b*m) index. The

independent effect of the deficit for the translog sales approach is captured by

the c0 index. However, when the deficit changes sign, the c*0 index is not

defined. Thus for purposes of comparison, in Table 3 we also list the

deficit index for the nonparametric sales approach, c0. It can be seen that

when c0   is   defined, c0 closely approximates c0. It can also be seen that

these deficit effects can be quite large; for example, the 1973 increase in the

balance of payments deficit over 1972 contributed to a 5.5% increase in domestic

sales, holding all other factors constant.

     Finally, these component indexes can be combined into productivity and

welfare indicators for Japan. In Table 4 the productivity, terms of trade, and

welfare indexes for the production, sales, and first order approximation

approaches are presented. The productivity indexes Rt, R*t, and Rt, which are

computed as a/b.c for the product approach, a*/b*.c*.c0* for the sales approach

and approximate the latter expression for the first order approximation

approach, are presented in the first column of Table 3. The indexes are all
                                         24




closely comparable which suggests that either Rt or Rt are useful

approximations to the R*t data points which cannot be observed. All the indexes

show a substantial decrease in productivity growth in the 1970-71 period and an

even stronger impact in 1973-74        the rates of growth actually became negative.

The post-1975 years were characterized by very healthy productivity rates

although not quite as high as in the earlier years of the sample, particularly

for 1981. which exhibited growth of only .2%. The largest percentage growth in

the post energy crisis years was the "snap-back" in 1976 when growth jumped back

up to 4,9%; this is closely followed by a 4.8% increase in 1980.

     The adjustment indexes -—   the   At. A*t, and At, indexes computed as d/e,

d*/e* and an approximation to the latter term, respectively -—     again are very
closely related, and also are very close to one throughout the sample, with the

exceptions of the OPEC price shock years of 1974 and 1979-80. The combined

effect of changes in export and import prices in these years was a decrease in

growth of over 3% in 1974, 1.5% in 1979 and almost 3% in 1980. Thus we are able

to measure rather precisely the effects on growth of the adverse changes in

Japan's terms of trade during these years.

     Adjusting the productivity growth measures by these terms of trade indexes

results in the welfare measures Wt, (RtAt), *t (R*tA*t) and W (RtAt),

which all are closely comparable and closely related to the "R" indexes since

the A's are close to 1.0; The impacts of the energy "crisis" are, of course,

more evident in these indexes; welfare growth in 1971 and particularly 1974 was

very low.

     Finally, for the sales and first order approximation approaches, the

combined indexes incorporating productivity, terms of trade changes and the

impact of the deficit are represented by T*t (W*tc*0) and Tt (the

corresponding approximation), respectively. These indexes are nearly identical
                                            25




 for those years in which T*t is defined. On average the productivity index Rt

 and the total short run welfare change index t differed by approximately 1%.

 The difference between the two series is of course due to the terms of trade

 adjustment index At and the deficit adjustment index c*Ot; i.e., Tt
                                                                          RtAtc0t
 In section VII, we shall return to the Japanese series and compare them with the

 corresponding U.S. series.



V. The U.S. Data



     The data required to calculate the indexes include price and quantity

information on national output, capital and labor inputs, exports and imports.

We have developed the output, import and export data for 1968—82 from the

National Income and Product Accounts, (U.S. Department of Commerce [19811,

[19821, [19831), and have used real capita] stock data constructed by the Bureau

of Labor Statistics (U.S. Department of Labor [1983]) and real labor data

updated from Jorgenson and Fraunieni [1981), since these series closely

approximate our theoretically ideal indexes.

     More specifically, we have calculated the value of output (ptyt) as gross

domestic business product including tenant occupied housing output, property

taxes, and Federal subsidies to businesses, but excluding Federal, State and

Local indirect taxes and owner occupied housing. The corresponding price index

(pt), was computed by cumulating the Business Gross 1)omestic Product Chain

Price index. Note that our output series for the U.S. is conceptually somewhat

different   from our va!ue added    output series for Japan. The U.S. yt and Py
series   may be found in Table 5.
                                         26



    The values of mercahndise exports (pxt.yxt) and imports (pmtymt) were

determined by adding the durable and nondurable export and import values,

respectively, reported in the National Accounts. Tariff revenues were auded to

the value of imports. Corresponding prices (Pxt and PMt) were caJculated as

translog indexes of the components of each measure, and quantities (Xt and Mt)

were determined implicitly. For l967—82, value and price data for nine

different types of exports and ten types of imports were available, which were

used to compute chain price indexes.

    Using the values of imports and exports, PMtMt         pmt•ymt and

pt.yt, tax adjusted gross domestic private business sales to domestic

purchasers, or absorption, was calculated as PsS =        pytyt   ptXt + pMtMt.     The

corresponding price (Pst) determined by cumulating the gross domestic purchases

chain price index from the National Accounts, and the constant dollar quantity

St was calculated by division.

     For our labor quantity series Lt, we used the series constructed by

D. Jorgenson and B. Fraumeni, which is conveniently tabled in the U.S.

Department of Labor [1983;771. Our total private labor compensation series,

pLtLt, was taken from the same publication. The price of labor, p1t, was

determined by division.6

     For our capital services quantity series Kt we used the private business

sector (excluding government enterprises )     constant   dollar capital serivces

input tabled in the U.S. Department of Labor l983;77J. In order to ensure that

the value of privately produced outputs equals the value of pirivate1y utilized

inputs, we determined the price of capital services PKt residually, i.e.,

pKt(pYtvt    PLtrt)/Kt     All of   these U.S. series are presented in Table 5.
                                       27




 VI. U.S. Indexes of Productivity and "Welfare" Chan   and Their Comgnents


      The patterns in the data for the U.S. vary considerably from those seen for

 Japan. For example, the price of labor did not increase nearly as substantially

 as it did in Japan and the corresponding change in labor quantity is much

 higher. Compensation to labor therefore increased similarly to Japan, but for

 the U.S. this was a result of increased levels of labor input whereas for Japan

the price adjustment was more important. The capital trends are more similar;

the U.S. price of capital increased slightly more than for Japan and the

quantity increased a bit less, but the magnitudes are closely comparable. The

output trend is analogous to that for capital; the volume of output increased

more in Japan and price increased less than for the U.S. The import and export

price and quantity trends also follow expected patterns. Import prices

increased substantially in the U.S., particularly post-1973, but not as much as

for Japan, and the increase in quantity of imports is similar for the two

countries. By contrast, export price increases are more substantial. for the

U.S. and the corresponding increase in exports is much lower than for Japan.

     Specific growth effects for the U.S. are presented in Table 6. The labor

impact is different than for Japan, as would be expected from the differing

labor trends; increases in the labor input in the U.S. have contributed to

greater product except in the worst recession years including 1970, 1975 and

1982. Overall the contribution is strongly positive (and more so than in Japan

which can be seen by the means of the respective CL indexes). The positive

impact of the capital stock is, by contrast, always positive but fluctuates less

and the overall impact is less than for Japan, as is also evident from the

reported means. The individua.l price impacts are particularly interesting for
                                         28



the U.S.; although the export price effects b and b*x caused increased product

value in the U.S. in every year except 1982, changes in the price of imports

reflected by bm and b*m caused decreased product value except in 1982. The

overall impacts are, however, especially for the earlier years, very small in

magnitude. By contrast, the increase in product value from domestic price

increases is positive and quite large throughout; it does not show the declining

effect over time that is found for Japan. Domestic and export prices remained

relatively high over the time period in the U.S. as compared to Japan.

     The combined components of the productivity indexes for each type of

effect; a, the change in product quantity alone; b, the change from all

components of the price vector; C,    the change from the combined input effects; d

and e, the impact of exports and imports respectively; and c0, the deficit

effect, are presented in Table 7. These combined indexes are interpreted

analogously to the individual impacts. For example, the c index indicates that

the impact of changes in input on production growth has been quite substantial

and positive, as one would expect. The d and e indexes are simply the b and

bm indexes. Note finally that the deficit effect is generally very small for

the U.S.

     The productivity and "welfare' indexes for the U.S. presented in Table 8

are combinations of the individual component indexes from Tables 6 and 7.

     The productivity growth measure from the product approach, Rt, and its

corresponding measures from the sales and first order approximation approaches,

R*t and Rt, are presented in the first column in Table 8. Note that these

multifactor productivity indexes are quite similar, and capture large drops in

productivity in 1970, 1975, 1979—80 and especially 1982. 1975 and 1976 were

poor productivity years -   there   was a 2% decrease in productivity ---   which

caused concern in the late 1970's about the observed "productivity slowdown".
                                          29




The late 1960s were also disappointing and 1977 appeared very strong in terms

 of productivity growth. In addition, 1980 exhibited a 2% productivity decline

and 1982 was catastrophic with a 6% drop in productivity. These patterns

suggest that productivity trends cannot be characterized by a unique

productivity downturn in 1973, although there does appear to be a trend toward

deterioration of productivity growth over time, much of which can be attributed

to output fluctuations represented by a/b.

       To incorporate the effects on U.S. "welfare" of changes in the terms of

trade in addition to changes in technical efficiency, the adjustment index

At =   d/e   and the corresponding indexes for the sales and first order

approximations approaches, A*t and At must be calculated. These indexes are

generally very close to 1.0, since internationally traded goods are such a small

proportion of total output. for the U.S. , even in the most recent years of the

sample. However, in 1974 and 1980 (two energy shock years), increases in the

prices of imported goods relative to exported goods were responsible for

declines in real output of about 1 1/2% in each year.

       With the exception of these two years, the "welfare" index Wt, obtained by

multiplying Rt and At (and analogously W and Wt for the sales and first order

approximation approaches) does not vary significantly from Rt; for a relatively

closed economy like the U.S., improvements in the terms of trade have a

relatively small effect on economic welfare defined in this manner.

       With the sales approach we can also assess changes in the deficit.

Incorporating the deficit effect into the definition of welfare results in

Tt*=Wt*.c0* for the sales approach and similarly Tt for the first order

approximation approach. The impact of multiplying by c0 was small, as one

would expect from considering the deviations of c0* from one in Table 7. The

exception to this is 1977. where the increase in the trade deficit relative to

1976 was large enough to account for an approximate 1.6% gain in real output.
                                           30




VI II.   ACompar ison of   Ja nese and U.S. Result               it1   4If
         Although the indexes discussed above are illuminating   individually, they
are   particularly interesting to compare across countries. For ease of

comparison, in Table 9, productivity, terms of trade and welfare indexes for the

product and first order approximation approaches are presented for both Japan

and the U.S. for 1968-82. The indexes based on the product approach are

presented because of the strong theoretical foundation for the translog

treatment developed in Diewert and Morrison 11985] and outlined above. The

first order approximation indexes are reported for comparison because the

deficit effect can be captured within this framework and yet all the components

of the indexes can be identified.

         The first indexes to consider are those for productivity. Rt. The Japanese

indexes show only two years of decline throughout the sample period, 1971 and

1974, whereas the U.S. indexes show declines in productivity in many years,

including 1969-70, 1975-76, and 1979-82. This is a large portion of a sample

that includes only 15 data points. The growth in productivity over the entire

sample period for Japan was large relative to the U.S., and showed a gradual

decline from around 6 to 3 percent per year, although there is a lot of

fluctuation around the trend. The worst years for Japan were worse than the

worst years for the U.S., but those years were very limited, over all, both

countries experienced a decreasing trend in yearly productivity growth over the

sample period, but the U.S. decline was more pronounced, and the average level

was substantially lower.

         The U.S. pattern of productivity is different not only in levels but also

in terms of timing and directions of change. For example, although for Japan
                                           31



 1974 was a disastrous year, with a productivity decline of more than 2.5%, there

 are indications of a snap back in productivity growth as early as 1975. For the

 U.S., 1975 and 1976 were both bad years with productivity declines of almost 2%

 per year.

          terms of trade adjustment indexes also are interesting to compare.
        The

 Although the At indexes are close to 1.0 for Japan, they are even closer to 1.0
 for the U.S. This is intuitively reasonable both because
                                                           the magnitude of trade
 relative     to GNP is large in Japan as compared to the   U.S., and because the

 pattern   of export prices as compared to import prices differs more     for Japan
than   the U.S. This difference in price patterns at least partly results because

Japan is more dependent on imported raw materials, especially fuels, than is the

U.S. For example, the 1974 value of At for Japan, .969, is the lowest value

over the sample period because of the impact of energy price increases. This

value indicates a decrease in potential product of about 3% in response only to

the change in the relative prices of traded goods. This corresponds to a U.S.

value of .986 in 1974, the second lowest value in the sample, indicating a

smaller 1.4% drop. On average the Japanese terms of trade adjustment values

tend to be slightly lower than for the U.S. and lower than unity; the means are

.995 and .977 respectively. This indicates a lower level of welfare overall

than is suggested by the pure productivity measures Rt, due to changes in the

terms of trade.

       Adjustment of the productivity measures by the At indexes to derive the Wt

indexes has little effect on the comparative welfare found for Japan and the

U.S. The overall tendency is that the welfare indicators remain similar to the

productivity indexes, although welfare growth is slightly lower than

productivity growth, especially for the later years and for Japan.
                                       32




       For example, the 1982 numbers indicate both the worst productivity growth

and the worst welfare growth for the U.S. during the sample period. Welfare

growth is, however, slightly less disastrous; productivity dropped by 5.9%

whereas welfare declined by 5.6%. Conversely, the best productivity growth year

for the U.s., 1973, where productivity increased by approximately 2.9%, becomes

slightly worse -- 2.8% -- when the terms of trade adjustment is made. By

contrast, the worst productivity growth in Japan was found in 1974, where a 2.6%

drop in productivity corresponded to a 5.6% decline in welfare. The terms of

trade adjustment for Japan also transforms a strong increase in productivity

growth of 4.8% to 1.9% in 1980 although at the beginning of the sample high

productivity growth rates of more than 6% correspond to even higher welfare

measures --   close to 7% in 1967. The terms of trade adjustment therefore has a
more substantial impact on the relative welfare patterns in Japan than in the

U.S.

       The Tt indexes including the adjustment for the deficit effect are also

presented in Table 9. The pattern of this adjustment is similar to that of the

adjustment to Wt from Rt. The U.S. numbers for the early 1980ts indicate a less

dramatic decrease in welfare growth toward the end of the sample with the

deficit effect incorporated than was found for productivity growth, although the

difference is negligible. By contrast, decreases in productivity earlier in the

sample (such as -2.1% for 1970) appear slightly worse with the deficit

transformation (-2.4%). The deficit adjustment for Japan also causes some of

the earlier years to appear worse, for example the 1971 drop in welfare becomes

greater than 4%. However, the effect on some later years is more negative and

dramatic; welfare growth in 1981 actually appears negative and the welfare

increase of 1.93% in 1980 is substantially worse than the 4.8% growth in

productivity, although slightly larger than the 1.86% for t. On average the
                                           33


 deficit   effect causes welfare growth in Japan to appear worse than indicated by

 Wt, whereas the reverse is true for the U.S.

         It is useful to focus on the last years of the sample both because this

 period was one of: large fluctuations in growth of all industrial countries and

 because the major differences resulting from adjustments of productivity growth

measurements to compute welfare growth appear in these years. The final

 comparison to be made here, therefore, is in terms of average growth rates to

summarize the overall trends across time periods. These average growth rates

for both Japan and the U.S. are presented in Table 10.

     For the traditional productivity measures Rt and Rt the difference

between the 1968-82 percentage productivity growth average is striking; the U.S.

experienced a decline overall in this period of approximately .1% per year,

whereas Japan experienced an increase in productivity of a strong 3.0% per year.

This discrepancy in productivity growth does not appear only after 1973,

however. Although the pre—1973 average for the U.S. is a positive .8% growth,

for Japan the corresponding rate of growth is almost 4%. The decline in

productivity is, however --    at   least on average —— a post-1973 effect. For the

1973-82 period the U.S. experienced a .35% decrease in productivity per year

(although a .26% increase if 1982 is dropped) and the corresponding 2.6% growth

experienced by Japan is lower than the pre-1973 rate of 4%, but still very high

by international standards.

     The trends in percentage growth captured in subperiods between the two OPEC

shocks for the two countries also differs strongly. The 1973-77, and 1977—82

breakdown represents a first period including the first shock and beginning of

the recovery and a second period including the rest of the recovery phase and

second   OPEC shock. This break corresponds to the end of the sample period for
many studies studies from   the   iate l970s which assessed the devastating results
of the energy price increases. These numbers pose some interesting questions.
                                         34




     For the U.S. the usual post—1973 productivity slowdown appears in modified

form; the 1968-73 numbers are larger (.8%/year) than 1973-77 (68%/year)

although not by a large margin because of' the bad productivity growth

experienced in 1969-70. The 977-82 numbers, however, are catastrophic;

productivity decreased in this period by about .65%. Much       of   this decrease can

be attributed, however, to 1982 since the 1977-81 percentage average growth is a

positive .5%. This trend downwards, of course, hides the significant

oscillations within the sub-periods; 1977 and 1978 were, for example, quite good

years for productivity growth whereas 1970 was poor.

     The Japanese averages indicate very different trends. First, the l9'73-77

sub—period was a period of significantly lower annual productivity growth (2.1%)

than 1968-73 (3.7%) .     The 1977-82 growth rate shows, however, a strong 'snap-

back" effect, even while including the second OPEC shock; the productivity

growth rate jumps back up to 3.1%. The productivity growth trend for Japan,

therefore, does not appear to be steadily downward as it does for the U.S.,

although the U.S. had a couple of good years in the late 1970's.

     Adjustment by terms of trade effects --     to   the Wt and Wt measures —- and by

deficit effects --   to   the Tt index —- change these patterns slightly but not

dramatically. One point already noted about the Japanese productivity trends is

that the post—1977 period appears weaker in terms of' welfare as compared to the

productivity trends, although for pre—1977 the adjustments have a much larger

impact; welfare growth in the 1973-77 period is only 1.2% per year. The

tendency toward a "welfare" slowdown and sluggish recovery in Japan is thus

stronger than it appeared from the Rt indexes. This same tendency is evident in

the U.S. indexes, but it is not as strong; welfare decreases appear greater than

1% per year for 1977-82 with the terms of trade adjustment (although when 1982

is dropped this becomes a decrease of .2%) and with the deficit adjustment the
                                          35




 corresponding decrease is .7% (--l6%), which is very close to the traditional

 productivity measure.



 VIII. Concludingjemarks



     Although the many theoretical and empirical results discussed in this paper

cannot easily be summarized, it is useful to highlight some of these points to

provide an overview of the contribution provided by this study.

     First, it must be recognized that productivity measures, although

important, may obscure significant contributions to short run welfare that are

obtained by international trade. In this paper we have outlined, following a

more rigorous treatment by Diewert and Morrison [l985, a method which can

distinguish these additional "welfare" changes, resulting from changes in the

terms of trade and the deficit, from productivity changes. To motivate and

develop this approach we have used a production theory based framework similar

to that which provides a basis for much of the productivity literature.

     This framework is used &o construct productivity, terms of trade adjustment

and welfare indexes for the U.S. and Japan as combinations of individual

comparative statics indexes representing the effects of output production,

domestic output price, input use, the deficit, and export and import price

changes on growth in production or sales.

     These indexes show that Japan's productivity from 1968 to 1982 has been

significantly greater than for the U.S. —- and in    fact   has been strongly

positive   in almost all. years whereas productivity and welfare has been
relatively   low in   the U.S. An interesting implication of these numbers is   that

Japan's   productivity growth appears not to have been declining as significantly

as the U.S.; Japan experienced a minimal number of very poor productivity growth
                                      36




years around the first OPEC energy price shock and then "snapped hack'

relatively quickly, although not completely. In addition, adjusting by the

relative terms of trade faced, and the deficit incurred, by the countries has a

greater impact for Japan than the U.S. and smaller productivity growth in post—

1973 and especially

197377 than appears in productivity numbers. For the U.S. this is also true,

although the effect is later; the most dramatic (negative) effects of the terms

of trade adjustment are evident after 1977. Once the terms of trade and deficit

effects are explicitly taken into account it appears for both countries for this

time period that traditional productivity measures understate short run

welfare.

     These implications are obviously only a small subset of those which these

indexes provide, but highlight the richness of the information available from

the procedures developed. Application of these procedures to later and more

complete data for these and other countries should provide very useful

indications of the effects of trade patterns on economic welfare.
                                             37




               Japanese Quantities and Prices of' K,L,Y,X,M, and S (Sales)


Table 1


YEAR       K                     L                      Y          Py
1967        29024.2    0.78710    41305.5     0.45343     54194.4 0.76405
1968        30654.1   0.87577     41994.0     0.52581    61100.4 0.80350
1969        33070.7   0.96136     42313.0     0.60483    68797.4 0.84201
1970        36316.2    1.03890   42766.3      0.73013    75335.9 0.90373
 1971      40369.7    0.95311    42993.0      0.86284    78818.1 0.95054
1972       44320.0    1.00000    43035.0      1.00000    85815.0 1.00000
1973       48708.2    1.08639    44151.6      1.22489    93380.8 1.11940
1974       53883.1    1.08656    43966.9      1.55597    92531.9 1.34997
1975       57530.7    1.04612    43849.4      1.81640    95026.3 1.45533
1976       60671.8    1.10302    44252.4      2.04039   100089.4 1.54842
1977       63747.6    1.12564    44848.4      2.24906   104862.2 1.63615
1978       66957.2    1.21046    45402.5      2.39676   110281.2 1.71132
1979       70777.9    1.22444    45998.6      2.55838   115269.0 1.75614
1980       74882.9    1.25878    46477.1      2.75886   120847.1 1.80579
1981       78665.4    1.23931    46854.9      2.94883   125788/3 1.85284
1982       82516.0    1.25230    47333.5      3.12253   129723.4 1.88582


           X          P          M            M         S          P8
1967       3940.108   0.96745    3836.849    0.95994     57191.9   0.72517
1968       4954.146   0.96083    4355.298    0.96187     62222.5   0.77682
1969       5882.085   0.99749    4992.975    0.96506     68738.2   0.82042
1970       6821.044   1.04710    5981.378    1.01768     76251.3   0.89196
1971       8266.639   1.03638    5989.071    1.07381     77216.8   0.95025
1972       8928.027   1.00000    6597.156    1.00000     85221.0   1.00000
1973       9512.114   1.09361    7953.468    1.18050     95460.4   1.12054
1974      11192.440   1.50515    7869.874    2.15937     95156.1   1.34471
1975      11278.783   1.55822    7040.110    2.43634     97603.6   1.43201
1976      13820.367   1.52077    7706.426    2.47283    103938,5   1.49972
1977      15047.310   1.50203    7920.279    2.40759    109137.5   1.55385
978       15200.701   1.39419    8242.751.   2.00481    117282.7   1.58858
1979      15027.924   1.57770    9095.688    2.61892    126517.7   1.63097
1980      17555.877   1.72185    8724.714    3.55662    132832.1   1.69111
1981      19466.441   1.80288    8275.875    3.79426    135839.3   1.71974
1982      18882.223   1.96821    8153.281    4.03833    143399,4   1.73282
                                  38




                       Specific Growth Effects for Japan


Table 2


 YEAR        b5                                 CL           CK

 1967     1.07684    1.00324      1.00083      1.00876     1.01915
 1968     1.07067    0.99935      0.99982      1.00748     1.03046
 1969     1.05527    1.00374      0.99972      1.00340     1.04273
 1970     1.08580    1.00501      0.99544      1.00480     1.05290
 1971     1.06391    0.99889      0.99536      1.00250     1.05748
 1972     1.05092    0.99615      1.00575      1.00048     1.04859
 1973     1.11896    1.00896      0.98651      1.01287     1.04843
 1974     1.20088    1.03764      0.93356      0.99781     1.04943
 1975     1.06517    1.00448      0.98465      0.99852     1.02963
 1976     1.04707    0.99687      0.99819      1.00525     1.02302
 1977     1.03561    0.99836      1.00310      1.00778     1.02102
 1978     1.02194    0.99100      1.01825      1.00713     1.02091
 1979     1.02657    1.01418      0.97312      1.00752     1.02389
 1980     1.03724    1.01106      0.96138      1.00598     1.02419
 1981     1.01693    1.00657      0.99123      1.00472     1.02085
 1982     1.00753    1.01311      0.99179      1.00599     1.01991

Mean      1.06133    1.00554      0.98992      1.00506     1.03329


            b*      b*x          b*              L             1<




 1967     1.07762   1.00327     1.00084      1.00884
 1968     1.07123   0.99935     0,99982      1.00754       1.03068
 1969     1.05612   1.00380     0.99972      1.00345       1.04338
 1970     1.08720   1.00509     0.99536      1.00488       1.05375
 1971     1.06535   0.99887     0.99526      1.00255       1.05876
 1972     1.05236   0.99605     1.00590      1.00049       1.04996
 1973     1.12054   1.00908     0.98636      1.01303       1.04907
 1974     1.20005   1.03746     0.93389      0.99782       1.04925
 1975     1.06492   1.00447     0.98471      0.99852       1.02952
 1976     1.04729   0.99685     0.99818      1.00527       1.02312
 1977     1.03609   0.99834     1.00314      1.00789       1.02130
 1978     1.02235   0.99083     1.01859      1.00726       1.02130
 1979     1.02669   1.01424     0.97306      1.00756       1.02401.
 1980     1.03687   1.01096     0.96174      1.00592       1.02395
 1981     1.01693   1.00657     0.99123      1.00472       1.02084
 1982     1.00761   1.01324     0.99171      1.00605       1.02011

Mean      1.06183   1.00553     0.98997      1.00511       1.03465
                                       39




             Components of the Rt (Productivity) and Wt (Welfare) Indexes
                      for the Product and Sales Approaches, Japan


 Table 3


 YEAR         a           b            c            d           e              CO


  1967      1.18259      1.08122      1.02807      1.00324    1.00083        1.01438
  1968      1.17687      1.06981     1.03816      0.99935     0.99982       0.98816
  1969      1.17287      1.05892      1.04627     1.00374     0.99972       0.99172
  1970      1.20160      1.08625     1.05795      1.00501     0.99544        1.00089
  1971      1.09599      1.05780     1.06012      0.99889     0.99536       0.98152
 1972      1.15590      1.05289      1.04909      0.99615     1.00575       1.00087
 1973      1.22485      1.11377      1.06192      1.00896     0.98651        1.02469
 1974      1.18656      1.16329      1.04714      1.03764     0.93356       1.00962
 1975      1.10140      1.05353      1.02810      1.00448     0.98465       0.99170
 1976      1.12431      1.04190      1.02838      0.99687     0.99819       0.99090
 1977      1.09802      1.03712      1.02897      0.99836     1.00310       0.98906
 1978      1.09989      1.03123      1.02819      0.99100     1.01825       0.99697
 1979      1.07625      1.01314      1.03159      1.01418     0.97312       1.02983
 1980      1.08877      1.00821      1.03031      1.01106     0.96138       1.00071
 1981      1.05921      1.01463      1.02566      1.00657     0.99123       0.98131
 1982      1.06568      1.01237      1.02602      1.01311     0.99179       0.99743
Mean       1.13192      1.05599      1.03849      1.00554     0.98992       0.99936

              a*           b*          c             d*        e*           c0

   1967     1.20013     1.08205      1.02835      1.00327    1.00084        1.01774
  1968     1.16545     1.07034       1.03845     0.99935     0.99982        0.98708
  1969     1.16671     1.05983       1.04698      1.00380    0.99972        0.99233
  1970     1.20603     1.08767       1.05889     1.00509     0.99536        1.00081
  1971     1.07884     1.05909       1.06146     0.99887     0.99526        0.98160
  1972     1.16144     1.05439      1.05048      0.99605     1.00590        1.00081
  1973     1.25517     1.11529       1.06273     1.00908     0.98636        1.05548
  1974     1.19623     1.16270      1.04696      1.03746     0.93389
  1975     1.09231     1.05332      1.02799      1.00447     0.98471
  1976     1.11526     1.04209      1.02851      0.99685     0.99818        0.98633
  1977     1.08791     1.03762      1.02936      0.99834     1.00314        0.98915
  1978     1.09865     1.03181      1.02872      0.99083     1.01859        0.99711
  1979     1.10753     1.01325      1.03175      1.01424     0.97306
  1980     1.08862     1.00813      1.03001      1.01096     0.96174        1.00068
  1981     1.03995     1.01463      1.02565      1.00657     0.99123
  1982     1.06368     1.01249      1.02627      1.01324     0.99171.       0.99751

Mean       1.13274     1.05654      1.03891      1.00553
                                        40



Table 4
            Productivity, Terms of Trade Adjustuient and Welfare Measures
for the Product, Sales, and First Order Approximation Approaches, Japan

 YEAR           Rt            At

 1967     1. .06389     1 .00407      1 .06821
 1968     1 .   05963   0.99917       1. 05875
 1969     1 .05862      1.00346       1 .06229
 1970     1 . 04560     1.00042       1 .04604
 1971     0.97735       0.99426       0.97174
 11972    I .   04646   1.    00188   1 .04842
 1973     1.03561       0.99535       1 .03080
 1974     0 .   97408   0.96870       0.94359
 1975     1 .011687     0 .   98907   1 .00575

 11976    1 .04931      0.99506       1.04413
 1977     1 .02892      1.00146       1 .03042
 1978     1 .03734      1. 00909      1.04677
 1979     1 .02976      0.98692       1 .01629
 1980     1 .04814      0.97201       1 .01880
 1981     1.01781       0.99774       1 .01551
 1982                   1 .00480      1 . 03089

Mean      1 .03221      0.99522       1 .02740

                R*t           A*t                  T*t

 1967     1.05974       1.00411       1.06410     1.08298
 1968     1.06227       0.99917       1.06139     1.04768
 1969     1.05958       1.00351       1.06331     1.05515
 1970     1.04631       1.00043       1.04676     1.04761
 1971     0.97765       0.99413       0.97192     0.95403
 1972     1.04775       1.00193       1.04977     1.05063
 1973     1.00333       0.99532       0.99863     1.05403
 1974                   0.96887
 1975                   0.98911
 1976     1.05497       0.99504       1.04973     1.03538
 1977     1.02974       1.00148       1.03126     1.02008
 1978     1.03805       1.00925       1.04765     1.04463
 1979                   0.98691
 1980     1.04766       0.97228       1.01862     1.01931
 1981.                  0.99774
 1982     1.02623       1.00484       1.03120     1.02863

Mean      1.03777       0.99526       1.03620     1.03668
                                 41



Table 4 contd.



            Rt        At                  Tt

 1967     1.06432    1.00411   1.06872   1.08287
 1968    1.06001    0.99917    1.05911   1.04753
 1969    1.05941     1.00351   1.06316    1.05503
 1970    1.04609    1.00044    1.04652   1.04737
 1971    0.97693    0.99411    0.97116   0.95398
 1972    1.04769    1.00192    1.04971   1.05056
 1973    1.03541    0.99538    1.03046   1.05362
 1974    0.97139    0.97052    0.94329   0.95176
 1975    1.01699    0.98884    1.00576   0.99780
 1976    1.04952    0.99504    1.04431   1.03534
 1977    1.02930    1.00147    1.03082   1.02005
 1978    1.03811    1.00917    1.04764   1.04461
 1979    1.02966    0.98715    1.01632   1.04555
 1980    1.04750    0.97225    1.01859   1.01929
 1981    1.01782    0.99771    1.01551   0.99706
 1982    1.02622    1.00485    1.03119   1.02863

Mean     1.03228    0.99535
                                             42




              U.S.   Quantities   and Prices of K,L,Y,X,M, and S (Sales)


Table 5


YEAR      K                     L                 PL         Y           Py

 1967     254.516    0.92252      543.092         0.72204     788.585    0.79501
 1968     266.369    0.95383      556.789         0.77277     838.986    0.81567
 1969     278.533    0.94054      576.440         0.82668     872.243    0.84667
 1970     290.697    0.90078      570.485         0.88226     863.168    0.88646
 1971     300.990    0.95611      573.463         0.93318     888.341    0.92636
 1972     311.907    1.00000      595.496         1.00000     938.255    0.96712
 1973     326.255    1.09631      625.866         1.06135    1021.939    1.00000
 1974     340.914    1.08115      630.035         1.15423    1037.676    1.05601
 1975     350.272    1.21930      611.574         1.22917    1019.453    1.15632
 1976     356.822    1.32665      635.394         1.32006    1038.203    1.26385
 1977     366.179    1.48218      666.360         1.40568    1086.373    1.33211
 1978     379.279    1.57942      705.067         1.53092    1188.673    1.41203
 1979     393.627     1.64533     736.629         1.66222    1229876 1.52217
 1980     407.663    1.70086      743.179         1.78329    1214.455 1.66221
 1981     419.203     1.93726     759.257          1.93094   1257.408 1.81181
 1982     435.110    1.86782      738.415         2.06104    1177.835 1.98212


          X                       M                          S


 1967     36.0953    0.84947      35.6903         0.80249        779.516 0.80.182
 1968     38.9682    0.86270      43.2146         0.81339     830.649    0.82588
 1969     40.8635    0.89104      45.5838         0.83500     860.247    0.86056
 1970     45.2778    0.93788      47.481.5        0.88906     846.679    0.90359
 1971     44.6520    0.96959      51.5564         0.94030     869.694    0.95239
 1972     49.3530    1.00000      58.6285         1.00000     916.821    1.00000
 1973     61.2051    1.16592      62.7543         1.17375     981.204    1.04900
 1974     65.9362    1.48958      60.7473         1.76037     996.297    1.10873
 1975     63.9734    1.66677      53.1780         1.94587     960.740    1.22404
 1976     66.5975    1.71765      65.1605         1.96222     994.593    1.33298
 1977     66.9110    1.78929      72.8799         2.13216    1076.490    1.40762
 1978     74.1455    1.90020      78.9832         2.29565    1146.155    1.49912
 1979     82.6177    2.16876      80.0676         2.70617    1182.880    1.61455
 1980     91.4960    2.40338      73.4325         3.41670    1160.537    1.76632
 1981     88.0600    2.63230      74.0626         3.62441    1185.064    1.95356
 1982     79.7703    2.62128      71.8893         3.53622    1116.955    2.12937
                                       43




                         Specific Growth Effects for   the   U.S.


 Table 6


  YEAR        b5             b            bm           CL             CK


  1968      1.02998      1.00076      0.99938      1.01574           1.01712
  1969     1.04210       1.00159     0.99873      1.02234           1.01634
  1970     1.05005       1.00269     0.99685      0.99326           1.01501
  1971     1.05416       1.00180     0.99699      1.00341           1.01212
  1972     1.05042       1.00165     0.99641      1.02494           1.01243
 1973      1.04428      1.00967      0.98960      1.03303           1.01572
 1974      1.06233       1.01974     0.96660      1.00437           1.01520
 1975      1.10429      1.01017      0.99116      0.98083           1.00950
 1976      1.08935      1.00267      0.99926      1.02470           1.00672
 1977      1.05699      1.00344      0.99191      1.03074           1.00946
 1978      1.06662      1.00497      0.99244      1.03669           1.01280
 1979      1.07876      1.01195      0.98238      1.02881           1.01313
 1980      1.09574      1.01056      0.97322      1.00581           1.01216
 1981      1.10775      1.00962      0.99309      1.01401           1.00982
 1982      1.09163      0.99959      1.00271      0.98213           1.01321
Mean       1.06830      1.00606      0.99138      1.01339           1.01272

             b*s       b*x          b*,           C*L


                                   0.99938       1.01575         1.01713
 1969      1.04200    1.00159      0.99874       1.00286        1.01630
  1970      1.05000    1.00269     0.99685      0.99327          1.01499
 1971      1.05400    1.00179      0.99700      1.00340         1.01207
 1972      1.05000    1.00164      0.99644       1.02473        1.01233
 1973      1.04400    1.00962      0.98966      1.03281         1.01562
 1974      1.06200    1.01963      0.96680      1.00435         1.01513
 1975      1.10400    1.01015      0.99119      0.98089         1.00948
 1976      1.08900    1.00266      0.99926      1.02460         1.00669
 1977      1.05600    1.00338      0.99205      1.03021         1.00931
 1978      1.06500    1.00485      0.99261      1.03581         1.01249
 1979      1.07700    1.01169      0.98276      1.02818         1.01285
 1980      1.09400    1.01038      0.97367      1.00571         1.01194
 1981      1.10600    1.00947      0.99319      1.01379         1.00966
 1982      1.09000    0.99960      1.00267      0.98243         1.01298

Mean       1.06753    1.00599      0.99148
                                   44




          Components of the Rt (Productivity) and t (Welfare) Indexes
                   for the Product and Sales Approaches, U.S.


Table 7


YEAR        a          b            c            d           e              Co


 1968     1.09160    1.03013      1.03313      1.00076     0.99938        1.00567
 1969     1.07913    1.04243      1.03905      1.00159     0.99873        1.00017
 1970     1.03610    1.04955      1.00816      1.00269     0.99685        0.99742
 1971     1.07553    1.05288      1.01556      1.00180     0.99699        1.00710
 1972     1.10258    1.04838      1.03767      1.00165     0.99641        1.00496
 1973     1.12620    1.04341      1.04926      1.00967     0.98960        0.99239
 1974     1.07223    1.04712      1.01963      1.01974     0.96660        1.00627
 1.975    1.07595    1.10566      0.99016      1.01017     0.99116        0.98925
 1976     1.11293    1.09145      1.03158      1.00267     0.99926        1.01414
 1977     1.12750    1.05205      1.04049      1.00344     0.99191        1.01675
 1978     1.13456    1.06381      1.04996      1.00497     0.99244        1.00312
 1979     1.11534    1.07242      1.04232      1.01195     0.98238        0.99830
 1980     1.07827    1.07766      1.01804      1.01056     0.97322        0.99660
 1981     1.12857    1.11068      1.02397      1.00962     0.99309        1.00275
 1982     1.02477    1,09415      0.99510      0.99959     1.00271        1.00297

Mean      1.09208    1.06545      1.02627      1.00606     0.99138        1.00252

                a*         h*       c             d*         e*           c*0


  1968    1.09756    1.03015      1.03315      1.00076     0.99938
  1969    1.07913    1.04234      1.03896      1.00159     0.99874      1.00017
  1970    1.03344    1.04951      1.00816      1.00269     0.99685
  1971    1.08265    1.05272      1.01552      1.00179     0.99700
  1972    1.10690    1.04798      1.03736      1.00164     0.99644      1.00479
  1973    1.11731    1.04314      1.04895      1.00962     0.98966      0.99141
  1974    1.07834    1.04690      1.01953      1.01963     0.96680      1.00678
  1975    1.06460    1.10537      0.99019      1.01015     0.99119
  197€    1.12737    1.09109      1.03146      1.00266     0.99926
  1977    1.14295    1.05115      1.03979      1.00338     0.99205      1.01655
  1978    1.13452    1.06226      1.04875      1.00485     0.99261      1.00293
  1979    1.11093    1.07080      1.04139      1.01169     0.98276      0.99838
  1980    1.07334    1.07625      1.01772      1.01038     0.97367      0.99670
  1981    1.12937    1.10888      1.02359      1.00947     0.99319      1.00259
  1982    1.02735    1.09247      0.99519      0.99960     1.00267      1.00294

Mean      1.09372     1.06473     1.02598      1.00600     0.99148      1.00232
                                         45



 Table 8

               Productivity, Terms of Trade Adjustment and Welfare Measures
          for the Product, Sales, and First Order Approximation Approaches, U.S.

  YEAR        Rt            At


   1968      1.02569      1.00014      1.02583
  1969       0.99630     1.00032      0.99662
  1970       0.97918     0.99953      0.97872
  1971       1.00585     0.99879      1.00463
  1972       1.01351     0.99806       1.01155
  1973       1.02866     0.99917      1.02781
  1974       1.00427     0.98568      0.98989
  1975      0.98280      1.00124      0.98402
  1976      0.98846      1.00193      0.99036
  1977      1.03002      0.99532      1.02520
  1978      1.01576      0.99737      1.01309
  1979      0.99779      0.99412      0.99192
  1980      0.98284      0.98350      0.96662
 1981       0.99233      1.00264      0.99495
  1982      0.94120      1,00231      0.94337

Mean        0.99900      0.99734      0.99631

              R*t          A*t          W*t          T*t


 1968                   1.00014
 1969      0.99631      1.00032        0.99663     0.99680
 1970                   0.99953
 1971                   0.99879
 1972      1.01333      0.99807       1.01137      1.01622
 1973      1.02996      0.99918       1.02912      1.02028
 1974      1.00349      0.98578       0.98922      0.99593
 1975                   1.00124
 1976                   1 .00192
 1977      1.02870      0.99540       1.02397     1.04092
 1978      1.01539      0.99743       1.01278     1.01575
 1979      0.99785      0.99425       0.99211     0.99050
 1980      0.98316      0.98378       0.96721     0.96403
 1981      0.99244      1.00260       0.99503     0.99760
 1982      0.94217      1.00227       0.94431     0.94708
Mean       1.00028      0.99738
                               46



Table 8 contd.



            Rt        At                 Tt

 1968      1.02572   1.00010   1.02582   1.03139
 1969      0.99634   100024    0.99658   0.99675
 1970      0.97941   0.99934   0.97876   0.97628
 1971      1.00599   0.9986i   1.00458   1.01147
 1972      1.01354   0.99787   1.01137   1.01615
 1973      1.02903   0.99852   1.02757   1.02018
 1974      1.00404   0.98584   0.98991   0.99591
 1975      0.98327   1.00079   0.98409   0.97388
 1976      0.98833   1.00190   0.99019   1.00353
 1977      1.02968   0.99512   1.02463   1.04085
 1978      1.01552   0.99715   1.01260   1.01559
 1979      0.99830   0.99358   0.99194   0.99033
 1980      0.98403   0.98256   0.96713   0.96395
 1981      0.99247   1.00239   0.99487   0.99746
 1982      0.94218   1.00236   0.94438   0.94715

Mean       0.99919   0.99709   0.99630   0.99872
                                                   47




                     Productivity, Terms of Trade and Welfare Measures,
              Product and First Order Approximation Approaches, U.S. and Japan


 Table 9


 Japan


  YEAR        Rt           Rt           At              At                              Tt

  1968         1.05963      1.06001      0.99917     0.99917                 1.05911     1.04753
  1969        1.05862      1.05941       1.00346     1.00351                 1.06316     1.05503
  1970         1.04560      1.04609      1.00042     1.00044       1.04604   1.04652     1.04737
  1971        0.97735      0.97693      0.99426      0.99411      0.97174    0.97116    0.95398
  1972        1.04646      1.04769       1.00188     1.00192       1.04842   1.04971    1.05056
  1973        1.03561      1.03541      0.99535     0.99538       1.03080    1.03046    1.05362
  1974        0.97408      0.97139      0.96870     0.97052       0.94359    0.94329    0.95176
  1975        1.01687      1.01699      0.98907     0.98884       1.00575    1.00576    0.99780
  1976        1.04931      1.04952      0.99506
  1977
                                                    0.99504       1.04413    1.04431    1.03534
              1.02892      1.02930      1.00146     1.00147       1.03042    1.03082    1.02005
  1978        1.03734      1.03811      1.00909     1.00917       1.04677    1.04764    1.04461
  1979        1.02976      1.02966      0.98692     0.98715       1.01629    1.01632    1.04555
  1980        1.04814      1.04750      0.97201     0.97225       1.01880    1.01859    1.01929
  1981        1.01781      1.01782      0.99774     0.99771       1.01551    1.01551    0.99706
  1982        1.02596      1.02622

Mean          1.03010      1.03014     0.99463      0.99477       1.02468    1.02490    1.02321
 (1968-82)

U.S.

             Rt           Rt           At           At                                 Tt
                         1.02572      1.00014     1.00010      1.02583   1.02582   1.03139
 1969      0.99630      0.99634       1.00032    1.00024      0.99662              0.99675
  1970     0.97918      0.97941      0.99953     0.99934       0.97872             0.97628
 1971       1.00585     1.00599      0.99879     0.99861      1.00463    1.00458   1.01147
 1972       1.01351      1.01354     0.99806     0.99787       1.01155   1.01137   1.01615
 1973      1.02866      1.02903      0.99917     0.99852      1.02781              1.02018
 1974      1.00427      1.00404      0.98568     0.98584      0.98989              0.99591
 1975      0.98280      0.98327      1.00124     1.00079      0.98402    0.98409   0.97388
 1976      0.98846      0.98833      1.00193     1.00190      0.99036              1.00353
 1977      1.03002      1.02968      0.99532     0.99512      1.02520    1.02463
 1978      1.01576      1.01552      0.99737     0.99715      1.01309              1.01559
 1979      0.99779      0.99830      0.99412     0.99358      0.99192    0.99194   0.99033
 1980      0.98284      0.98403      0.98350     0.98256      0.96662    0.96713   0.96395
 1981      0.99223      0.99247      1.00264     1.00239      0.99495              0.99746
 1982      0.94120      0.94218      1.00231     1.00236      0.94337    0.94438   0.94715
Mean       0.99899      0.99919
                                             48




             Average Growth Rates for Productivity and Welfare, Selected Years
                                         Japan   and the U.S.


Table   10




YEARS               Rt              Rt                                            Tt

Japan

                  .03010           .03014             .02468        .02490       .02321
 1968--82
 1973—82          .02638           .02619             .01830        .01839       .01930

 1968—73          .03721           .03759             .03634        .03669       .03468
                  .02096           .02052             .01094        .01093       .01157
 1973-77
                  .03132           .03144             .02645        .02668       .02586
 1977—82


U.S.

 1968-82         - .00101     -
                                   .00081         —
                                                      .00369    — .00370     —   .00128
                                                  -   .00728    — .00548     — .00512
 1973—82         - .00359     -    .00332

 1968—73          .00820           .00834             .00753        .00745       .00870
 1973-77          .00684           .00687             .00346        .00328       .00687
 1977—82         - .00667     -.   .00630         - .01081      —
                                                                    .01074   - .00744
                                         49




    Footnotes
    1

    See Diewert and Morrison [1985j for further   details.
    2
    See Diewert and Morrison I1985j for further elaboration.
    3
Two other approximations were also tried for purposes of comparison.
included dividing the compensatjot of labor series by the               These
per worker to generate a price of labor                      average month hours
                                          series and using "cash earnings pe
regular worker" to approximate a labor price.  These two methods resulted In
series which bounded tile price of labor data used in the study.
4

It appeared important,
                       particularly for mineral fuels, to decompose these
indexes to allow for the individual
                                    impacts of the different categories to
appear: the fuel component of imports exhibited
price in the 1974 data                          a dramatic jump in value and
5                      which is important to capture explicitly.
This
l2.5 occursThis
            even though the depreciation rate was assumed to
         ---.
                assumption was made as a result of evidence
                                                             be quite high -—
investment is a significantjy higher                        that replacement
the U.S. experience.                 portion of total investment relative to
6
The BLS labor quantity series is
                                 an unweighted manhours series and hence is
unsuitable for our purposes. We wish to thank Mike Harper at BLS and Barbara
Fraumeni for their help in providing the updated data series.
                                      50




grpi
Denny, M., and M. Fuss [1983], "A General Approach to Intertemporal and
          Interspatial Productivity Comparisons", Journal of EconometricS,     23,
          pp. 315- 330.

Diewert, W.E., [19741, "ApplicationS of Duality Theory", pp. 106—71 in M.I).
          Intrilligator and D.A. Kendrick (eds.), Frontiers oflanUt±
          Economics,
          Vol. II, Amsterdam.

Diewert, W.E. [19831, "The Theory of the Output Price Index and the
          Measurement ot Rea.l Output Change,", pp. 1049-1113 in Price_Level
          Measurement, W.E. Diewert and C Montmarquet.te (eds.), Ottawa: Statistics
          Canada.

Diewert, W.E. and C.J. Morrison, [19851, "Adjusting Output and Productivit
          indexes for Changes in the Terms of Trade", National Bureau of Economic
          Research, Working Paper No. 1564, February

Research and Statistics Department, Bank of Japan, Economic Statistics1,
          various years.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics [1983], Trends in  Muftr
           Productivity, 1948-81, Bulletin 2178, Washington, D.C., 20402: U.S.
          Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis [1981], The National Income
          and Product Accounts of the  United_States29--76,_Statistical   Tables, A
          Supplement to the Survey of Current Business, Washington, D.C. 20402:
          U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis [1982,1983], SUriLof
          Current Business, 62:7 (July) and 63:7 (.July), Washington, D.C. 20402:
          U.S. Government Printing Office.
