                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INTERNATIONAL TAXATION AND CROSS-BORDER BANKING

                                         Harry Huizinga
                                         Johannes Voget
                                          Wolf Wagner

                                       Working Paper 18483
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18483


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2012




We thank Ben Lockwood and Nadine Riedel for comments on an earlier draft and Ata Can Bertay
for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Harry Huizinga, Johannes Voget, and Wolf Wagner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Taxation and Cross-Border Banking
Harry Huizinga, Johannes Voget, and Wolf Wagner
NBER Working Paper No. 18483
October 2012
JEL No. F23,G21,H25

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines empirically how international taxation affects the volume and pricing of cross-border
banking activities for a sample of banks in 38 countries over the 1998-2008 period. International double
taxation of foreign-source bank income is found to reduce banking-sector FDI. Furthermore, such
taxation is almost fully passed on into higher interest margins charged abroad. These results imply
that international double taxation distorts the activities of international banks, and that the incidence
of international double taxation of banks is on bank customers in the foreign subsidiary country. Our
analysis informs the debate about additional taxation of the financial sector that has emerged in the
wake of the recent financial crisis.


Harry Huizinga                                      Wolf Wagner
Tilburg University                                  Tilburg University
5000 LE Tilburg                                     5000 LE Tilburg
The Netherlands                                     The Netherlands
H.P.Huizinga@uvt.nl                                 wagner@uvt.nl

Johannes Voget
University of Mannheim
68131 Mannheim
Germany
voget@uni-mannheim.de
1.       Introduction
         The international tax system tends to discriminate against foreign-owned banks.
Specifically, domestic banks are just subject to a local corporate income tax on domestic income,
while foreign-owned banks in addition may be subject to non-resident dividend withholding tax
in the subsidiary country and corporate income tax on repatriated dividends in the parent
country. International double taxation potentially puts international banks at a competitive
disadvantage, with implications for the performance as well as the structure of the international
banking market.2 This paper examines empirically the impact of international taxation on bank
interest margins and pre-tax profitability as indices of banking-sector performance. Furthermore,
we investigate how international taxation affects banking FDI in terms of foreign-bank assets
and numbers, as measures of banking-sector structure.
         Our study of the international taxation of banking offers insights that are interesting from
two main perspectives. First, in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008-2009, many
countries are thinking of new taxes on their financial systems to help prevent a next crisis and
also to raise the overall tax contribution of the financial sector. A main new tax being considered
is the Financial Activities Tax, which is a tax on a bank’s combined profits and wage bill (see
IMF, 2010). In a recent communication, the European Commission (2010) has announced that it
is conducting an impact assessment study of the Financial Activities Tax (among other financial
taxes), which is potentially followed by a proposal for a European directive to coordinate such
taxation in the EU. Our analysis of international income taxation as applied to the banking sector
informs about the likely incidence and dislocation effects of a Financial Activities Tax, given
that the latter tax also is a tax on income derived from the financial sector. More directly, we
gain insight into the impact of the corporate income tax when some firms in a country are subject
to a differentially high level of tax – due to international double taxation.
         A second reason for studying the international double taxation of banking is that it
constitutes a barrier to further banking market integration. Regulatory barriers to international
banking have been reduced worldwide, but the drive at banking market unification has so far
stopped short of eliminating the international double taxation of banking income. This

2
  International expansion only makes sense for a bank if this provides benefits that exceed the cost of international
double taxation. These benefits potentially include being able to serve internationally active customers,
diversification gains, economies of scale, access to agglomeration benefits in international financial centers, and
international regulatory arbitrage. See McCauley, McGuire and von Goetz (2010), Claessens and Van Horen (2009),
and Committee on the Global Financial System (2010).


                                                         2
potentially explains why many countries’ banking markets remain dominated by national banks,
even if many banking markets have become more international, as measured by the external
assets and liabilities of domestic banks as well as the ownership of banks.3
         Our empirical analysis of the impact of international taxation on banks is based on a
sample of individual banks in 38 countries during the 1998-2008 period. We estimate that bank
interest margins almost fully reflect the additional international taxation of dividends paid by
foreign subsidiaries. The incidence of international taxation thus appears to be on a bank’s
lending and depositor customers. This result is robust to limiting the sample to intra-EU banking,
to limiting the sample to banks that are foreign subsidiaries, and to adjusting the interest margin
for a bank’s loan loss provisioning as a measure of credit risk.
         We do not find that a bank’s pre-tax profitability is materially affected by international
double taxation of dividend income. This may reflect that higher international taxation of a
foreign subsidiary’s income triggers more outward profit shifting to the parent bank (and higher
tax-deductible costs to hide this profit shifting). Consistent with a profit shifting motive, we
further find that a foreign subsidiary’s reported profits are positively related to the corporate
income tax in the parent country.
         Using a gravity model approach, we investigate the impact of international double
taxation on banking FDI on a bilateral aggregated basis. We find evidence that international
double taxation of dividend income reduces banking-sector FDI in terms of foreign-bank assets.
In addition, we find that the number of foreign banks is significantly reduced by international
double taxation.
         The responsiveness of the number of international banking establishments to international
double taxation suggests that banks face a two-step international banking decision: first, they
consider whether to set up a foreign subsidiary and, second, they determine the pricing (and
quantity) of their foreign financial services. The endogeneity of the initial FDI decision w.r.t.
international double taxation implies that the estimation of the impact of such taxation on net
interest margins may be biased. We apply a two-stage Heckman estimation to net interest
revenue regressions to account for the possible endogeneity of the FDI decision, confirming a
major pass through of international double taxation into higher interest margins. Taken together,

3
 See Allen, Beck, Carletti, Lane, Schoenmaker, and Wagner (2011, Table 1.1) for information on the development
of the external assets and liabilities of domestic banking systems relative to GDP of BIS reporting countries over the
2002-2009 period.


                                                          3
our results indicate that international double taxation increases interest margins, as it causes
foreign-owned firms to reduce their host-country supply of financial services by way of FDI.
        Several papers have previously examined the tax and non-tax determinants of bank
interest margins and profitability. For a sample of banks in 80 countries over the years 1988-
1995, Demirgüç-Kunt and Huizinga (1999) find that interest margins and pre-tax profitability are
negatively related to official reserves, which represent a form of implicit taxation. Interest
margins and profitability are further positively related to the local corporate tax rate. The
estimated coefficient on the corporate tax rate in the profitability regression is consistent with a
full pass-through of the corporate tax to bank customers. Demirgüç-Kunt and Huizinga (2001)
extend this analysis to distinguish between domestically owned and foreign-owned banks. The
profitability of foreign-owned banks is found to rise relatively little with the local corporate tax
rate, which can be explained by international profit shifting or by the international double tax
relief provided by parent countries. The present paper goes beyond Demirgüç-Kunt and Huizinga
(2001) by including in the analysis both host and parent country taxation payable by foreign-
owned banks, thus accounting for international double taxation.4
        An extensive literature, surveyed by Ederveen and de Mooij (2006), examines the impact
of taxation on FDI. Several authors have previously found a role for parent-country taxation to
affect the location of FDI. For US multinationals, Kemsley (1998) finds that the host country tax
only affects the ratio of US exports to foreign production over the period 1984-1992 if the
multinationals find themselves in excess credit positions. Analogously, a role of parent-country
taxation in affecting FDI into the United States is found by Hines (1996) who shows that foreign
countries with worldwide taxation invest relatively much in US states with high state taxes. This
reflects that multinationals located in countries with worldwide taxation may be able to obtain
foreign tax credits for US state corporate income taxes. Egger, Loretz, Pfaffermayr, and Winner
(2009) construct an effective tax rate on a bilateral basis that reflects overall host and parent
country taxation, and they find that this bilateral effective tax rate has a negative impact on

4
  Demirgüç-Kunt, Laeven and Levine (2003) examine the impact of bank regulations, market structure and national
institutions on the bank net interest margins for a sample of banks from 72 countries over the years 1995-1999 while
not considering taxation. Martinez Peria and Mody (2004) examine how foreign bank participation affects interest
margins of Latin American banks during the period 1995-2000, distinguishing between individual-bank and
banking-system foreign ownership. Maudos and Guevara (2003) examine the impact of bank market power on
interest spreads in six large European banking markets in the period 1993-2000. Valverde and Fernandez (2007)
examine the impact of a bank’s activity mix on bank margins in Europe.



                                                         4
bilateral FDI stocks after controlling for host and parent country unilateral effective tax rates.
Barrios, Huizinga, Laeven and Nicodème (2012) examine how international double taxation
affects foreign subsidiary location, finding that parent country corporate income taxation
discourages subsidiary location. Huizinga and Voget (2009) find a negative impact of
international double taxation on headquarter location following international M&As using
individual deal as well as aggregated data. The present paper examines the impact of
international double taxation on FDI in the banking sector only, using information for all banks
rather than just for those that are newly formed through M&As. Focusing on the banking sector
has the advantage that bank-level data allow us to identify a price response (through interest
margins) and a quantity response (through FDI) to international double taxation.
        This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the international tax system, and it
provides some summary information on the international tax rates that apply to our sample of
banks. Section 3 presents the empirical results on the impact of international taxation on bank
interest margins and profitability. Section 4 in turn presents results on how international taxation
affects banking sector FDI. This section also examines whether the results on interest margins
and bank profitability are robust to controlling for the potential endogeneity of FDI. Section 5
concludes.


2.      The international taxation of banks
2.1     The international tax system
        In this section, we describe the international tax system that applies to a bank owned by
some foreign parent bank. We consider the additional international taxation that is levied on the
subsidiary’s dividend and also its interest payments to outside investors on the assumption that
these payments are first made to the parent firm which then passes them on to final investors.
Thus, we will assume that the parent bank pays out any dividends received from the foreign
subsidiary as dividends to investors, while any interest received is paid out as interest. We
examine the international tax system as it applies to dividend and interest payments in turn. 5
      A bank’s income is subject to the local corporate income tax before it can be paid out as
dividends. For a domestic bank located in country i, the corporate income tax ti is the only tax on


5
 See Huizinga, Laeven and Nicodème (2008) for an alternative description of the international tax treatment of the
debt and equity finance of a multinational firm.


                                                         5
income paid out as dividends at the corporate level. Table 1 indicates the statutory corporate tax
rate on corporate profit in 2008 for the 38 countries in this study, which in addition to many
European countries includes Australia, Canada, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, South Korea and
the United States.6
         Dividends paid out by a foreign subsidiary located in country i can be subject to a
nonresident dividend withholding tax wie levied by the subsidiary country. Bilateral dividend
withholding taxes for our sample of countries in 2008 are presented in Table 2. Among long-
standing EU member states, nonresident dividend withholding taxes for payments to parent firms
are zero on account of the EU Parent-Subsidiary Directive. Non-EU countries such as Canada,
Japan, New Zealand, and the United States maintain non-zero dividend withholding taxes in a
considerable number of cases.
           The parent country may or may not tax any income generated abroad. In case the parent
country operates a territorial or source-based tax system, it effectively exempts foreign-source
income from taxation. The effective tax on income generated in country i and paid out as
dividends in country p then is t i + wie (1  t i ) , and the additional tax on account of foreign

ownership, denoted τi, equals wie (1  t i ) .
            Alternatively, the parent country operates a worldwide or residence-based tax system. In
this instance, the parent country subjects income reported in country i to taxation, but it generally
provides a foreign tax credit for taxes already paid in country i to reduce the potential for double
taxation. The OECD model treaty, which summarizes recommended practice, gives countries the
choice between an exemption and a foreign tax credit as the only two ways to relieve double
taxation (OECD, 1997). The foreign tax credit reduces domestic taxes on foreign source income
one-for-one with the taxes already paid abroad. The foreign tax credit can be indirect in the sense
that it applies to both any withholding tax and the underlying subsidiary-country corporate
income tax, or it is direct and applies only to the withholding tax. In either case, foreign tax
credits are generally limited to prevent the domestic tax liability on foreign source income from
becoming negative.
           In the indirect credit regime, an international bank will pay no corporate income tax in
the parent country, if the parent tax rate tp is less than t i  wie (1  t i ). The international bank then

6
    The sample is restricted to OECD countries and countries of the European Economic Area due to data availability.


                                                           6
has unused foreign tax credits and is said to be in an excess credit position. Alternatively, tp
exceeds ti  wie  ti wie . In that instance, the bank pays tax in the parent country at a rate equal to

the difference between tp and ti  wie  ti wie . The effective, combined tax rate on the dividend
income then equals the parent country tax rate, tp. To summarize, with the indirect credit system,
the effective rate on income generated in country i, is given by max [ t p , ti  wie  ti wie ], and the

additional tax on account of foreign ownership τi, equals max [ t p  t i , wie (1  t i ) ]. With a direct

foreign tax credit, the international bank pays no corporate income tax in the parent country, if
the parent tax rate tp is less than wie . In the more common case where tp exceeds wie , the bank

instead pays tax in the parent country at a rate equal to (1  t i )(t p  wie ) . The effective, two-

country tax rate now is given by t i  (1  t i ) max[ t p , wie ] , and the additional international tax τi,

equals (1  t i ) max[ t p , wie ] . A few countries with worldwide taxation do not provide foreign tax

credits, but instead allow foreign taxes to be deducted from the multinational’s taxable income.
In the scenario, the effective rate of taxation on dividends is given by 1  (1  ti )(1  wie )(1  t p ) ,

and  i equals (1 t i )[1  (1  wie )(1  t p )] .

        Columns 2-4 of Table 1 provide information on the double taxation rules applied to
incoming dividends in 2008. Several countries are seen to discriminate between international tax
treaty partners and non-treaty countries. We have collected information on the existence of
bilateral tax treaties to assess the relevant double tax relief method. Also, several EU countries
are seen to offer relatively generous double tax relief for intra-EU dividends.
       Next, we consider the additional international taxation that may apply to interest payments
by a foreign subsidiary bank that reach final investors via an international parent bank. Interest
expense on debt is generally deductible from taxable corporate income in the subsidiary country
i, but the subsidiary country may levy a non-resident withholding tax wid on interest payments to
the parent bank in country p. As seen in Table 3, bilateral nonresident withholding taxes on
interest on interest payments to related parties tend to be zero in the EU on account of the
Interest and Royalties Directive, even if non-EU countries such as Canada, Japan and the United
States frequently levy positive nonresident interest withholding taxes.




                                                       7
      The parent country generally applies corporate income tax to the parent bank’s interest
receipt from its foreign subsidiary. As before, the parent country has three main options
regarding double tax relief: (i) an exemption, (ii) a foreign tax credit, or (iii) a deduction. For
each of these three cases, an additional international tax rate on interest on account of the
subsidiary’s foreign ownership can be derived, and formulae are presented in Table 4. Columns 5
and 6 of Table 1 provide information on the double taxation rules applicable to incoming interest
from treaty and non-treaty signatory countries, respectively. As seen in the table, most countries
provide a foreign tax credit (to be applied to any nonresident interest withholding tax), a few
countries allow a deduction in the absence of a tax treaty, and no country exempts foreign
interest income.


2.2    International taxation of banks in the sample
       Data on individual banks are taken from Bankscope. This data source provides
accounting data on banks worldwide in a standardized format. In addition, Bankscope contains
data on ownership relationships among banks. For each bank, Bankscope provides information
on major owners (and also information on any owned subsidiaries). Our aim is to have a sample
of all the banking establishments that operate in a country, and for each establishment provide
information on majority foreign ownership, if any. To construct a comprehensive sample of the
banks in a country, we include unconsolidated parent firms and all subsidiaries. The ownership
information provided for subsidiaries is then used to see if there is a corporate major shareholder
and to find out where such a major shareholder has its residence. Our country coverage is limited
to the countries for which we have collected tax information as listed in Table 1. Thus, we
include banks that are located in one of these countries and that have majority owners resident in
one of these countries. Our sample covers the years 1998-2008.
       Table 5 provides a breakdown of our sample of banks by the country of location. Banks
located in the US comprise 46% of the sample, or 4462 US banks in an overall sample of 9731.
Other countries with at least 400 observations are France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and
Switzerland. Table 5 also provides information on the share of assets held by foreign-owned
banks. The foreign-bank asset share is on average 9.5% internationally. The foreign ownership
share by assets is very high in the Baltic states (96.5% in Estonia, 49.7% in Latvia, and 80.0 in
Lithuania) and also in Luxembourg (67.2%), while it is lowest in the US at 1.2%.



                                                   8
         Table 6 provides information on the local and international tax burdens on banks by
country of residence. The host country corporate income tax on average is 36.1% for all banks.
The average dividend double tax, corresponding to the expressions in Table 4, is calculated as
0.8% for all banks. The average interest double tax is further shown to be positive only for some
banks located in Cyprus and Switzerland. In the empirical work below, we will only consider the
international double taxation of dividend income, given the dearth of observations where the
international double taxation of interest income is positive. The final two columns of Table 6
provide information on the average international taxes for only the sample of foreign-owned
banks. For these banks, the average dividend double tax amounts to 3.5%, to suggest that
foreign-owned banks on average face a 10% higher tax than domestic banks that are only subject
the local corporate tax rate.


3.       Bank interest margins and profitability
         In this section, we examine how the international taxation of banks affects bank interest
margins and bank profitability. A bank’s pre-tax profits are defined by the following accounting
identity
         Pre-tax profits = Net interest income + Net other operating income – Loan loss provisions
– Overhead.
         In the empirical work, we will use interest income and profitability measures scaled by
total bank assets. Thus, net interest income over assets is a bank’s net interest income divided by
total assets. Net interest income over assets has a sample mean of 2.8%, as seen in Table 7.
Similarly, Pre-tax profits over assets is the ratio of a bank’s pre-tax profits to total assets. This
profit variable reflects variation in all the various items in a bank’s income statement, including
its net interest income. The mean of this variable is1.3%. Pre-tax profits over assets can be split
into Taxes over assets and Post-tax profits over assets with mean values of 0.4% and 1.0%,
respectively. The Taxes over assets variable reflects the taxes paid by the reporting bank, and
hence they exclude any corporate taxes to be paid by an international parent bank and any
nonresident dividend withholding taxes. These latter taxes are to be paid out of the dividends
distributed by the bank.7


7
 The Taxes over assets variable similarly excludes any nonresident interest withholding taxes that are to be paid out
of interest paid by the bank and received by nonresidents.


                                                          9
        The margin and profitability variables will be explained by several tax rate variables in
the empirical work. Among these, the local or host country corporate income tax has a mean of
35.2% for the observations in our sample. Next, the parent country tax is the corporate income
tax rate in the parent country in case a bank is foreign-owned. This variable is set to zero in case
of domestic ownership. The mean of the parent country tax variable is seen to be 7.4%.
International double taxation of dividend income has a mean of 0.8%.
        The impact of bank taxes on bank net interest revenue and profitability reflects the extent
to which these taxes are shifted onto bank customers and other related parties through different
price setting. In practice, banks may be able to shift some of their taxes to bank retail customers,
other bank liability holders, bank employees and further providers of banking inputs. For
instance, a bank could shift some of its taxes to its retail customers in the form of a higher
lending rate and a lower deposit rate, giving rise to higher net interest revenues and higher pre-
tax profitability.
        Banking taxation may also affect the recorded net interest revenue and profitability as a
result of international profit shifting within a multinational bank. Higher host country taxation
and dividend double taxation, in particular, provide increased incentives to shift profits to an
international parent bank, implying lower recorded profitability of a foreign subsidiary bank.
International profit shifting thus may lead to a less positive or even negative relationship between
the taxation of subsidiary profits and recorded subsidiary profits. At the same time, recorded
subsidiary profits may be positively related to the parent country corporate tax rate, if higher
parent country taxation causes a multinational firm to shift profits from the parent bank towards
its foreign subsidiaries.
        Several bank-level and country-level variables are included in the analysis as controls.
Assets is the log of total bank assets in real terms to control for bank size. The ratio of earning
assets to total bank assets is the share of a bank’s assets that generates interest or dividend
income, and it proxies for a bank’s focus on interest-generating activities as opposed to fee-
generating activities. Foreign bank signals ownership by foreign shareholders with at least 50%
ownership. Foreign ownership potentially affects net interest revenue and profitability on
account of different interest margins and profitability in an economic sense as well as on account
of international profit shifting. Bank market share is a bank’s total loans as a share of all loans
provided by banks located in a certain country. A high bank-level market share may give rise to



                                                  10
market power, leading to higher net interest revenue and profitability. Alternatively, a high
market share could reflect bank efficiency, resulting in low interest margins to the extent that
bank customers reap the benefits of higher bank efficiency.
         Among the country-level controls, the national foreign ownership share is the share of
assets of foreign-owned banks in total banking system assets. A high share of foreign ownership
nationally suggests free entry of foreign banks, possibly reducing interest margins and
profitability. National top five market share is the share of loans of the top five lending banks in
total loans provided in a country. A highly concentrated lending market, as indicated by a high
top 5 lending share, may explain high interest margins and profitability. GDP per capita is the
log of real GDP per capita. Industrial growth rate is the growth rate of industrial production.
Strong industrial growth may imply high loan demand, pushing up net interest revenue and
profitability. Inflation rate is the rate of change in the consumer price index. High inflation may
increase net interest revenue, if lending rates more accurately reflect inflation than deposit rates.
Finally, real interest rate is the money market interest rate minus the inflation rate. High real
interest rates may reflect plentiful opportunities to invest profitably, pushing up interest margins
and bank profitability.
         Table 8 shows the results of regressions of the net interest income over assets variable.
The regressions include host country and year fixed effects, and standard errors are robust to
clustering at the bank level. In regression 1, the host country tax obtains a negative coefficient of
-0.015 that is statistically insignificant.8 The failure of the host country corporate tax to lead to
higher interest margins could reflect that higher host country taxation induces outward profit
shifting. Alternatively, it reflects that the incidence of the corporate income in open economies is
largely on labor, giving rise to lower wages. Consistent with this, Arulampalam, Devereux, and
Maffini (2012) estimate that an exogenous rise in the corporate tax of 1$ would reduce the wage
bill by 49 cents.
         In regression 1, the double dividend tax obtains a coefficient of 0.035 that is significant at
the 5% level. Thus, some of the incidence of international double taxation appears to be on the
foreign subsidiary’s lending and depositor customers and other suppliers of funds. International



8
 The coefficient for the tax rate reflects the long-run effect on the net-interest margin. An explicit modeling of
short-run dynamics would require longer time series. See also Verbeek (2008, p. 117-118).


                                                          11
double taxation, unlike host country taxation, is not primarily shifted to labor, as double taxation
only applies to a specific set of foreign bank owners rather than to banks generally.
           In regression 1 the assets variable obtains a coefficient of -0.002 that is significant at the
1% level. This may reflect that big banks deal with large customers that obtain favorable interest
rates. The bank-level foreign ownership dummy enters with a negative coefficient of -0.003 that
is significant at 5%. This could equally reflect that foreign-owned banks tend to deal with
sophisticated customers, or alternatively that they have to offer more attractive interest terms to
their customers on account of lack of information or distrust. Net interest income over assets is
further positively and significantly related to the bank’s own market share, as a large loan market
share may enable it to exercise market power in the loan market. Among the macroeconomic
variables, the net interest income relative to assets is positively and significantly related to the
growth rate of industrial production and to the rate of inflation.
           The estimated coefficient of 0.035 for the double tax variable in regression 1 implies a
certain sharing of the incidence of additional international taxation between the bank and its
customers. To evaluate this, let n be the net-of-tax net interest margin calculated as (1-t)b where t
is the combined national and international tax rate on net interest income and b is the pre-tax
interest margin. Tax revenue is denoted r and is equal to tb. A change in the combined tax rate t
changes the bank return by dn/dt = -b + (1-t)*db/dt, while the change in revenues is given by
dr/dt=b + t*db/dt. The share of the incidence on the bank is computed as –( dn/dt)/(dr/dt), while
the share of the incidence on bank customers equals (db/dt)/(dr/dt). To do the calculation, we set
b to its sample mean of 0.028, t is the combined summed mean dividend double tax and mean
host country tax of 0.36 (the sum of 0.352 and 0.008), and db/dt is the estimated coefficient of
0.035. The share of the incidence of a higher international double tax on the bank is now
calculated to be 13.8%, with the remaining share of 86.2% of the incidence being borne by the
bank’s loan customers and depositors.
           Member states of the EU do not impose discriminatory restrictions on intra-EU foreign
banking and they subscribe to a common set of basic minimum standards of bank regulation in
areas such as capital adequacy and deposit insurance.9 In the EU, however, there still is some
international double taxation of dividend income, as several EU member states continue to tax
the worldwide income of their resident multinational banks. A sample just of EU banks (located

9
    The European Union’s Second Banking Directive of 1989 allows EU banks to freely operate throughout the EU.


                                                        12
in the EU and with EU parent firms, if any) provides an interesting setting to test for the impact
of international taxation on interest margins and profitability, given that EU banking markets are
otherwise relatively uniform. In regression 2, we restrict the sample to only EU banks. The host
country tax enters this regression with negative coefficient that is insignificant, while the double
tax variable obtains a coefficient of 0.032 that is significant at the 5% level.
         Next, in regression 3 we restrict the sample to foreign owned banks, reducing the sample
from 9731 observations in regression 1 to 2135 observations. The coefficient for the host country
tax is estimated to be insignificant, while the coefficient of 0.038 for the double tax variable is
significant at the 5% level.
         Regression 4 includes bank fixed effects rather than country fixed effects to account for
possible unobserved bank heterogeneity. The host country tax now receives a positive coefficient
that is insignificant, while the double tax variable is estimated with a coefficient of 0.026 that is
significant at 5%.
         Finally, in regression 5 the dependent variable is the interest margin variable adjusted for
concurrent loan loss provisioning, to reflect differences across banks in the riskiness of their
credit portfolios. The host country tax now enters with a negative coefficient of -0.017 that is
significant at 5%. A negative coefficient is consistent with a profit shifting motive. Banks, in
particular, have an incentive to transfer questionable credits to high-tax countries before any loan
loss provisions are taken to benefit from the tax deductibility of such provisioning (or of the
implied subsequent write-offs) at the higher tax rate.
         Table 9 presents results of regressions of bank profitability and of the level of host
corporate income taxes paid. Specifically, the dependent variables in regressions 1-3 are pre-tax
profits over assets, taxes over assets, and post-tax profits over assets, respectively. In all three
regressions, the host country tax is seen to enter with negative coefficients that are statistically
significant, consistent with an international profit shifting motive. In particular, reported pre-tax
profitability would decline with profit shifting on account of the profits actually shifting abroad,
and also on account of the various costs the bank incurs to implement and hide the profit
shifting.10 The dividend double tax does not enter any of the three regressions with a statistically
significant coefficient, as higher income resulting from a pass through of the tax to bank


10
  These various costs are not reflected in the interest margin variable, which can explain a less negative response of
net interest income to the host country tax in the presence of profit shifting that for the case of pre-tax profitability.


                                                           13
customers and other input providers may be offset by increased outward profit shifting and its
associated costs.
        To further check for the presence of profit shifting, we next include the parent country tax
variable in regressions 1-3 of Table 9, with the results reported as regressions 4-6. A higher
parent country tax potentially leads to higher reported profitability at pertinent foreign
subsidiaries, as this provides a parent bank with the incentive to shift profits to its foreign
subsidiaries. In regression 4, pre-tax profitability increases significantly with the parent country
tax, consistent with a profit shifting incentive. Correspondingly, in regression 5 corporate taxes
paid in the host country are positively and significantly related to the parent country corporate
tax, reflecting that higher reported pre-tax profits lead to a higher host country tax liability. In
regression 6, post-tax profitability is also related positively to the parent country corporate tax,
but the relationship is not statistically significant. The profitability and taxation variables in
regressions 4-6 are qualitatively related to the host country tax and dividend double tax variables
as in regressions 1-3.


4.      FDI in the banking sector
        The previous section examined how international taxation affects net interest revenue and
bank profitability given the domestic and foreign ownership of banks. The evidence is consistent
with a significant pass-through of international taxation into higher interest margins. With elastic
demand for financial services, higher net interest revenues relative to assets can only be achieved
by cutting back the volume of financial services. Thus, international taxation should have a
discernible impact on the quantity of financial services provided by foreign-owned banks. In this
section, we estimate the impact of international taxation on the volume of foreign-provided
financial services as well on the number of international banking establishments. In addition, we
provide two-stage Heckman estimation of some of our bank interest margin and profitability
regressions. This accounts for the potential endogeneity of the FDI decision to international
double taxation.
        Our volume variable is the aggregate assets of foreign-owned banks in a particular
country as owned by corporate entities in another country. Aggregate assets of foreign banks on
a bilateral basis are expected to decline with dividend double taxation, if the average bank cuts
back its activities in countries where dividends are subject to double international taxation. As an



                                                  14
alternative banking FDI variable, we also consider the number of banks in a particular country
owned by corporate entities in another country. International taxation may prevent the
establishment of foreign ownership relationships between certain pairs of countries, or it may
cause highly taxed banks to sell their foreign subsidiaries to bring about a more tax efficient
ownership structure, thereby reducing the number of foreign owned banks. We apply a gravity
model to estimate the impact of international taxation on our indices of banking-sector FDI.
Previously, Wei (2000), Evenett (2003), and Buch, Kleinert and Toubal (2004) have used the
gravity model to explain FDI. Further, Di Giovanni (2005) and Huizinga and Voget (2009) have
applied the gravity model to the volume of cross-border M&as, while Portes and Rey (2005)
have estimated a gravity model of trade in financial assets.
         The gravity model relates our measures of cross-border banking to national and
international tax rates and to a range of non-tax controls. Among these controls, we include
standard gravity model variables such as the bilateral distance, contiguity (a dummy variable
signaling that two countries have a common border), and common official language (a dummy
variable signaling that two countries have a common official language). Also included are host
and potential parent country GDPs which are expected to be positively related to bilateral
banking FDI. Finally, we include indices of host and parent countries’ regulatory quality, and
indices of their use of capital controls. Inward banking FDI may be related negatively and
positively to host-country and parent-country regulatory quality respectively, if banking FDI is
driven by a need for a parent bank to be located in a country with relatively high regulatory
quality. Capital controls generally may discourage banking FDI. Table 11 shows summary
statistics for the variables in our banking FDI regressions.
         Following the modeling of trade flows in Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006), Table 11
shows estimation results of Poisson regressions, where the dependent variable is either the total
assets of foreign-owned banks or the number of foreign-owned banks on a bilateral aggregate
basis.11 The regressions include host country, parent country, and year fixed effects, and errors


11
   Silva and Tenreyro (2006, p. 645) indicate that the Poisson estimator is consistent if E[yi | xi ] = exp(xiβ) where yi
is the dependent variable and xi are the independent variables. The corresponding regression in their paper relates
the level of yi to the natural logarithm of each element of xi. Correspondingly in Table 10, the number of foreign-
owned bank and foreign owned assets are reported in levels, while distance, host GDP, and parent GDP are in logs.
The estimated coefficients for the logged right-hand-side variables are interpreted as elasticities, while the
coefficients on other variables including the tax variable are interpreted as semi-elasticities. Negative binomial
regressions are not considered as an alternative to the Poisson regressions because Bosquet and Boulhol (2010) point


                                                           15
are clustered at the host country level. We in turn consider the overall international sample and
the sample of only intra-EU banking relationships. In regression 1 for the overall sample, the
dependent variable is total assets of foreign-owned banks on a bilateral basis. The dividend
double tax obtains a significantly negative coefficient of -7.191. This estimated for the dividend
double tax implies that a 1 percentage point increase in this variable reduces bilateral FDI by
7.2%, which is economically significant given a mean dividend double tax of 3.5% for foreign-
owned banks as seen in Table 6.
         In regression 2 the dependent variable is the number of cross-border banks. The dividend
double tax is significantly negative with a coefficient of -3.297. This suggests that a one
percentage point increase in the dividend double tax reduces the number of cross-border banks
on a bilateral basis by 3.3%.12 This estimated coefficient of -3.297 is less negative than the
estimated coefficient in the corresponding foreign-bank assets regression 1. This suggests that a
higher dividend double tax leads to both fewer and smaller cross-border banks.13
        Next, regressions 3 and 4 of Table 12 reproduce the first two regressions of this table for
the intra-EU sample. When FDI is measured in terms of cross-border banking assets, the
estimated coefficient for the dividend double tax in regression 3 for the intra-EU sample of -
13.639 is more negative than the corresponding coefficient of -7.191 in regression 1 for the
wider sample. Thus, intra-EU banking FDI appears to be relatively sensitive to international
taxation, perhaps because EU banks from different countries offer similar services giving rise to
high demand elasticities at foreign-owned banks inside the EU. On the other hand, when FDI is
measured in terms of subsidiary banks abroad, then the estimated coefficient on the dividend
double tax for the intra-EU sample in regression 4 of -3.074 is very similar to the estimate of -
3.297 in regression 2 for the wider sample, although the coefficient is now insignificant in the
smaller sample.
        The responsiveness of the number of international banking establishments to international
double taxation suggests that banks face a two-step international banking decision: first, they
consider whether to set up a foreign subsidiary and, second, they determine the pricing (and

out that negative binomial regressions with a continuous dependent variable are scale-dependent. Instead, employing
robust errors accommodates deviations from the Poisson distribution.
12
   Consistent with this, Barrios, Huizinga, Laeven, and Nicodème (2012) report evidence that the international
location decisions of multinational firms reflect international double taxation of corporate income.
13
   Verbeek (2008, p. 250) points out that a selection bias does not arise if selection depends upon the exogenous
variables only. Hence, a significant effect of dividend double taxes on the number of cross-border banks does not
imply a selection bias for the interest margin regressions in the previous section.


                                                        16
quantity) of their foreign financial services. The endogeneity of the initial FDI decision w.r.t.
international double taxation implies that the estimation of the impact of such taxation on net
interest margins may be biased, if the errors at the first-stage FDI stage are correlated with the
errors at the second-stage pricing stage. To conclude this section, we apply a two-stage Heckman
estimation to several of the net interest revenue, profitability and taxation regressions from
Tables 8 and 9 where the first-stage regressions are probit specifications estimating positive
bilateral banking FDI corresponding to the FDI regression 1of Table 11. Variables at the second
stage are aggregated at the bilateral national level on a yearly basis.14 The results of the second-
stage regressions are reported in Table 12. Regression 1 re-estimates the net interest revenue
regression 1 of Table 8, yielding an estimated coefficient for the double tax variable of 0.051 that
is significant at the 1% level, somewhat higher than the corresponding estimate of 0.035 in Table
8. Regression 2 reproduces the net interest revenue adjusted for loan loss provisioning regression
5 of Table 8, giving rise to an estimated coefficient of 0.050 for the double tax variable that is
significant at 1%. Regressions 3-5 of Table 12 redo the pre-tax profitability, taxes paid, and post-
tax profitability regressions 1-3 of Table 9. Reported pre-tax and post-tax bank profitability are
negatively and significantly related to the host country tax rate in regressions 3 and 5 of Table 12
consistent with a profit shifting motive, but the relationship between taxes paid and the host
country tax rate is statistically insignificant in regression 4.
         Overall, our estimation results in the net interest revenue regressions of Tables 8 and 12
and the FDI regressions of Table 11 are consistent in that the dividend double tax has statistically
significant effects in both settings. Taken together, our results indicate that the dividend double
tax increases margins, as it causes foreign-owned firms to reduce their host-country supply of
financial services.


5.       Conclusions
         International double taxation is a remaining barrier to international banking market
integration. As a result of such taxation, international banks may face higher corporate income
taxation than domestic banks that operate in the same banking market. International double
taxation thus provides for variation in the taxation of banks within countries as well as across


14
  The selection model cannot be estimated at the firm level because there is no sample of potential parent firms but
only a sample of potential parent countries.


                                                         17
countries. In this paper, we estimate the pricing response – as reflected in interest margins – and
the quantity response – as reflected in banking-sector FDI - to variation in international double
taxation.
       We find that the international double taxation of the dividend income of international
banks is almost fully reflected in higher interest margins. Thus, international banks appear to
have enough pricing power to pass on their international tax burden to local bank customers. As
the revenue of this tax in part accrues to the parent country treasury, the parent country corporate
tax appears to be partially exported to the host country banking market. To be able to raise
prices, however, banks are shown to restrict the supply of financial service in banking markets
subject to higher international double taxation of dividends. Specifically, bilateral aggregate FDI
in terms of foreign bank assets is shown to decline with the international double taxation of
dividend. The sensitivity of banking-sector FDI to international double taxation implies that
such taxation distorts the international banking market. Specifically, the international ownership
of banks subject to high international double taxation is discouraged.
       True integration of the international banking market requires that discriminatory taxation
of international banks is eliminated. This implies that countries eliminate nonresident dividend
withholding taxes and exempt the foreign-source income of their resident multinational banks
from domestic taxation. In our larger data set, the average rate of international double taxation of
dividend income, reflecting both nonresident withholding taxation and home country corporate
income taxation, amounts to a substantial 3.5%. In the EU, nonresident dividend taxes on intra-
firm dividend payments have been eliminated by the Parent-Subsidiary Directive, but parent
country corporate income taxes generally remain. Specifically, EU countries that continue to tax
corporate income on a worldwide basis are Bulgaria, Greece, Ireland, Poland, Portugal and
Romania. The United Kingdom switched to a territorial tax system in 2009. Worldwide, the US
is a major country that continues to tax corporate income on a residence basis.
       Our results have implications for the debate on any additional taxation of the financial
sector following the financial crisis of 2007-2009. The IMF (2010) discusses a range of options
for new tax instruments that would increase the tax burden on the financial sector. These include
a Financial Activities Tax, which is a levy on a bank’s combined profits and wage bill, and a
Financial Stability Contribution, which taxes a bank’s liabilities net of its insured deposits. Our
results concerning international income taxation as applied to the banking sector inform



                                                 18
especially about the likely incidence and dislocation effects of a Financial Activities Tax given
that the latter tax also is a tax on income derived from the financial sector. Our empirical results
specifically suggest that a Financial Activities Tax could well be largely passed on to bank
customers, and lead to significant dislocation effects of banking activity. This outcome is more
likely if a Financial Activities Tax varies widely across countries and possibly within countries
in case it were levied on a bank residence-basis. Within-country variation in Financial Activities
Tax can be avoided if it levied on a consumption destination basis, as recommended by the IMF.
While there are clear parallels between corporate income taxation and a Financial Activities Tax,
it remains uncertain to which extent our results on international corporate income taxation and
banking carry over to a Financial Activities Tax.




                                                 19
References

Allen, Franklin, Thorsten Beck, Elena Carletti, Philip Lane, Dirk Schoenmaker, and Wolf
Wagner, 2012, Cross-Border Banking in Europe: Implications for Financial Stability
and Macroeconomic Policies, CEPR policy report.

Arulampalam, Wiji, Michael Devereux, and Giorgia Maffini, 2012, The direct incidence of
corporate income taxes on wages, European Economic Review 56, 1038-1059.

Barrios, Salvador, Harry Huizinga, Luc Laeven, and Gaëtan Nicodème, 2012, International
taxation and multinational firm location decisions, forthcoming in Journal of Public Economics.

Bosquet, Clement, and Herve Boulhol, 2010, Scale-dependence of the negative binomial pseudo-
maximum likelihood estimator, mimeo.

Buch, Claudia M, Jorn Kleinert, and Farid Toubal, 2004, The distance puzzle: On the
interpretation of the distance coefficient in gravity equations, Economics Letters 83, 293-298.

Committee on the Global Financial System, 2010, Long-term issues in international banking,
CGFS Papers No. 41.

Claessens, Stijn, and Neeltje Van Horen, 2009, Being a foreigner among domestic banks: Asset
or liability?, De Nederlandsche Bank Working Paper 224.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Harry Huizinga, 2001, The taxation of domestic and foreign banking,
Journal of Public Economics 79, 429-453.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Harry Huizinga, 1999, The determinants of commercial bank interest
margins: some international evidence, World Bank Economic Review 13, 379-408.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Luc Laeven and Ross Levine, 2003, Regulations, market structure,
institutions, and the cost of financial intermediation, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36,
593-622,

Di Giovanni, Julian, 2005, What drives capital flows? The case of cross-border M&A activity
and financial deepening, Journal of International Economics 65, 127-149.

Ederveen, Sjef and Ruud de Mooijj, 2006, What a difference does it make? Understanding the
empirical literature on taxation and international capital flows, Economic Papers No. 261,
European Commission, Directorate-General for Economic and Financial Affairs, Brussels.

Egger, Peter, Simon Loretz, Michael Pfaffermayr, and Hannes Winner, 2009, Bilateral effective
tax rates and foreign direct investment, International Tax and Public Finance 16, 822-849.

European Commission, 2010, Communication on the taxation of the financial sector, Brussels.




                                                20
Eurostat, 2004, Structures of the Taxation Systems in the European Union, Office for Official
Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg.

Evenett, Simon J., 2003, Do all networks facilitate international commerce? U.S. law firms and
the international market for corporate control, Journal of the Japanese and International
Economies 17, 520-537.

Gwartney, James, Robert Lawson, Herbert Grubel, Jakob de Haan, Jan-Egbert Sturm, and Eelco
Zandberg, 2009, Economic Freedom of the World: 2009 Annual Report, The Fraser Institute,
Vancouver, BC.

Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer, 2002, Illusory Border Effects, CEPII Working Paper No. 2002-
01.

Hines, James, R., 1996, Altered states: Taxes and the location of foreign direct investment in
America, American Economic Review 86, 1076–1094.

Huizinga, Harry, Luc Laeven, and Gaëtan Nicodème, 2008, Capital structure and international
debt shifting Journal of Financial Economics 88, 80-118.

Huizinga, Harry and Johannes Voget, International taxation and the direction and volume of
cross-border M&As, Journal of Finance 64, 1217-1249.

IBFD, 2009a, Corporate Investment Income, IBFD Publications, Amsterdam.

IBFD, 2009b, Corporate Taxation in Europe, IBFD Publications, Amsterdam.

IBFD, 2009c, IBFD Tax Treaties Database, IBFD Publications, Amsterdam.

IBFD, 2009d, Tax News Service, IBFD Publications, Amsterdam.

International Monetary Fund, 2010, A fair and substantial contribution by the financial sector,
Final report for the G-20, Washington, DC.

Kaufman, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi, 2009, “Governance Matters VIII”,
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4978.

Kemsley, Deen, 1998, The effect of taxes on production location, Journal of Accounting
Research 36, 321-341.

KPMG International, 2009, KPMG's Corporate Tax Rate Survey 1998-2009, KPMG
International.

Loretz, Simon, (2008), Corporate taxation in the OECD in a wider context, Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 24, 639-60.




                                                21
Martinez Peria, Maria Soledad and Ashoka Mody, 2003, How foreign participation and market
concentration impact bank spreads: Evidence from Latin America, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 36, 511-537.

Maudos, Joaquin, and Juan Fernandez de Guevara, 2004, Factors explaining the interest margin
in the banking sectors of the European Union, Journal of Banking and Finance 28, 2259-2281.

McCauley, Robert, Patrick McGuire and Peter von Goetz, 2010, The architecture of global
banking: from international to multinational?, BIS Quarterly Review (March), 25-37.

OECD, 1977, Model double tax convention on income and capital, Paris.

Portes, Richard and Helene Rey, 2005, The determinants of cross-border equity flows, Journal of
International Economics 65, 269-296.

Santos Silva, João and Tenreyro, Silvana, 2006, The log of gravity, The Review of Economics
and Statistics 88(4), 641-658.

Valverde, Santiago Carbo, and Francisco Rodriguez Fernandez, 2007, The determinants of bank
margins in the European Union, Journal of Banking and Finance 2007, 2043-2063.

Verbeek, Marno, 2008, A Guide to Modern Econometrics, 3rd ed., John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester.

Wei, Shang-Jin, 2000, How taxing is corruption on international investors?, The Review of
Economics and Statistics 82, 1-11.

Wong, Kit Pong, 1996, On the determinants of bank interest margins under credit and interest
rate risks, Journal of Banking and Finance 21, 251-271.

World Bank, 2009, World Development Indicators, World Bank, Washington DC.




                                              22
Table 1. Corporate income taxes and double tax relief in 2008
 a: Direct tax credit (only withholding tax), b: If the exemption is not specified in the tax treaty, then only 25% of dividends are exempted, c: Indirect tax credit
with tax treaty, d: Three tax treaties (with Brazil, Israel and Mexico) provide for an exemption, otherwise direct credit, e: The tax treaty must include an
exchange of information clause.
Country                         (1)                    (2)                    (3)                             (4)                   (5)                 (6)
                            Corporate         Relief for dividends                                                           Relief for interest
                            income tax rate
                                              With treaty              Without treaty              Intra-EU                  With treaty           Without treaty
Australia                        0.30         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Austria                          0.25         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Belgium                          0.34         95% Exemption            95% Exemption                                         Credit                Credit
Bulgaria                         0.10         Credita                  Credita                     95% Exemption             Credit                Credit
Canada                           0.34         Exemption                Credit                                                Credit                Credit
Croatia                          0.20         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Cyprus                           0.10         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Czech Republic                   0.21         Exemption                Deduction                   Exemption                 Credit                Deduction
Denmark                          0.25         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Estonia                          0.21         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Finland                          0.26         Exemptionb               Credita                     Exemption                 Credit                Credit
France                           0.33         95% Exemption            95% Exemption                                         Credit                Deduction
Germany                          0.30         95% Exemption            95% Exemption                                         Credit                Credit
Greece                           0.25         Credit                   Credit                                                Credit                Credit
Hungary                          0.16         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Ireland                          0.13         Credit                   Credit                                                Credit                Deduction
Italy                            0.31         95% Exemption            95% Exemption                                         Credit                Credit
Japan                            0.41         Credit                   Credit                                                Credit                Credit
Latvia                           0.15         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Lithuania                        0.15         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Luxembourg                       0.30         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Malta                            0.35         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Mexico                           0.28         Credit                   Credit                                                Credit                Credit
Netherlands                      0.25         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
New Zealand                      0.30         Credit                   Credit                                                Credit                Credit
Norway                           0.28         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Poland                           0.19         Creditc                  Credita                     Exemption                 Credit                Credit
Portugal                         0.25         Creditd                  Credita                     Exemption                 Credit                Credit
Romania                          0.16         Credita                  Credita                     Exemption                 Credit                Credit
Slovak Republic                  0.19         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Deduction
Slovenia                         0.22         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
South Korea                      0.28         Credit                   Credit                                                Credit                Credit
Spain                            0.30         Exemptione               Credit                                                Credit                Credit
Sweden                           0.28         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
Switzerland                      0.17         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Deduction
Turkey                           0.20         Exemption                Exemption                                             Credit                Credit
United Kingdom                   0.28         Credit                   Credit                                                Credit                Credit
United States                    0.39         Credit                   Credit                                                Credit                Credit




                                                                                    23
Table 2. Nonresident withholding taxes on dividends in 2008

This table provides nonresident withholding taxes on dividends from countries in the left column to countries in the top row.
This




       AT       AU      BE      BG         CA      CH      CY      CZ      DE      DK       EE      ES      FI          FR      GB      GR      HR      HU      IE
AT               0.15       0          0    0.05       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0       0       0           0
AU       0.15            0.15        0.3    0.05    0.15     0.3    0.15    0.15     0.15     0.3    0.15        0.15    0.15    0.05     0.3     0.3    0.15        0.15
BE          0       0                  0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0       0       0           0
BG          0    0.07       0               0.07       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.05       0           0
CA       0.05    0.05    0.15     0.1               0.05    0.15    0.05    0.05     0.05    0.05    0.15         0.1     0.1    0.05    0.25    0.05     0.1        0.05
CH          0    0.15       0       0       0.05               0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.05       0           0
CY          0       0       0       0          0       0               0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0       0       0           0
CZ          0    0.15       0       0       0.05       0       0               0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.05       0           0
DE          0    0.15       0       0       0.05       0       0       0                0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.15       0           0
DK          0    0.15       0       0       0.05       0       0       0       0                0       0           0       0       0       0    0.05       0           0
EE          0       0       0       0          0       0       0       0       0        0               0           0       0       0       0       0       0           0
ES          0    0.15       0       0       0.15       0       0       0       0        0       0                   0       0       0       0       0       0           0
FI          0    0.15       0       0        0.1       0       0       0       0        0       0       0                   0       0       0    0.05       0           0
FR          0    0.15       0       0        0.1       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0               0       0       0       0           0
GB          0       0       0       0          0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0               0       0       0           0
GR          0       0       0       0          0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0               0       0           0
HR          0       0       0       0          0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0               0           0
HU          0       0       0       0          0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0       0                   0
IE          0    0.15       0       0       0.05       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.05       0
IT          0    0.15       0       0       0.15       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0     0.1       0           0
JP        0.1    0.15    0.05     0.1       0.05     0.1     0.2     0.1     0.1      0.1     0.2     0.1         0.1    0.05     0.1     0.2     0.2     0.1         0.1
KR       0.05    0.15    0.15    0.05       0.15     0.1    0.25    0.05    0.05     0.15    0.25     0.1         0.1     0.1    0.05    0.05    0.25    0.05         0.1
LT          0       0       0       0          0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0       0       0           0
LU          0    0.15       0       0       0.05       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.15       0           0
LV          0     0.1       0       0       0.05       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.05       0           0
MT          0       0       0       0          0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0       0       0           0
MX          0       0       0       0          0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0       0       0           0
NL          0    0.15       0       0       0.05       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0     0.1       0           0
NO          0    0.15       0       0       0.05       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.15       0           0
NZ       0.15    0.05    0.15    0.15       0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15     0.15    0.15    0.15        0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15        0.15
PL          0    0.15       0       0       0.15       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.05       0           0
PT          0     0.2       0       0        0.1       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0     0.2       0           0
RO          0    0.05       0       0       0.05       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.05       0           0
SE          0       0       0       0          0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0       0       0           0
SI          0    0.15       0       0       0.05       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0    0.05       0           0
SK          0       0       0       0          0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0           0       0       0       0       0       0           0
TR       0.15    0.15    0.15     0.1       0.15    0.15    0.15     0.1    0.15     0.15     0.1    0.05        0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15     0.1     0.1        0.15
US       0.05    0.05    0.05     0.3       0.05    0.05    0.05    0.05       0     0.05    0.05     0.1        0.05    0.05    0.05     0.3     0.3    0.05        0.05




                                                                                24
(Table 2, continued)
      IT       JP      KR      LT      LU      LV      MT      MX      NL      NO      NZ       PL      PT      RO      SE      SI      SK      TR       US
AT         0     0.1    0.05       0       0       0       0    0.05       0       0    0.25        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.25     0.05
AU      0.15    0.15    0.15     0.3     0.3     0.3    0.15       0    0.15    0.15    0.05     0.15     0.3    0.05    0.15     0.3    0.15      0.3    0.05
BE         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0        0
BG         0    0.07    0.05       0       0       0       0    0.07       0       0    0.07        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.07     0.07
CA      0.15    0.05    0.15    0.05    0.05    0.05    0.15     0.1    0.05    0.05    0.15     0.15     0.1    0.05    0.05    0.05    0.05    0.25     0.05
CH         0     0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0    0.05       0       0    0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.35     0.05
CY         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0        0
CZ         0     0.1    0.05       0       0       0       0     0.1       0       0    0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0      0.1    0.05
DE         0     0.1    0.05       0       0       0       0    0.05       0       0    0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.15     0.05
DK         0     0.1    0.15       0       0       0       0       0       0       0    0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.15     0.05
EE         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0        0
ES         0     0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0    0.05       0       0    0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.05       0.1
FI         0     0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0       0       0       0    0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.15     0.05
FR         0    0.05     0.1       0       0       0       0    0.05       0       0    0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.15     0.05
GB         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0        0
GR         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0        0
HR         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0        0
HU         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0        0
IE         0       0       0       0       0       0       0    0.05       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.2        0
IT               0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0    0.15       0       0    0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.15     0.05
JP       0.1            0.05     0.2    0.05     0.2     0.2       0    0.05    0.05    0.15      0.1     0.2     0.1     0.1     0.2     0.1      0.1        0
KR       0.1    0.05            0.25     0.1    0.25    0.05       0     0.1    0.15    0.15     0.15     0.1    0.07     0.1    0.25    0.05    0.15       0.1
LT         0       0       0               0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0        0
LU         0    0.05     0.1       0               0       0    0.05       0       0    0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.15         0
LV         0     0.1     0.1       0       0               0     0.1       0       0      0.1       0       0       0       0       0       0      0.1    0.05
MT         0       0       0       0       0       0               0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0        0
MX         0       0       0       0       0       0       0               0       0        0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0        0
NL         0    0.05     0.1       0       0       0       0    0.05               0    0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0    0.15     0.05
NO         0    0.05    0.15       0       0       0       0       0       0            0.15        0       0       0       0       0       0      0.2    0.15
NZ      0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15             0.15    0.15    0.15       0    0.15    0.15    0.15     0.15
PL         0     0.1    0.05       0       0       0       0    0.05       0       0    0.15                0       0       0       0       0      0.1    0.05
PT         0     0.2     0.1       0       0       0       0     0.1       0       0     0.2        0               0       0       0       0    0.05     0.05
RO         0     0.1    0.07       0       0       0       0    0.15       0       0    0.15        0       0               0       0       0    0.15       0.1
SE         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0               0       0        0        0
SI         0    0.15    0.05       0       0       0       0    0.15       0       0    0.15        0       0       0       0               0      0.1    0.05
SK         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0                0        0
TR      0.15     0.1    0.15     0.1    0.15     0.1    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15      0.1    0.15    0.15    0.15     0.1    0.05             0.15
US      0.05       0     0.1    0.05    0.05    0.05     0.3       0    0.05    0.15    0.15     0.05    0.05     0.1    0.05    0.05    0.05    0.15




                                                                               25
Table 3. Nonresident withholding taxes on interest in 2008

This table provides nonresident withholding taxes on interest from countries in the left column to countries in the top row.
       AT       AU       BE         BG         CA       CH         CY      CZ         DE         DK         EE         ES      FI          FR         GB         GR      HR      HU         IE
AT                   0          0          0       0           0       0          0          0          0          0       0           0          0          0       0       0          0           0
AU        0.1                 0.1        0.1     0.1         0.1     0.1        0.1        0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1         0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1     0.1        0.1         0.1
BE          0     0.1                      0    0.15           0       0          0          0          0          0       0           0          0          0       0     0.1          0           0
BG          0     0.1      0.1                   0.1         0.1    0.07        0.1          0          0        0.1       0           0          0          0     0.1    0.05        0.1        0.05
CA        0.1     0.1     0.15        0.1                    0.1    0.15        0.1        0.1        0.1        0.1    0.15         0.1        0.1          0    0.25     0.1        0.1         0.1
CH          0     0.1        0          0         0.1                  0          0          0          0          0       0           0          0          0       0    0.05          0           0
CY          0       0        0          0           0       0                     0          0          0          0       0           0          0          0       0       0          0           0
CZ          0     0.1        0          0         0.1       0          0                     0          0          0       0           0          0          0       0       0          0           0
DE          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0                        0          0       0           0          0          0       0       0          0           0
DK          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0          0                        0       0           0          0          0       0       0          0           0
EE          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0          0          0                     0           0          0          0       0       0          0           0
ES          0     0.1        0          0       0.15        0          0       0          0          0          0                      0          0          0       0    0.08          0           0
FI          0     0.1        0          0         0.1       0          0       0          0          0          0          0                      0          0       0       0          0           0
FR          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0                     0       0       0          0           0
GB          0     0.1        0          0           0       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0                  0     0.1          0           0
GR        0.1    0.25      0.1        0.1       0.25      0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1       0.08        0.1       0.08         0.1        0.1          0             0.1        0.1        0.05
HR       0.05    0.15      0.1       0.05         0.1    0.05       0.15       0          0          0        0.1       0.15           0          0        0.1     0.1                  0           0
HU          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0       0                      0
IE          0     0.1        0          0         0.1       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0       0       0
IT          0     0.1        0          0      0.125        0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0     0.1       0              0
JP        0.1     0.1      0.1        0.1         0.1     0.1        0.2     0.1        0.1        0.1        0.2        0.1         0.1        0.1        0.1     0.2     0.2     0.1            0.1
KR        0.1    0.15      0.1        0.1       0.15      0.1       0.25     0.1        0.1       0.15       0.25        0.1         0.1        0.1        0.1    0.08    0.25       0              0
LT        0.1     0.1      0.1        0.1         0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1        0.1          0        0.1         0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1            0.1
LU          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0       0       0              0
LV          0    0.05        0          0       0.05        0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0    0.05       0              0
MT          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0       0       0              0
MX        0.1     0.1      0.1        0.1         0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1        0.1        0.1        0.1         0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1            0.1
NL          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0       0       0              0
NO          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0       0       0              0
NZ       0.15     0.1      0.1       0.15       0.15      0.1       0.15    0.15        0.1        0.1       0.15       0.15         0.1        0.1        0.1    0.15    0.15    0.15            0.1
PL          0     0.1     0.05        0.1       0.15      0.1        0.1     0.1       0.05       0.05        0.1          0           0          0          0     0.2     0.1     0.1            0.1
PT        0.1     0.2      0.1        0.1         0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1        0.1        0.1        0.1         0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1     0.2     0.1            0.1
RO       0.03     0.1      0.1        0.1         0.1     0.1        0.1    0.07       0.03        0.1        0.1        0.1        0.05        0.1        0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1           0.03
SE          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0       0       0              0
SI          0       0        0          0           0       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0       0       0              0
SK          0     0.1        0          0         0.1       0          0       0          0          0          0          0           0          0          0       0     0.1       0              0
TR        0.1     0.1      0.1        0.1         0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1        0.1        0.1        0.1         0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1            0.1
US          0     0.1     0.15        0.3         0.1       0        0.1       0          0          0        0.1        0.1           0          0          0     0.3     0.3       0              0




                                                                                             26
(Table 3, continued)
      IT       JP      KR      LT      LU      LV      MT      MX       NL      NO      NZ      PL         PT         RO      SE         SI      SK         TR       US
AT         0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
AU       0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1      0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1         0.1      0.1
BE         0     0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0      0.1       0       0     0.1       0          0          0       0          0       0       0.15     0.15
BG         0     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1    0.05       0      0.1       0       0     0.1     0.1        0.1        0.1       0       0.05     0.1         0.1      0.1
CA      0.15     0.1    0.15     0.1     0.1     0.1    0.15    0.15      0.1     0.1    0.15    0.15        0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1       0.25       0.1
CH         0     0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0    0.15        0       0     0.1       0          0          0       0          0       0       0.35         0
CY         0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
CZ         0     0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0      0.1       0       0    0.15       0          0          0       0          0       0         0.1        0
DE         0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
DK         0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
EE         0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
ES         0     0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0    0.15        0       0     0.1       0          0          0       0          0       0         0.1      0.1
FI         0     0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0    0.15        0       0     0.1       0          0          0       0          0       0       0.15         0
FR         0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
GB         0     0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0    0.15        0       0     0.1       0          0          0       0          0       0       0.15         0
GR       0.1    0.25    0.08     0.1    0.08     0.1     0.1      0.1    0.08     0.1    0.25     0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1       0.12     0.25
HR       0.1    0.15    0.15     0.1    0.15     0.1       0    0.15        0       0    0.15     0.1       0.15        0.1       0       0.15     0.1         0.1    0.15
HU         0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0       0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
IE         0     0.1       0       0       0       0       0      0.1       0       0     0.1       0          0          0       0          0       0         0.2        0
IT               0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0   0.125        0       0     0.1       0          0          0       0          0       0      0.125    0.125
JP       0.1             0.1     0.2     0.1     0.2     0.2    0.15      0.1     0.1    0.15     0.1        0.2        0.1     0.1        0.2     0.1       0.15       0.1
KR       0.1     0.1            0.25     0.1    0.25     0.1      0.1    0.15    0.15     0.1     0.1       0.15        0.1    0.15       0.25     0.1       0.15     0.12
LT       0.1     0.1     0.1             0.1       0     0.1      0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1         0.1      0.1
LU         0       0       0       0               0       0        0       0       0       0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
LV         0    0.05    0.05       0       0               0    0.05        0       0    0.05       0          0          0       0          0       0       0.05     0.05
MT         0       0       0       0       0       0                0       0       0       0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
MX       0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1              0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1         0.1      0.1
NL         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0                0       0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
NO         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0               0       0          0          0       0          0       0           0        0
NZ       0.1    0.15     0.1    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15    0.15      0.1     0.1             0.1       0.15       0.15     0.1       0.15    0.15       0.15       0.1
PL       0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1    0.15     0.05       0     0.1                0.1        0.1       0        0.1     0.1         0.1        0
PT       0.1     0.2    0.15     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1      0.1     0.1     0.2        0.1                0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1       0.15       0.1
RO       0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1    0.05    0.15     0.03     0.1    0.15        0.1        0.1             0.1       0.05     0.1         0.1      0.1
SE         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0          0          0       0                  0       0           0        0
SI         0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0        0       0       0          0          0       0          0               0           0        0
SK         0     0.1     0.1       0       0       0       0    0.19        0       0    0.19          0          0       0          0       0                 0.1        0
TR       0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1     0.1      0.1     0.1     0.1        0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1     0.1        0.1               0.1
US      0.15     0.1    0.12     0.1       0     0.1     0.3    0.15        0     0.1     0.1          0        0.1     0.1          0    0.05          0    0.15




                                                                                 27
Table 4. Expressions for international double tax rates
Expressions for the additional taxation of dividend and interest flows to investors on account of foreign ownership
of a bank. t i is the corporate income tax in the subsidiary country. t p is the corporate income tax in the parent

country.   wie is the nonresident withholding tax on dividends levied by the subsidiary country. wid is the non-
resident withholding tax on interest payments levied by the subsidiary country. Note that the exemption and indirect
foreign tax credit as applied to interest flows are not observed in our sample of countries.

Double tax relief metbod                       Dividends                                    Interest
        Exemption                                 e
                                               w  ti w     e
                                                                                            wid  t p
                                                  i         i


 Indirect foreign tax credit         max[ ti  wi       ti wie , t p ]  ti           max[ wid , t p ]  t p

  Direct foreign tax credit              (1  t i ) max[ t p , wie ]                  max[ wid , t p ]  t p

           Deduction                 (1 t i )[1  (1  wie )(1  t p )]                 wid  t p wid




                                                                28
Table 5. Summary statistics for foreign ownership of banks by country of residence
The national share of foreign ownership is the share of the assets of foreign-owned banks in total assets of banks
located in a country.
Country name                   Number of            National share of
                              observations         foreign ownership
Australia                          55                    0.023
Austria                           321                    0.022
Belgium                           172                    0.240
Bulgaria                           74                    0.483
Canada                             32                    0.383
Croatia                            79                    0.632
Cyprus                             20                    0.577
Czech Republic                     85                    0.476
Denmark                            62                    0.034
Estonia                            15                    0.965
Finland                            12                    0.719
France                            772                    0.077
Germany                           815                    0.037
Greece                             19                    0.073
Hungary                            63                    0.339
Ireland                            75                    0.146
Italy                             491                    0.029
Japan                              75                    0.109
Korea                              57                    0.109
Latvia                             35                    0.497
Lithuania                          17                    0.800
Luxembourg                        416                    0.672
Malta                              3                     0.395
Mexico                             50                    0.065
Netherlands                        80                    0.035
New Zealand                        11                    0.017
Norway                             18                    0.157
Poland                             99                    0.428
Portugal                           59                    0.057
Romania                            63                    0.401
Slovakia                           34                    0.358
Slovenia                           27                    0.155
Spain                              92                    0.020
Sweden                             16                    0.190
Switzerland                       646                    0.082
Turkey                             39                    0.065
United Kingdom                    270                    0.085
USA                              4,462                   0.012

Total                            9,731                   0.095




                                                         29
Table 6. Mean values of tax related variables for banks by country of residence

Host country corporate tax is corporate income tax rate in the bank’s country of residence. Dividend double tax
is the double tax rate on repatriated dividend income. Interest double tax is double tax rate for interest income.
                                                     All banks              Foreign banks
Country name               Number    Host        Dividend      Interest   Dividend   Interest
                           of obs.   country     double        double     double     double
                                     corporate   tax           tax        tax        tax
                                     tax
Australia                   55        0.313        0.06          0         0.106       0
Austria                     321       0.292       0.007          0         0.047       0
Belgium                     172       0.369       0.004          0         0.012       0
Bulgaria                    74        0.174       0.055          0         0.095       0
Canada                      32        0.339       0.064          0         0.073       0
Croatia                     79        0.215       0.025          0         0.039       0
Cyprus                      20        0.163       0.034        0.007       0.062     0.017
Czech Republic              85        0.272       0.017          0         0.028       0
Denmark                     62        0.274       0.002          0         0.012       0
Estonia                     15        0.246       0.022          0         0.022       0
Finland                     12        0.265         0            0            0        0
France                      772       0.351       0.003          0         0.015       0
Germany                     815       0.396       0.004          0         0.022       0
Greece                      19        0.293       0.007          0         0.009       0
Hungary                     63         0.17       0.044          0          0.05       0
Ireland                     75        0.118        0.03          0         0.035       0
Italy                       491        0.38         0            0         0.006       0
Japan                       75        0.421       0.022          0          0.06       0
Korea                       57        0.283       0.017          0         0.076       0
Latvia                      35         0.18       0.026          0         0.038       0
Lithuania                   17        0.177       0.002          0         0.002       0
Luxembourg                  416        0.33       0.012          0         0.013       0
Malta                        3         0.35         0            0            0        0
Mexico                      50        0.336       0.008          0         0.023       0
Netherlands                 80        0.324       0.024          0         0.047       0
New Zealand                 11        0.316        0.01          0         0.111       0
Norway                      18         0.28       0.006          0         0.027       0
Poland                      99        0.218       0.018          0         0.025       0
Portugal                    59        0.309       0.003          0         0.013       0
Romania                     63        0.217       0.083          0           0.1       0
Slovakia                    34        0.215       0.039          0         0.045       0
Slovenia                    27        0.244       0.008          0         0.015       0
Spain                       92        0.349       0.004          0         0.011       0
Sweden                      16         0.28       0.012          0         0.033       0
Switzerland                 646       0.235       0.024        0.000       0.052     0.000
Turkey                      39         0.26       0.057          0          0.13       0




                                                          30
United Kingdom    270    0.299   0.004         0      0.011    0
USA              4,462   0.394   0.002         0      0.047    0

Total            9,731   0.361   0.008        0.000   0.035   0.000




                                         31
Table 7. Summary statistics for variables in net interest revenue and profitability regressions

See the Appendix for variable definitions
Variable                                     Number of     Average   Std. dev.   Minimum   Maximum
                                            observations
Net interest revenue over assets               9731         0.028     0.018       -0.019    0.316
Pret-tax profits over assets                   8893         0.013     0.017       -0.02     0.263
Taxes over assets                              9495         0.004     0.007        -0.1     0.203
Post-tax profits over assets                   8739         0.010     0.013       -0.166    0.213
Host country corporate tax                     9731         0.352     0.069       0.100     0.501
Parent country corporate tax                   9729         0.074     0.144         0       0.501
Dividend double tax                            9731         0.008     0.025         0       0.290
Assets                                         9731         7.024     1.979       -0.819    14.15
Earning assets over total assets               9731         0.920     0.075         0         1
Foreign bank                                   9731         0.219     0.414         0         1
National share of foreign ownership            9731         0.095     0.189         0         1
Bank market share                              9731         0.011     0.046         0         1
National top 5 market share                    9731         0.364     0.188       0.138       1
GDP per capita                                 9731        10.213      0.57       7.388     10.936
Industrial growth rate                         9731         0.010     0.019       -0.072    0.350
Inflation                                      9731         0.028     0.023       -0.009    0.458
Real interest rate                             9731         0.021     0.032       -0.148    0.305




                                                      32
Table 8. Results of net interest revenue regressions

The dependent variable is net interest revenue over total assets in columns (1)-(4) and it is net interest revenue net of
loan loss provisions over assets in column (5). See the Appendix for variable definitions. Regressions (1)-(3) and (5)
include fixed effects for country of residence and year fixed effects. Regression (4) includes bank fixed effects and
year fixed effects. Standard errors are robust to clustering at the bank level and provided in parentheses. * denotes
significance at 10 %; ** a significance at 5%; *** significance at 1%.
                                      (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)                 (5)
Variables                          Benchmark    Only intra-EU    Only foreign      Bank fixed       Adjusted net
                                                                   owned            effects       interest revenue
                                                                                                     over assets
Host country corporate tax           -0.015         -0.006          -0.002            0.004           -0.017**
                                     (0.010)        (0.013)         (0.020)          (0.007)           (0.008)
Dividend double tax                 0.035**        0.032**         0.038**          0.026**            0.034**
                                     (0.016)        (0.015)         (0.019)          (0.013)           (0.015)
Assets                             -0.002***      -0.003***       -0.002***        -0.005***         -0.002***
                                     (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.001)           (0.000)
Earning assets over total assets      0.009         -0.002           0.009          0.014**           0.017***
                                     (0.006)        (0.014)         (0.008)          (0.006)           (0.005)
Foreign bank                        -0.003**        -0.002                           -0.000             -0.001
                                     (0.001)        (0.001)                          (0.001)           (0.001)
National share of foreign             0.003        0.008**           0.000            0.001             0.001
ownership
                                    (0.003)        (0.003)          (0.004)          (0.002)          (0.003)
Bank market share                   0.010*        0.024***           0.008           -0.000            0.010*
                                    (0.006)        (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.003)          (0.006)
National top 5 market share          0.001          0.003          0.009***         0.003***           0.002
                                    (0.002)        (0.004)          (0.003)          (0.001)          (0.002)
GDP per capita                       0.007          0.007            0.009            0.004           0.019**
                                    (0.008)        (0.011)          (0.011)          (0.006)          (0.008)
Industrial growth rate             0.117***        0.133*          0.142***         0.090***         0.116***
                                    (0.028)        (0.069)          (0.045)          (0.028)          (0.023)
Inflation rate                     0.079***         0.095          0.046**          0.085***         0.078***
                                    (0.022)        (0.085)          (0.018)          (0.026)          (0.024)
Real interest rate                  -0.009          0.004           -0.004            0.008            -0.001
                                    (0.008)        (0.014)          (0.012)          (0.006)          (0.009)
Observations                         9731           3,588            2,135            9,731            8,894
R-squared                            0.268          0.196            0.291            0.117            0.331




                                                           33
Table 9. Results of profitability and taxation regressions

The dependent variables are listed at the top of the table. See the Appendix for variable definitions. Regressions
include fixed effects for country of residence and year fixed effects. Standard errors are robust to clustering at the
bank level and provided in parentheses. * denotes significance at 10 %; ** a significance at 5%; *** significance at
1%.
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
Variables                               Pre-tax        Taxes         Post-tax         Pre-tax        Taxes          Post-tax
                                        profits         over          profits         profits         over           profits
                                          over         assets          over            over          assets           over
                                         assets                       Assets          assets                         Assets
Host country corporate tax            -0.028***       -0.007**      -0.023***       -0.028***       -0.008**       -0.023***
                                        (0.008)        (0.003)        (0.006)        (0.008)         (0.003)         (0.006)
Dividend double tax                      0.010         -0.004          0.013           0.008          -0.005          0.012
                                        (0.016)        (0.006)        (0.013)        (0.015)         (0.006)         (0.012)
Assets                                -0.001***      -0.000***      -0.001***       -0.001***      -0.000***       -0.001***
                                        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
Earning assets over total assets      -0.043***      -0.013***      -0.029***       -0.043***      -0.013***       -0.029***
                                        (0.009)        (0.003)        (0.006)        (0.009)         (0.003)         (0.006)
Foreign bank                             0.001         -0.000          0.000          -0.004       -0.002***         -0.003
                                        (0.001)        (0.000)        (0.001)        (0.003)         (0.001)         (0.002)
National share of foreign ownership      0.003          0.001          0.002           0.003          0.001           0.002
                                        (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.003)         (0.001)         (0.002)
Bank market share                      0.018***         0.002        0.015***       0.018***          0.003         0.015***
                                        (0.006)        (0.002)        (0.005)        (0.006)         (0.002)         (0.005)
National top 5 market share              0.000         -0.001         -0.000          -0.000          -0.001         -0.001
                                        (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.003)         (0.001)         (0.002)
GDP per capita                           0.007        0.006**          0.002           0.010         0.007**          0.004
                                        (0.006)        (0.003)        (0.005)        (0.007)         (0.003)         (0.006)
Industrial growth rate                   0.040         0.017*          0.012           0.041         0.017**          0.013
                                        (0.026)        (0.009)        (0.019)        (0.026)         (0.009)         (0.019)
Inflation rate                         0.061***       0.027***       0.044***       0.061***       0.026***         0.043***
                                        (0.019)        (0.008)        (0.015)        (0.019)         (0.008)         (0.015)
Real interest rate                     0.022**          0.006          0.013         0.021**          0.005           0.013
                                        (0.010)        (0.003)        (0.008)        (0.010)         (0.003)         (0.008)
Parent country corporate tax                                                          0.015*         0.006**          0.009
                                                                                     (0.008)         (0.003)         (0.006)
Observations                            8893           9495            8739            8,892          9,493           8,738
R-squared                               0.120          0.082           0.121           0.120          0.083           0.121




                                                          34
Table 10. Summary statistics for variables in FDI regressions

See the Appendix for variable definitions.
Variable                                Obs       Mean         Std. dev.   Min        Max

Foreign owned banks                      11,372        0.199      1.274         0        107
Foreign owned bank assets                11,372        1,627     19,942         0     1,090,878
Host country corporate tax               11,372        0.290      0.077       0.100     0.501
Parent country corporate tax             11,372        0.290      0.078       0.100     0.501
Dividend double tax                      11,372        0.059      0.067       0.000     0.310
Distance                                 11,372        7.779      1.123       4.088     9.883
Contiguity                               11,372        0.068      0.251         0         1
Common official language                 11,372        0.060      0.238         0         1
Intra EU                                 11,372        0.520      0.500         0         1
Host GDP                                 11,372        4.984      1.846       1.298     9.349
Parent GDP                               11,372        5.187      1.805       1.727     9.349
Host regulatory quality                  11,372        1.171      0.495      -0.119     2.011
Parent regulatory quality                11,372        1.238      0.444       0.045     2.011
Host capital controls                    11,372        4.331      2.668       0.800    10.000
Parent capital controls                  11,372        4.186      2.523       0.800    10.000




                                                  35
Table 11. Results of banking FDI regressions

The dependent variable in regressions (1) and (3) is assets of banks located in a host country and owned by a parent
country in a particular year in millions of constant US 2000 dollars. The dependent variable in regressions (2) and
(4) is the number of banks located in a host country and owned by a parent country in a particular year. See the
Appendix for variable definitions. All regressions are Poisson regressions accounting for host country, parent
country and year fixed effects. Standard errors are robust to clustering at the host country level and provided in
parentheses. * denotes significance at 10 %; ** a significance at 5%; *** significance at 1%.
                                      (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)
Variables                            Assets         Frequency         Assets         Frequency
                                                                     Intra-EU         Intra-EU
Host country corporate income           0.806          -1.524          4.376            2.753
tax                                   (4.599)         (1.867)         (3.312)          (2.222)
Dividend double tax                 -7.191***        -3.297**       -13.639**           -3.074
                                      (2.777)         (1.382)         (6.524)          (2.926)
Distance                            -0.722***       -0.666***       -1.083***        -0.860***
                                      (0.212)         (0.169)         (0.290)          (0.188)
Contiguity                              0.687           0.248          0.105         1.003***
                                      (0.776)         (0.360)         (0.523)          (0.301)
Common official language               -0.015          -0.049        1.794***           -0.338
                                      (0.586)         (0.146)         (0.663)          (0.338)
Intra EU                               -0.049        -0.573**
                                      (0.666)         (0.266)
Host GDP                                2.451        3.539***          -2.065          -0.078
                                      (2.151)         (1.279)         (2.009)         (1.582)
Parent GDP                              1.540         1.746*            2.541          -0.101
                                      (3.744)         (1.003)         (3.478)         (1.277)
Host regulatory quality              -3.620**         -1.156*         -1.168*         -0.815*
                                      (1.418)         (0.671)         (0.625)         (0.417)
Parent regulatory quality              -1.329           0.019           0.349          0.172
                                      (1.221)         (0.221)         (1.115)         (0.386)
Host capital controls                 -0.143*          -0.039          -0.120          0.015
                                      (0.086)         (0.036)         (0.079)         (0.047)
Parent capital controls                 0.004          -0.016           0.046          0.047
                                      (0.093)         (0.050)         (0.099)         (0.043)
Number of observations                 11372           11372            3428            3428




                                                         36
Table 12. Two-stage regressions of net interest revenue, profitability and taxation

The dependent variables are listed in the top row of the table. See the Appendix for variable definitions. Variables
are aggregated at the bilateral national level on a yearly basis. Reported are the second-stage Heckman regressions
where the first stage regressions are probit models of the presence of bilateral FDI analogous to regression 1 of
Table 11. Reported regressions include fixed effects for country of residence and year fixed effects. Standard errors
are robust to clustering at the bank level and provided in parentheses. * denotes significance at 10 %; ** a
significance at 5%; *** significance at 1%.
                                           (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)
Variables                             Net interest     Adjusted net      Pre-tax          Taxes          Post-tax
                                        revenue      interest revenue     profits          over            profits
                                          over          over assets        over           assets            over
                                         assets                           assets                           Assets
Host country corporate tax               -0.007          -0.007          -0.028*            0.002        -0.032**
                                        (0.022)          (0.018)         (0.016)          (0.009)         (0.015)
Dividend double tax                    0.051***         0.050***           0.012            0.002           0.019
                                        (0.018)          (0.018)         (0.021)          (0.010)         (0.019)
Assets                                -0.002***        -0.002***        -0.002**          -0.001*         -0.001*
                                        (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.000)         (0.001)
Earning assets over total assets          0.010           0.013          -0.034*           -0.008        -0.025**
                                        (0.010)          (0.011)         (0.018)          (0.007)         (0.012)
National share of foreign ownership       0.002           0.001            0.000           -0.001          -0.001
                                        (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.004)          (0.001)         (0.004)
Bank market share                         0.011           0.007         0.023**          0.008**          0.017*
                                        (0.010)          (0.011)         (0.009)          (0.003)         (0.010)
National Top 5 market share            0.010***         0.010**            0.001            0.002          -0.002
                                        (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.004)          (0.001)         (0.004)
GDP per capita                            0.012         0.027**         0.022**             0.004         0.017*
                                        (0.008)          (0.011)         (0.010)          (0.003)         (0.009)
Industrial growth rate                 0.160***         0.153***        0.101***         0.041***        0.047**
                                        (0.033)          (0.033)         (0.031)          (0.009)         (0.023)
Inflation rate                         0.057***         0.051***        0.069***         0.019***        0.050***
                                        (0.011)          (0.014)         (0.018)          (0.006)         (0.018)
Real interest rate                       -0.009          -0.000           -0.001            0.002          -0.008
                                        (0.015)          (0.018)         (0.014)          (0.005)         (0.012)
Observations                             11,351          11,359          11,359           11,352          11,359




                                                          37
Appendix. Variable description and data sources

                Variable                                         Definition                                                Data sources
Net interest revenue over assets      Bank’s net interest revenue over total assets                       Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
Pre-tax profits over assets           Bank’s pre-tax profits over total assets                            Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
Post-tax profits over assets          Bank’s post-tax profits over total assets                           Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
Taxes over assets                     Bank’s taxes over total assets                                      Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
Host country corporate tax            Corporate income tax rate in bank country of residence              Eurostat (2004), KPMG International (2009),
                                                                                                          and Loretz (2008)
Parent country corporate tax          Corporate income tax rate in parent firm country of residence       As for the host country corporate income tax
Dividend double tax                   Double tax rate on repatriated dividend income                      As for the host country corporate income tax
                                                                                                          plus IBFD (2009a, 2009b, 2009c, 2009d)
Interest double tax                   Double tax rate for interest income                                 As for the dividend double tax
Assets                                Bank’s total assets in millions of constant 2000 US dollars         Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
                                      (logarithm)
Earning assets over total assets      Bank’s total earning assets over total assets                       Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
Foreign bank                          Dummy variable indicating if at least 50% of shares are owned       Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
                                      by shareholders in single foreign country
National share of foreign ownership   Share of assets of foreign-owned banks in total banking system      Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
                                      assets in a country
Bank market share                     Bank’s total loans as a share of all loans provided by banks in a   Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
                                      country
National top 5 market share           Loan market share of the 5 largest loan-providing banks             Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
                                      relative to all loans provided by banks in a country
GDP per capita                        Gross domestic product of bank country of residence in billions     World Development Indicators 2009, World
                                      of constant 2000 US dollars (logarithm)                             Bank (2009)
Industrial growth rate                Rate of change of industrial production growth index                International Financial Statistics
Inflation rate                        Rate of change in the consumer price index                          World Development Indicators 2009, World
                                                                                                          Bank (2009)
Real interest rate                    Money market rate minus inflation rate                              World Development Indicators 2009, World
                                                                                                          Bank (2009)
Foreign owned banks                   Number of banks located in a host country and owned by a            Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
                                      parent country in a particular year
Foreign owned bank assets             Sum of the assets of banks located in a host country and owned      Bureau van Dijk’s Bankscope database
                                      by a parent country in a particular year in millions of constant
                                      US 2000 dollars
Distance                              Distance between two countries’ most populated                      Head and Mayer (2002)
                                      agglomerations in km (logarithm)


                                                                         38
Contiguity                  Dummy variable indicating whether two countries are                Head and Mayer (2002)
                            contiguous
Common official language    Dummy variable indicating whether two countries share a            Head and Mayer (2002)
                            common official language
Intra EU                    Dummy variable indicating whether two countries are both EU        Head and Mayer (2002)
                            members in a given year
Host GDP                    Gross domestic product of the bank country of residence in         World Development Indicators 2009, World
                            billions of constant 2000 US dollars (logarithm)                   Bank (2009)
Parent GDP                  Gross domestic product of the parent firm country of residence     World Development Indicators 2009, World
                            in billions of constant 2000 US dollars (logarithm)                Bank (2009)
Host regulatory quality     Indicator capturing perceptions of the ability of the government   Kaufman et al. (2009)
                            of host country to formulate and implement sound policies and
                            regulations that permit and promote private sector
                            development. Values range from -2.5 to 2.5, with higher values
                            corresponding to better perceptions.
Parent regulatory quality   Indicator capturing perceptions of the ability of the government   Kaufman et al. (2009)
                            of the parent firm’s country to formulate and implement sound
                            policies and regulations that permit and promote private sector
                            development. Values range from -2.5 to 2.5, with higher values
                            corresponding to better perceptions.
Host capital controls       Indicator of the percentage of capital controls levied by host     Gwartney et al. (2009)
                            country as a share of the total number of capital controls
                            covered by the International Monetary Fund. Values range from
                            0 to 10, with higher values corresponding with more capital
                            controls.
Parent capital controls     Indicator of the percentage of capital controls levied by parent   Gwartney et al. (2009)
                            firm country as a share of the total number of capital controls
                            covered by the International Monetary Fund. Values range from
                            0 to 10, with higher values corresponding with more capital
                            controls.




                                                               39
