                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    UNDERSTANDING AND IMPROVING THE SOCIAL CONTEXT OF WELL-BEING

                                          John F. Helliwell

                                        Working Paper 18486
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18486


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the December 15-16, 2011, Helsinki meeting of the
SITRA-NEF project New Theories and Policies for Well-Being. I am very grateful for subsequent
helpful suggestions from Roland Benabou, Adele Diamond, Timo Hämäläinen, Alex and Cath Haslam,
Danny Kahneman, Juliet Michaelson, Randy Nesse and Nancy Pistrang. I gratefully acknowledge
the research support of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by John F. Helliwell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Understanding and Improving the Social Context of Well-Being
John F. Helliwell
NBER Working Paper No. 18486
October 2012
JEL No. D6,I28,N30

                                             ABSTRACT

The paper first attempts to demonstrate the fundamental importance of the social context. The related
evidence is drawn from recent theoretical and empirical advances in the study of subjective well-being.
Treating people’s self-assessments of the quality of their lives as valid measures of well-being exposes
the importance of the social context and suggests new ways to design better policies.

The paper starts with demonstrations of the unexpectedly great well-being consequences of social
and pro-social behavior. In addition, evidence is advanced to show an evolutionary fitness for social
and pro-social behaviors above and beyond those flowing through their direct consequences for subjective
well-being. This is followed by discussion of specific measures of the social context, of the fundamental
importance of trust as social glue, and of several experiments designed to improve subjective well-being.


John F. Helliwell
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
and Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca
Introduction

Most theory and practice aimed at understanding and improving human well-being deals with
individuals, and largely ignores their social interactions. Likewise, both theory and practice tend
to focus on individual problems and how they can be fixed. This paper attempts to fill these gaps,
first by showing the fundamental importance of the social context, and then by showing how
well-being can be improved by changing the focus from repair of damage to building happier
lives. Both of these new directions are based on recent theoretical and empirical advances in the
study of subjective well-being. Treating people’s self-assessments of the quality of their lives as
valid measures of well-being exposes the importance of the social context and suggests new
ways to design better policies.

The paper starts with demonstrations of the fundamental importance of the social context,
building on the unexpectedly great well-being consequences of social and pro-social behavior. In
addition, evidence is advanced to show an evolutionary fitness for social and pro-social
behaviors above and beyond those flowing through their direct consequences for subjective well-
being. This will be followed by discussion of specific measures of the social context, and of the
fundamental importance of trust as social glue.

Turning then to policy applications, the paper will deal with valuing the social context, building
the evidence base for improving the social context, and demonstrating a variety of policy
applications.

Humans are social beings.

Seen in evolutionary context, brains are expensive, occupying only 2% of adult human body
weight but requiring 20% of total energy intake (Aiello & Wheeler 1995). Early comparative
studies argued that this costly brain was needed to survive and prosper in complex feeding and
foraging environments (Clutton-Brock & Harvey 1980). It has since been argued that primate
brains are larger than required by the relative complications of their ecologies (Dunbar 1998),
and that this extra size is located in the prefrontal cortex, that recently-evolved part of the brain
devoted to the computational demands of complex social systems. This was first labeled
Machiavellian intelligence (Bryne & Whitten 1988) reflecting its original focus on strategies of
deception and dominance, but was later set in a broader context as the social brain hypothesis

                                                   1
(Dunbar 1998). Using several sorts of data, Dunbar argues that the evolution of large human
prefrontal cortexes was required by the complexities of managing social groups, and was
justified, despite its substantial resource cost, by the great benefits from these more complex
social interactions. The evidence includes data showing that across genetically quite separate
primate species there is a strong correlation between prefrontal cortex size and the existence, size
and intensities of social groups (Schultz & Dunbar 2007). A further link between prefrontal
cortex size and social groupings is that the adult cortex size across primate species correlates not
with the duration of gestation, lactation or life, but with the length of the juvenile period, during
which social learning is concentrated (Joffe 1997).

Contemporary evidence of the power and fundamental nature of social activities is provided by
two recent experiments. Cohen et al (2010) found that pain thresholds were much higher for
rowers doing an ergometer workout in synchrony, compared to doing the identical work alone. In
a lighter vein, laughing together (while watching comedy) significantly increased pain thresholds
compared to watching and laughing alone (Dunbar et al 2011). Hence social activities, even of a
fairly basic sort (as with simple synchrony), significantly increase physical and presumably
mental capacities to deal with challenges.

Much of this evolutionary analysis is done in narrowly utilitarian terms: expensive brain
developments were evolutionarily successful because the social activities thereby increased
group fitness and survival powers. The notion of group fitness as sufficient grounds for
evolutionary success was challenged strongly by Williams (1966) and more famously by
Dawkins (1976). Both emphasized that fitness at the individual gene level was required for
evolutionary success. Dawkins’s ‘selfish gene’ description was taken by many to suggest not just
that the evolutionary success of genes was dependent only on their own fitness, but that
individuals were by some parallel reason selfish. At the very least, this forced evolutionists to be
more clear about the channels through which social and pro-social behavior could achieve
evolutionary fitness. West et al (2007) advocate a four-way classification of behaviours that have
been selected for by natural selection, scored by their effects on the actor and the recipient,
respectively: mutual benefit (+/+), altruism (-/+), selfishness (+/-) and spite (-/-). To keep the
altruistic category conceptually clean, they recommend doing the accounting long-term rather
than immediate (to permit what is often called ‘reciprocal altruism’ to be treated as mutually


                                                  2
beneficial) and making ‘weak altruism’ only ambiguously altruistic. Weak altruism is defined as
action that leads to negative direct benefits for the actor relative to other members of the group.
But if the group as a whole benefits from the action, then the actor can have negative effects
relative to the group but possibly even larger positive effects flowing from membership in the
group thereby benefitted (perhaps the boy with his finger in the dike?). Thus some models that
have been described as altruistic because individuals contribute when they could have been free
riders might actually increase fitness even at the individual level, and hence might better be
described as mutually advantageous or ambiguous cases.

However the edges of the categories are drawn, the prevalence of mutual advantage situations,
and hence the evolutionary advantages of social and prosocial behavior, are likely to be larger if
social and pro-social behavior increases subjective well-being. Why might this be the case?

First, the difficulty of assembling and motivating groups of sufficient size and community of
interests to meet effective environmental challenges is bound to be less if members of the species
in question have and enjoy good social relations. For example, the strength of social ties has been
shown to predict increased cooperation in a social network (Harrison et al 2011), and many
studies have shown that even modest amounts of face-to-face connection significantly increase
willingness to co-operate (see the meta-analysis by Balliet 2010).

Second, in addition to all these practical advantages, social engagement also makes people
happy. Such a happiness bonus would itself produce an evolutionary advantage for the species,
because that part of the pre-frontal cortex used for problem-solving but energy-using (Kahneman
2011) thinking1 works more effectively, and suffers less fatigue, when people are happy
(Diamond 2007). If social activity in and of itself makes people happy, then effective groups are
less costly (in terms of the required size and energy use of the prefrontal cortex) to create and
manage. Hence there is likely to be an overall efficiency gain when, as is the case for modern
humans, people simply enjoy each other’s company. Thus in the model of Gintis (2000), any
enjoyment-driven costly cooperative behaviour will increase the chances that a community will
cohere and survive in bad times.


1
 Kahneman (2011) contrasts this more reflective slow thinking with the fast instinctive reactions that are initially
deployed in response to unfolding events.. He refers to the latter as system 1 thinking, because of its first-responder
role, while he refers to the more reflective and energy-using process as system 2 thinking.

                                                           3
Figure 1 provides one example drawn from a vast range of data showing the links between social
activity and happiness. For each age, average happiness scores are reported separately for
weekends and weekdays. Over one-half million respondents to the Gallup Healthways US daily
poll were asked how happy they were yesterday. As shown in Helliwell and Wang (2011b) the
only significant day-of-week patterns were between weekdays and weekends (where the latter
includes all statutory holidays). For all ages, but especially for those ages when full-time work is
the norm, weekends are happier than weekdays. By itself, this finding is interesting, but not a
convincing demonstration of the importance of the social context, because leisure is usually
assumed to be happier than work. But when the results are analyzed in more detail the correlates
of the extra weekend happiness are exposed to be social.

Across individuals, the number of hours of social activity the day before is a strong correlate of
the happiness reported for that day, and average number of daily hours spent in social activities
is one-third larger on weekends. Most of the rest of the weekend effect is determined by the
relative quality of the social context at home and at work. For example, the weekend effect is
less than half as large for those who regard their immediate work supervisor as a partner as it is
for those who see the supervisor as a boss (Helliwell and Wang 2011b, Figure 3.3). Differences
in the time available for social activities are also likely to be a major part of the reason for the U-
shapes of Figure 1, which show that happiness is lowest in midlife, where the competing time
pressures from work and home are greatest, thereby reducing the time available for, and the
pleasures derived from, social interactions. For example, the happiness effects of having children
are more frequently positive on weekends than on weekdays, and for those who are not in full-
time employment.

Many other studies have shown that life satisfaction is higher for those who have larger networks
of both family and friends, and who are able to spend more time with them. Thus both the
existence and use of social networks are important supports for well-being, even when other
factors are taken into account. People with supportive social networks feel more sense of
belonging in their communities, which adds even more to their satisfaction with life. For
example, a strong sense of belonging to one’s community has the same association with life
satisfaction as would a trebling of household income (Helliwell & Barrington-Leigh 2011, Table
4.1).


                                                   4
Humans are pro-social beings.

We have seen that people are happier when they are with other people. This already provides a
stronger basis for individuals to want to build and use their social linkages, and these linkages in
turn increase the prospects of finding collaborative solutions to community problems. The
evolutionary advantage of sociability would be even greater if humans enjoyed not just doing
things with others, but also for others. This makes the study of pro-social behavior important for
the theory of evolution, for the prediction of human behavior, and for the design of public
policies.

What does the evidence show? First, when people are in bilateral social relationships that involve
one person helping the other, it is often, or perhaps usually, the giver who receives the bigger
boost in subjective well-being. For example, Schwartz and Sendor (1999) find that in patient-
based peer-to-peer counseling of multiple sclerosis patients the subjective well-being benefits are
larger and more prolonged for givers than for receivers. What is especially telling about the
example is that the original study only looked at the benefits for recipients, reflecting the
standard assumption that the values of kindness flow to the recipients rather than the donors.
Only afterwards did researchers think to assess the well-being consequences for the givers.
Hence there are still relatively few studies that even try to compare the well-being benefits for
givers and receivers. One prospective study (Brown et al 2003) showed that subsequent mortality
experiences were better for givers than receivers of help. A more recent qualitative study of the
consequences for supporters in peer-to-peer counseling among female cancer patients (Pistrang
et al 2011) showed that while the givers were sometimes apprehensive about possible ill-effects
on their own recovery and ability to cope, they instead found the process very rewarding in
several ways, and most especially in subjective well-being2.

Second, comparative cross-cultural experiments have been combined with international survey
data from more than 130 countries to suggest that the happiness effects of pro-social acts have
claims to be universal features of human behavior. Although the form and purpose of giving
differs from country to country, depending upon needs and customs, those who give are happier


2
  Two examples: “It’s been a very, very positive thing. I’ve walked away feeling really happy, that my very bad
experience has benefited somebody else.” and “It was very nice to feel that you may have shone a bit of light into
the corners of somebody else’s dark room.” (Pistrang et al, 2011, Table 2)

                                                         5
than those who do not (Aknin et al 2010). This is consistent with experimental results from
fifteen different societies showing that co-operative behavior in experimental games is greater
everywhere than would be predicted using selfish assumptions (Henrich et al 2001).

Third, although their pro-social acts make them happier, many people appear to underestimate
the extent of this effect (Dunn et al 2008), just as they tend to over-estimate the subjective well-
being they will get from higher incomes and consumption. One possible, although somewhat
convoluted, rationale for this might be that the so-called ‘warm glow’ obtained by doing things
for others might be less warm if it were foreseen, and hence open to be seen as a more
sophisticated form of selfishness. Perhaps it is no coincidence that almost every religion has a
version of the golden rule as a primary tenet. It has been documented that the existence of such
advisory rules has a significant effect on behavior, and hence can provide a way for unselfish
benevolence to get its full happiness reward. For example, student subjects showed some modest
tendency to give themselves higher grades than they had earned (self-awarded scores exceeded
the true scores by just under 7%, on average) to mark in their own favour (Mazar et al, 2008,
experiment 1), but had no such tendency if they had previously been asked to write down as
many as they could remember of the Ten Commandments. This is in contrast to the dishonest
marking of the unprimed control group and another comparison group asked instead to write
down the names of ten books they had read in high school. External reputation also matters.
Tirole and Benabou (2010) survey studies showing not just that people want to do the right thing,
but that they also want to be seen to do so.

Health feedbacks strengthen the evolutionary case for the pro-social brain

There is a positive feedback loop running from happiness induced by social behavior back into
better health outcomes, which in their turn support happiness. There is a large and growing
literature showing that greater happiness predicts better health (Diener & Chan 2011, Cohen &
Pressman 2006). Through a variety of processes (e.g. Steptoe et al 2005) positive affect reduces
the onset and seriousness of diseases from the common cold (Cohen et al 2003) to suicide
(Koivumaa-Honkanen et al 2000) and all-cause mortality (Danner et al 2001, Chida & Steptoe
2008). In addition to these general links from happiness to better health, there is evidence of
direct links from social nurturing to better health and reproductive fitness (Huppert 2005, 312).


                                                  6
For example, social support early in life is a strong predictor of health in adulthood, mediated in
part by the quality of social relationships during adulthood (Shaw et al 2004).

Finally, another large literature (surveyed by Lyubomirsky et al 2005) shows a number of
feedbacks from positive affect to marital and other social successes likely to support
evolutionary fitness.

What, me worry?

If the positive feedback loop linking sociality, pro-sociality, happiness and health is so powerful
in evolutionary terms, why is there so much unhappiness about? Is there an evolutionary
downside to happiness that requires periodic doses of unease and distrust to make a viable
evolutionary package? In his research into the evolutionary fitness of moods, Nesse (2004)
argues that even though a moderately high baseline mood is likely to be evolutionarily
successful, for reasons like those outlined above, defense against threats requires negative
emotions to spur hard thinking and timely action. An attitude of ‘what, me worry?’ poses an
evolutionary disadvantage in the face of obstacles, whether physical or social in origin, requiring
effective planning and actions if they are to be surmounted. Thus for Nesse, negative emotions
play an essential role as spurs to effortful actions needed to ensure survival. Of course, too much
or misplaced anxiety may be counterproductive. And evolutionary lags may leave some
unnecessary fears intact (fear of snakes is his example) while not yet instilling sufficiently
immediate responses to the impending danger of a speeding car.

Kahneman (2011) makes the same point in a quite different way, using his distinction between
System 1 (fast) and System 2 (slow) thinking. If people are either tired or happy, they are more
likely to use their fast System 1 responses. System 1 thinking is less likely to see threats for what
they are, and hence may be in trouble if the actual environment poses serious threats. Effortful
System 2 analysis is required to assess risks, especially if they are novel or complicated, and to
develop smart strategies for dealing with them. Being too mellow may leave system 2 powers
switched off just when they are needed most.

Do these lines of thought threaten the evolutionary effectiveness of the pro-social brain? I think
not. But they do require a more sophisticated interpretation. The Nesse and Kahneman analysis
argues that a positive feedback loop linking sociality, happiness, and health may threaten

                                                  7
survival power if anxiety and defensive actions cannot be triggered when they are needed. That
is a very important qualification.

The saving grace for the evolutionary power of social and pro-social behavior, even including
their happiness bonuses, is that effective social networks are better both at sounding appropriate
alarms and responding to them. What makes a socially connected community agile and effective
in responding to threats is that its members do not have to waste their scarce system 2 resources,
or be unduly anxious, about watching their backs. Since they are pro-social, and members can
trust each other, the required watchfulness can be shared and delegated, and the best brains
drawn upon for the design of fast action plans when the community faces new threats or
challenges. Indeed, in terms of survival power, the evolutionary advantage of social and pro-
social attributes is likely most in evidence not in times of happy rest, but when the group needs
to act fast to deal with existential threats. Successful responses require the capacity for bouts of
watchful anxiety, purposeful thinking, and the capacity to act in concert when the need arises.

It is not an accident that environmental or other crises can provide occasions for communities
with high social capital to test their mettle and help each other. Examples where communities
were drawn together under external threats include Finnish experience during the Winter War
(Kivimäki & Tepora 2009) and that of Aceh, Indonesia, in response to the 2004 tsunami
(Deshmukh 2008). Less well endowed communities may at least be spurred to press the reset
button eventually to develop a strategy to rebuild, as shown by Kusago’s (2011) analysis of the
destruction and eventual rebuilding of community in Minamata, Japan, after many lives were
lost through poisoning from a chemical plant. He illustrates how social connections were
eventually rebuilt, enabling people to recover better lives from a disastrous starting point.

Measuring the Social Context

How is the social context to be defined and measured? One practical definition might be that
any aspect of the social context is important insofar as it impinges on subjective well-being. This
may leave out linkages of fundamental importance solely because they have not been isolated
and studied enough for their importance to be revealed. In these relatively early years of
attempting to define and assess the importance of different elements of the social context, the



                                                  8
total importance of the social context has probably been understated, because of the lack of
relevant measures for aspects of the social context that theory suggests are likely to be important.

Early empirical work on the social context of well-being was designed to value those aspects of
the social context that had been identified and measured as part of social capital (see especially
Putnam 2000). These initially included social trust (often seen as a measure of the efficacy of
social capital) and a range of measures of social ties to friends, family and neighbours.

Soon after, surveys were extended to produce separate measures of the size and extent of use of
various social networks. Both size and use were found to be important supports for overall
measures of happiness and life satisfaction (Helliwell & Putnam 2004 for comparable Canadian
and U.S. estimates, and Helliwell & Barrington-Leigh 2011 for joint and separate estimates of
the well-being effects of social network size and use).

More recently, measures of social identity have been used to mediate between social interactions
and subjective well-being. One Canadian finding is that local belonging is more important than,
but does not diminish or replace, more encompassing social identities. In particular, evidence
from the Canadian General Social Survey shows that community-level, provincial and national
senses of belonging are all important supports for life satisfaction, with the local effects being
twice as large as those of provincial or national belonging (Helliwell & Barrington-Leigh 2011,
Table 4.1).

Trust is special

Trust provides at once a fundamental measure of the quality of the social context and a key
ingredient for successful collaborations. Interactions build trust, and vice-versa. Trust appears to
be more readily destroyed than rebuilt, although related evidence from well-being studies is not
readily to hand. This asymmetry suggests that extra attention needs to be paid to maintaining the
fabric of trust, since its subsequent re-establishment may be difficult to achieve. Where trust is
low, but not too low, then an external threat can provide a spur to co-operation that would
otherwise have been impossible to achieve.

Thus it was in the case already mentioned of the 2004 tsunami death and damage in Aceh,
Indonesia. The shock was sufficient to break the long established and even more damaging cycle


                                                  9
of conflict that had previously existed. The well-being effects of ending the long conflict - the
peace dividend - were so great that surveys showed subjective average life satisfaction to be
higher after than before the tsunami. But trust levels can be so low, and conflicts so engrained,
that a natural disaster can make them even worse, and external relief efforts can deliver more
grounds for conflict. Such was the case in Sri Lanka, where the direct tsunami damage was of the
same magnitude as in Aceh, but the long-standing conflict was made even worse, and life
satisfaction was much lower after than before the disaster (for a comparison of the two cases, see
Deshmukh 2009). Where trust is high, or at least recoverable, then an external threat or physical
disaster can create opportunities for trust and healthy social connections to be exercised and
celebrated. Where trust is too low, then an external crisis provides one more thing to fight over,
and more evidence of dysfunctional community life.

Where actual and expected trustworthiness differ, it is the expected level that dominates when
people assess the quality of their lives. Analysis based on national surveys of the past and
expected future incidence of property crimes shows a significant negative cross-country
correlation (r=-0.37, p=.05) between subjective well-being and expected future rates of crime.
No such relation shows up for variations in the actual incidence, even though both past
occurrences and future prospects are derived from the same respondents in the same
victimization surveys (Helliwell & Wang 2011a, 55-6).

Although trust in neighbours and strangers delivers large happiness benefits, people
underestimate the chances of their lost wallets being returned. Less than 25% of the population
of Toronto thinks their cash-bearing wallets would be returned, but when the Toronto Star
dropped 20 cash-bearing wallets around town, 16 were returned, all but one with cash intact
(Helliwell & Wang 2011a, 55).

Within workplaces, the importance of trust dwarfs the impact of salary and bonuses: to work
where trust in management is one point higher, on a 10-point scale, has the same relation to life
satisfaction as a one-third higher income (Helliwell & Huang 2010). Yet many public and private
workplaces have seen income disparities grow and trust levels fall over the past thirty years.

Trust is built by frequent chances to interact with strangers and neighbours, whether in elevators,
buses, libraries or public spaces. Yet buildings are designed for looks and streets to move traffic,


                                                 10
with scant thought for shared public spaces in which to build trust needed to let children walk to
school, workers to collaborate for innovation, and passers-by to smile. One example of such
innovation is provided by the surge of interest in community gardens. Although these are usually
undertaken to increase the availability and quality of locally grown food, they increase trust-
building frequent social contacts that can sprout and sustain vibrant local social communities
(Ladner 2011).

Using subjective well-being data to value the social context

Experimental and survey evidence developed over the past fifteen years now permits at least
some aspects of the social context to be valued in ways that enable a possible revolution in the
techniques used to assess public policies. Although benefit/cost analysis has become a standard
tool for evaluating changes in government policies and many investment projects, the
calculations are usually limited to outcomes for which a monetary value can be assigned. Other
outcomes, including changes in the social context, were often recognized to be important. Yet as
‘intangibles’ they were frequently relegated to the footnotes. From there they would emerge only
if two projects were more-or-less tied in terms of the calculated benefit/cost ratios.

All of this has now changed. Analysis of subjective well-being can now deliver estimates of the
well-being contributions of income and various aspects of the social context. These in turn
permit estimates of the income-equivalent values of different aspects of the social context. These
are often described as ‘compensating differentials’, since they represent the amount of income
sufficient to match the value of’ some aspect of the social context. These compensating
differentials can be used to attach income-equivalent values to the social context, thereby lifting
social capital and the quality of community life from the footnotes to the centre of benefit/cost
analysis.

A Canadian study (Gyarmati et al 2008) recruited people in six communities who were receiving
either income assistance or employment insurance, and randomly selected those who were to
receive instead a comparable income for working in community projects chosen and managed by
each of the communities. Their subsequent conventional benefit/cost analysis took direct account
only of the subsequent income and employment experience of those chosen for the programme,
compared to the control group. Changes in community-level social trust were noted, but did not


                                                 11
enter the conventional analysis explicitly. An extended benefit/cost analysis, making use of life
satisfaction equations to attach values to improvements in the quality of community life, lifted
the social context benefits from the footnotes into the central analysis. The resulting benefit/cost
ratios were much higher, showing clearly the advantages of income maintenance programmes
designed to increase the social capital of the participants and their communities.

Building the evidence base for better policies

Much of the early evidence on the value of the social context was based on cross-sectional
survey data. While these results showed many important patterns, there was every indication of
two-way relationships, with better social interactions leading to greater subjective well-being,
and vice versa. The most convincing way of unraveling the underlying causal structures is to find
some form of experimental intervention that can be treated as a trigger for a cascade of
subsequent changes. If the intervention is a natural event, and researchers are fast-moving
enough, then the consequences of the same changes playing out in different communities can be
assessed. Thus it was possible to assess the consequences of new political powers in Italian
regions with differing initial amounts of social capital (Putnam 1993, Helliwell & Putnam 1995).
Alternatively, if the change affects some but not all communities, then the effects of the change
can be established by comparison with otherwise similar communities that did not face the
change (Gyarmati et al 2008).

Where random-assignment tests of changes have been undertaken, they have typically operated
at the individual level, often for reasons of cost or simplicity, usually without any consideration
of variations in the social context. Thus there has been little experimental assessment of how
differing social contexts alter the consequences of interventions. In the light of the importance of
the social context, more of such research is badly needed. A UK experiment showed that starting
a water club in a residential care facility, with increased water consumption as the central aim,
produced significant health benefits. These were initially attributed to a lower incidence of
dehydration, the frequency of which provided the impetus for creating the water club. Yet when
researchers subsequently decomposed the experiment into its club and water-drinking
components (by comparison with an alternative social club that did not involve drinking water or
anything else), it was found that it was the club rather than the water that increased health and
well-being (Gleibs et al 2011).

                                                 12
To broaden the evidence base for policy applications requires imaginative interplay between
large surveys capturing population-level linkages, natural experiments, lab experiments, small-
scale interventions, and larger field trials.

Broadening the scope of policy applications

Discussions of policy uses of well-being research, whether pro or con, usually focus on national
policies of conventional sorts, often relating to the use of taxation to redistribute income or
expenditure, based on estimated relations between income and subjective well-being (e.g. Layard
2005). The importance of the social context of well-being, as documented in this paper, suggests
a much wider range of policy implications and applications.

The social circumstances underpinning subjective well-being are influenced by how all
institutions are set up and managed. The ‘how’ of policy delivery is as important as the ‘what’
(Frey et al 2004). As argued in this paper, and more fully in Helliwell (2011b), there are clear
implications for the management of institutions ranging from schools and hospitals (Haslam et al
2008) to prisons (Leong 2011, Helliwell 2011a), workplaces (Helliwell & Huang 2011b),
communities (Halpern 2010, Bacon et al 2010) and elder care (Haslam et al 2010). The elder
care example helps to show why ‘how’ trumps ‘what’.

Elder-care residents near Exeter, in the UK, were being transferred to a new facility, and the
researchers set up an experiment to test the effects of what seemed a modest change in the ‘how’
the move was done. There were two floors of residents in the facility, and they were treated as
the control and treatment groups for the move to the new facility. The (initially) less happy floor
was made the treatment group. Both groups had the same budget for the decoration of the
common social areas in the new facility. The control group had their social spaces designed by
professionals, while the residents of the unhappy floor were invited to work together to choose
their own décor. This simplest possible change in the ‘how’ of service delivery led the previously
unhappy floor to 50% greater use of their new social spaces, compared to the happy floor. These
effects were both significant and sustained. The previously unhappy floor became the happier
floor, with more social connections and fewer health problems requiring a doctor’s attention.
Social context experiments like this are costly to administer, given the need for group
intervention with comparable control groups, and this may help to explain why there has been so


                                                 13
little research of this type into the possible gains from changing how public and private services
are designed and delivered. Yet the results are so striking, and their applicability to many other
contexts so obvious, that it is right to recommend and expect much more future attention to the
‘how’.

The quality of government institutions has direct linkages to life satisfaction, with efficiency and
trustworthiness likely to be more important than how the government is elected (Helliwell &
Huang 2008).

Diverse policy innovations, each capable of being copied by others, can help to create better
social contexts, and more sustainable environments, in firms, neighbourhoods, NGOs and
nations.

 In the macroeconomic context, happiness equations have been used to estimate the comparable
 well-being values of national inflation and unemployment rates (Di Tella et al 2001, Di Tella &
 MacCulloch 2009) and to compare the direct and indirect well-being consequences of
 unemployment (Helliwell & Huang 2011a). More direct macro policy implications of well-
 being findings are illustrated by the South Korean approach to macroeconomic policies
 designed to maintain income, employment, investment and fiscal balance following the 2008
 global financial crisis (Helliwell 2011b, 298-300). Recognizing the high SWB costs of
 unemployment, the government acted to encourage both public and private employers to
 maintain employment, and to use their temporarily spare capacity to design and implement
 industrial changes for a Green Korea. “The ‘grand social compact’ which was agreed to in
 February 2009 set a guideline according to which the social partners should negotiate
 employment retention as a quid-pro-quo for wage concessions” (OECD 2010, 2). South Korea
 chose policies that could be argued to enhance subjective well-being, above and beyond any
 economic consequences, but still left Korea at the top of the international league table for crisis
 and post-crisis economic outcomes. The ‘social compact’ nature of the policy package almost
 surely contributed additional subjective well-being, according to the evidence reported
 elsewhere in this paper. By redirecting activities rather than increasing unemployment, the
 policy strategy enabled all parties to see themselves not as competitors for fractions of a
 shrinking pie, but as collaborative contributors to outcomes designed to benefit all. Thus more


                                                 14
 recognition of what motivates behavior, and what delivers better lives, can lead to policies that
 simultaneously deliver better economic and non-economic outcomes.

 Conclusion

Research on the determinants of subjective well-being has already produced insights useful for
governments, NGOs, communities, firms and families. The results confirm that sufficient income
is a strong support for happiness, but that the social context is even more important. This is too
often forgotten in the race for higher incomes and consumption.

Income matters less than the chance to connect with others, thereby improving our own lives and
especially the lives of others. There is even evolutionary evidence that bulging human brains,
and especially their prefrontal cortexes, have been crucial in allowing humans to be the most
social beings, living better lives through co-operation.

Within workplaces, the importance of the social context dwarfs the impact of salary and bonuses.
To work where trust in management is one point higher, on a 10-point scale, has the same
relation to life satisfaction as a one-third higher income. Yet many public and private workplaces
have seen income disparities grow and trust levels fall over the past thirty years.

Experiments in elder-care facilities show that residents given the chance to do things together, to
help themselves and others, live healthier and happier lives. Other experiments show that
although everybody gains from peer support groups among disease sufferers, the care-givers gain
even more health and happiness than do the recipients.

Although trust in neighbours and strangers delivers huge happiness benefits, people overestimate
the risks of future burglaries and underestimate the chances of their lost wallets being returned.
Trust is built by frequent chances to interact with strangers and neighbours, whether in elevators,
buses, libraries or public spaces. Yet buildings are designed for looks and streets to move traffic,
with scant thought for the public spaces needed to build the trust needed to let children walk to
school.

Other examples, ranging from delivery of health care, management of prisons and schools, to
macroeconomic policies, show how governments can learn from happiness research to make



                                                 15
lives better for all. Individuals and neighbors can lead the way, improving lives while showing
governments better paths to follow.




                                               16
                                          References

Aknin, L.B. , C.P. Barrington-Leigh, E.W. Dunn, J.F. Helliwell, R. Biswas-Diener, I. Kemeza, P.
     Nyende, C.E. Ashton-James & M.I. Norton (2010) ‘Prosocial spending and well-being:
     cross-cultural evidence for a psychological universal’ NBER Working Paper 16415.
     Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Aiello, L.C. & Wheeler, P. (1995) ‘The expensive tissue hypothesis’ Current Anthropology
      36:184-93.

Bacon, N., M. Brophy, N. Mguni, G. Mulgan & A. Shandro (2010) The States of Happiness:
     Can Public Policy Shape People’s Wellbeing and Resilience? London: The Young
     Foundation.

Balliet, D. (2010) ‘Conversation and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas: A Meta-Analytic Review’
      Journal of Conflict Resolution 54, 39-57.

Batson, C.D. & L.L. Shaw (1991) ‘Evidence for altruism: Toward a pluralism of prosocial
     motives’ Psychological Inquiry 2(2): 107-22.

Brown, S.L., R.M. Nesse, A.D. Vinokur & D.M. Smith (2003) ‘Providing social support may be
    more beneficial than receiving it: Results from a prospective study of mortality’
    Psychological Science 14(4): 320-7.

Bryne, R. & R. Whitten, eds. (1988) Machiavellian Intelligence Oxford: Oxford University
     Press.

Chida, Y. & A. Steptoe (2008) ‘Positive psychological well-being and mortality: A quantitative
     review of prospective observational studies’ Psychosomatic Medicine 70, 741-56.

Clutton-Brock, T.H. & P.H. Harvey (1980) ‘Primates, brains and ecology’ Journal of Zoology
      190(3), 309-23.

Cohen, S., W.J. Doyle, R.B. Turner, C.M. Alper & D.P. Skoner (2003) ‘Emotional style and
     susceptibility to the common cold’ Psychosomatic Medicine 50, 652-7.

Cohen, S. and S.D. Pressman (2006) ‘Positive Affect and Health’ Current Directions in
     Psychological Science 15(2), 22-5.

Cohen, E.E.A., R. Ejsmond-Frey, N. Knight & R.I.M. Dunbar (2010) ‘Rowers’ high:
     Behavioural synchrony is correlated with elevated pain thresholds’ Biology Letters 6(1),
     106-8

Corning, P.A. (1996) ‘The co-operative gene: On the role of synergy in evolution’ Evolutionary
     Theory 11, 183-207.



                                              17
Danner, D.D., D.A. Snowdon & W.D. Friesen (2001) ‘Positive emotions in early life and
    longevity: Findings from the nun study’ Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 80,
    804-13.

Dawkins, R. (1976) The Selfish Gene Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Deshmukh, Y. (2009) ‘The “hikmah” of peace and the PWI. Impact of natural disasters on the
    QOL in conflict-prone areas: a study of the Tsunami-hit transitional societies of Aceh
    (Indonesia) and Jaffna (Sri Lanka)’. Florence, ISQOLS World Congress, July 2009.

Diamond, A. (2007) ‘Interrelated and interdependent’ Developmental Science 10(1), 152-158.

Diener, E. & M.Y. Chan (2011) ‘Happy people live longer: Subjective well-being contributes to
     health and longevity’ Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being 3(1), 1-43.

Diener, E., R. Lucas, U. Schimmack & J.F. Helliwell (2009) Well-Being for Public Policy, New
     York: Oxford University Press.

Di Tella, R., R. MacCulloch and A. Oswald (2001) ‘Preferences over inflation and
     unemployment: Evidence from surveys of happiness’ American Economic Review 91(1),
     335-41.

Di Tella, R. & R. MacCulloch (2009) ‘Happiness, contentment and other emotions for central
     bankers’ In Foote, C.L., L. Goette, & S. Meier, eds., Policymaking Insights From
     Behavioral Economics. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (Proceedings of a
     conference held September 2007), 311-73.

Dunbar, R.I.M. (1998) ‘The social brain hypothesis’ Evolutionary Anthropology 6(5), 178-90.

Dunbar, R.I.M. (2003) ‘The social brain: Mind, language and society in evolutionary
    perspective’ Annual Review of Anthropology 32, 163-81.

Dunbar, R.I.M., R. Baron, A. Frangou, E. Pearce, E.J.C. van Leeuwen, J. Stow, G. Partridge, I
    MacDonald, V. Barra & M. van Vugt (2011) ‘Social laughter is correlated with elevated
    pain threshold’ Phil Trans R. Soc Lon B. Published online, 14 September 2011, in advance
    of the print edition.

Dunn, E.W., Aknin, L.B., Norton, M.I. (2008) ‘Spending money on others promotes happiness’
     Science 319, 1687-1688.

Frederickson, B.L. (2004) ‘The broaden-and-build theory of positive emotions’ Phil Trans R.
     Soc Lon. B 359, 1367-77.

Frey, B.S., M. Benz & A. Stutzer (2004) ‘Introducing procedural utility: Not only what but how
      matters’ Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 160, 377-401.



                                              18
Gintis, H. (2000) ‘Strong reciprocity and human sociality’ Journal of Theoretical Biology 206.
      169-79.

Gleibs, I.H., C. Haslam, S.A. Haslam & J.M. Jones (2011) ‘Water clubs in residential care: Is it
     the water or the club that enhances health and well-being?’ Psychology & Health 26(10),
     1361-77.

Gyarmati, D., de Raaf, S., Palameta, B., Nicholson, C., & Hui, T. (2008). Encouraging Work and
    Supporting Communities: Final results of the Community Employment Innovation Project.
    Ottawa: Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.

Halpern, D. (2010). The Hidden Wealth of Nations. Cambridge: Polity Press.

Haslam, C., A. Holme, S.A. Haslam, A. Iyer, J. Jetten & W.H. Williams (2008) ‘Maintaining
     group memberships: Social identity continuation predicts well-being after a stroke’
     Neuropsychological Rehabilitation 18(5/6), 671-91.

Haslam, C., S.A. Haslam, J. Jetten, A. Bevins, S. Ravenscroft & J. Tonks (2010) ‘The social
     treatment: The benefits of group interventions in residential care settings’ Psychology and
     Aging 25(1), 157-67.

Helliwell, J.F. (2011a) ‘Institutions as enablers of well-being: The Singapore prison case study’
      International Journal of Wellbeing 1(2), 255-65
       http://www.internationaljournalofwellbeing.org/index.php/ijow/article/view/28

Helliwell, J.F. (2011b) ‘How can subjective well-being be improved?’ In F. Gorbet & A. Sharpe,
      eds. New Directions for Intelligent Government in Canada. Ottawa: Centre for the Study of
      Living Standards 283-304. http://www.csls.ca/festschrift/Helliwell.pdf

Helliwell, J.F. & C.P. Barrington-Leigh (2010) ‘Measuring and understanding subjective well-
      being’ Canadian Journal of Economics 43, 729-53.

Helliwell, J.F. & C.P. Barrington-Leigh (2011) ‘How much is social capital worth?’ In J. Jetten,
      C. Haslam & A. Haslam, eds. The Social Cure: Identity, Health and Well-Being London:
      Psychology Press, 55-71.

Helliwell, J.F., C.P. Barrington-Leigh, A. Harris, & H. Huang (2010) ‘International evidence on
      the social context of well-being’ In E. Diener, J.F. Helliwell & D. Kahneman, eds.
      International Differences in Well-Being. New York: Oxford University Press. 291-350.

Helliwell, J.F. & H. Huang (2008) ‘How’s your government? International evidence linking
      good government and well-being’ British Journal of Political Science 38, 595-619.

Helliwell, J.F. & H. Huang (2010) ‘How’s the job? Well-being and social capital in the
      workplace’ Industrial and Labor Relations Review 63, 205-28.



                                                19
Helliwell, J.F. & H. Huang (2011a) ‘New measures of the costs of unemployment: Evidence
      from the subjective well-being of 2.3 million Americans’ NBER Working Paper 16829.
      Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Helliwell, J.F. & H. Huang (2011b) ‘Well-being and trust in the workplace’ Journal of
      Happiness Studies 12, 747-67.

Helliwell, J.F. & R.D. Putnam (1995) ‘Economic growth and social capital in Italy’ Eastern
      Economic Journal 21(3), 295-307.

Helliwell, J.F. & R.D. Putnam (2004) ‘The Social Context of Well-Being’ Phil Trans R. Soc
      Lon. B 359: 1435-46. Reprinted in F.A. Huppert, B. Keverne & N. Baylis, eds., The
      Science of Well-Being. London: Oxford University Press, 2005, 435-59.

Helliwell, J.F. & S. Wang (2011a) ‘Trust and well-being’ International Journal of Wellbeing
      1(1): 42-78. www.internationaljournalofwellbeing.org/index.php/ijow/article/view/3/85

Helliwell, J.F. & S. Wang (2011b) ‘Weekends and subjective well-being’ NBER Working Paper
      17180. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Henrich, J., R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr, H. Gintis and R. McElreath (2001) ‘In
     search of Homo Economicus: Behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies’
     American Economic Review 91(2), 73-8.

Huppert, F. (2005) ‘Positive mental health in individuals and populations’ In F.A. Huppert, B.
    Keverne & N. Baylis, eds., The Science of Well-Being. London: Oxford University Press,
    307-40.

Joffe, T.H. (1997) ‘Social pressures have selected for an extended juvenile period in primates’
      Journal of Human Evolution 32, 593-605.

Kahneman, D. (2011) Thinking, Fast and Slow. Toronto: Doubleday.

Kivimäki, V. & T. Tepora (2009) ‘War of hearts: Love and collective attachment as integrating
     factors in Finland during World War II’ Journal of Social History 43(2), 285-305.

Koivumaa-Honkanen, H., R. Honkanen, H. Viinamäki, K. Heikkilä, J. Kaprio & M. Koskenvuo
     (2000) ‘Self-reported life satisfaction and 20-year mortality in healthy Finnish adults’
     American Journal of Epidemiology 152(10), 983-91.

Kusago, T. (2011) ‘A sustainable well-being initiative: Social divisions and the recovery process
     in Minamata, Japan’. Community Quality of Life Indicators: Best Cases V. 3, 97-111.

Ladner, P. (2011) The Urban Food Revolution. Vancouver: New Society.

Layard, R. (2005) Happiness: Lessons from a New Science New York: Penguin.

                                               20
Leong, Lena (2011) ‘The Story of the Singapore Prison Service: From Custodians of Prisoners to
     Captains of Life’. In J. Bourgon, ed. A New Synthesis of Public Administration. Kingston:
     Queen’s School of Policy Studies, McGill-Queen’s University Press (2011, pp. 139-154).

Lyubomirsky, S., L. King & E. Diener (2005) ‘The benefits of positive affect: Does happiness
     lead to success?’ Psychological Bulletin 131(6), 803-55.

Mazar, N., O. Amir & D. Ariely (2008) ‘The dishonesty of honest people: A theory of self-
    concept maintenance’ Journal of Marketing Research 45, 633-44.

Pistrang, N., Z. Jay, S. Gessler & C. Barker (2012) ‘Telephone peer support for women with
      gynaecological cancer: Benefits and challenges for supporters’ Psycho-Oncology (in press)

OECD (2010) Employment Outlook 2010 - How Does Korea Compare? Paris: OECD
     http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/13/42/45603966.pdf

Putnam, R.D. (1993) Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy Princeton:
     Princeton University Press.

Putnam, R.D. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community, New
     York: Simon & Schuster.

Schwartz, C. E., & M. Sendor (1999) ‘Helping others helps oneself: response shift effects in peer
    support.’ Social Science & Medicine 48: 1563-75.

Schultz, S. & R.I.M. Dunbar (2007) ‘The evolution of the social brain: anthropoid primates
     contrast with other vertebrates’ Proceedings of the Royal Society B 274: 2429-36.

Shaw, B.A., N. Krause, L.M. Chatters, C.M. Connell & B. Ingersoll-Drayton (2004) ‘Emotional
     support from parents early in life, aging, and health’ Psychology and Aging 19(1), 4-12.

Steptoe, A., J. Wardle, M. Marmot & B.S. McEwen (2005) ‘Positive affect and health-related
      neuroendocrine, cardiovascular, and inflammatory processes’ Proceedings of the National
      Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102(18), 6508-12.

Tirole, J. & R. Benabou (2010) ‘Individual and corporate social responsibility’ Economica 77, 1-
      19.

West, S.A., A.S. Griffin & A. Gardner (2007) ‘Social semantics: altruism, cooperation, strong
     reciprocity and group selection’ Journal of Evolutionary Biology 20(2), 415-32.

Williams, G.C. (1966) Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some Current
      Evolutionary Thought Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                               21
22
                  Figure 1: Happiness by age, on weekdays and weekends
1.000




0.950




0.900




0.850




0.800
        18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80

                                       Weekend           Weekdays




                                                  23
