                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE REVENUE DEMANDS OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEE PENSION PROMISES

                                         Robert Novy-Marx
                                          Joshua D. Rauh

                                        Working Paper 18489
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18489


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




Rauh gratefully acknowledges funding from the Zell Center for Risk Research at the Kellogg School
of Management. We thank Frank de Jong and David Wilcox for discussions, as well as seminar participants
at the Wharton Household Finance Conference, the Wharton Applied Economics Seminar, the Harvard
University Public Finance Seminar, HEC Paris, the University of Lugano, the Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago, and the European Finance Association 2011 conference for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Robert Novy-Marx and Joshua D. Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Revenue Demands of Public Employee Pension Promises
Robert Novy-Marx and Joshua D. Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 18489
October 2012
JEL No. E62,H31,H55,H62,H70,H74

                                              ABSTRACT

We calculate increases in contributions required to achieve full funding of state and local pension systems
in the U.S. over 30 years. Without policy changes, contributions would have to increase by 2.5 times,
reaching 14.1% of the total own-revenue generated by state and local governments. This represents
a tax increase of $1,385 per household per year, around half of which goes to pay down legacy liabilities
while half funds the cost of new promises. We examine sensitivity to asset return assumptions, wage
correlations, the treatment of workers not currently in Social Security, and endogenous geographical
shifts in the tax base.


Robert Novy-Marx
Simon Graduate School of Business
University of Rochester
305 Schlegel Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
Robert.Novy-Marx@Simon.Rochester.edu

Joshua D. Rauh
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Knight Management Center
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305-7298
and NBER
Rauh_Joshua@gsb.stanford.edu
         The condition of state and local government defined benefit (DB) pension systems in the
U.S. has received national attention in debates over government budgets. The academic literature
on this issue has primarily focused on three main questions. First, analyses of the strength of the
legal claims of public pension beneficiaries have informed studies of the measurement of
liabilities under appropriate discount rates (see Gold 2002; Novy-Marx and Rauh 2008, 2009,
2011a, 2011b; Brown and Wilcox 2009). These papers have largely focused on already-accrued
liabilities. Second, several papers have considered the optimal level of funding for public
employee pension plans (D’Arcy, et al 1999; Bohn 2011) in light of the political economy of
public sector debt decisions (Persson and Tabellini 2000; Alesina and Perotti, 1995). Third, an
extensive literature has considered the question of optimal asset allocation (Black 1989; Bodie
1990; Lucas and Zeldes 2006, 2009; Pennacchi and Rastad 2011).1
         Missing in the literature has been an analysis of the revenue demands of the pension
promises to public employees when considering the plans on an ongoing basis. If states and local
governments are to pay pensions under current policies, how much more revenue will need to be
devoted to these systems, both to pay down legacy liabilities and fully fund service accruals?
This paper provides calculations of the increases in contributions that would be required to
achieve fully funded pension systems in 30 years, a standard amortization period. These
contribution increases are calculated relative to a base of Gross State Product (GSP) growth
applied to today’s contributions. Results are presented under a variety of possible assumptions
about growth, asset returns, the treatment of future work by current employees, and the
sensitivity of state and local growth to policy changes. We loosely call the latter effects “Tiebout
effects” after Tiebout (1956).2
         Contributions from state and local governments to pay for public employee retirement
benefits, including the employer share of payments into Social Security, currently amount to
5.7% of the total own-revenue generated by these entities (all state and local taxes, fees, and
charges). In aggregate, and assuming each state grows at its 10 year average with no Tiebout
effects, government contributions to state and local pension systems must rise to 14.1% of own-
         1
           Other papers have surveyed various labor market, behavioral, and political economy aspects of public
pensions (Friedberg 2011; Beshears, et al 2011; and Schieber 2011). Shoag (2011) considers macroeconomic
impacts of pension contributions. Fitzpatrick (2011) measures the valuation placed by a group of Illinois public
employees on their pension benefits based on their choices to buy into additional retirement benefits.
         2
           To be precise, the effect we consider is limited to taxpayers “voting with their feet,” not the equilibrium
provision of local public goods. The voting-with-feet phenomenon reflects the incentive to leave states with high tax
burdens and worse public services in order to migrate to states with lower tax burdens and better public services.

                                                          2
revenue to achieve fully funded systems in 30 years. Average contributions would have to rise to
40.4% of payroll to achieve these goals, corresponding to an increase of 24.1% of payroll. This
analysis starts from estimates of December 2010 asset and liability levels for state and local
pension funds, and holds employee contributions as a percent of payroll constant at current rates.
       These results may be best understood in terms of per-household contribution increases
that would have to start immediately and grow along with state economies. The average
immediate increase is $1,385 per household per year. In twelve states, the necessary immediate
increase is more than $1,500 per household per year, and in five states it is at least $2,000 per
household per year. A key feature of this analysis is that it accounts for the cost of new DB
accruals, for both current and future workers, not just the cost of unfunded legacy liabilities.
Decomposing the results into these two components reveals that 49% of the increased
contributions would be required to pay only the present value of new service accruals.
       These results are computed under an asset return assumption in which the pension fund
assets earn a real risk-free rate of return, approximated by the yield on long-duration TIPS (1.7%
as of December 2010) plus inflation. That is, we calculate required contributions under the risk-
adjusted (or in finance terminology risk-neutral) mean real return. Considering the unadjusted
return distribution would ignore the fact that the worst scenarios occur when marginal utility is
highest. Under the risk-adjusted expected baseline, we also consider the possibility that public
sector wages covary with priced risk factors (i.e., the market). When public sector salaries are
exposed to priced risks, expected wages grow more slowly under the risk neutral measure than
under the objective measure. Implementing wage risk in this fashion has a relatively modest
effect on the results, reducing the required increases to $1,285 per household from $1,385.
       In sensitivity analysis, we compute the costs under the 10th and 90th percentile of risk-
adjusted asset growth, based on standard assumptions about the return properties of state pension
fund assets. If only the 10th percentile outcome is achieved, the increase in the required
contribution rises to $2,468 per household (24% of tax revenue). If the 90th percentile outcome is
achieved, the increase in the required contributions drops to $756 (7% of tax revenue). The
effects of the wage correlations are greatest when asset returns are low.
       Introducing Tiebout effects, we examine how the results change when raising revenues or
cutting services reduces a state’s long-run economic growth rates, as taxpayers respond by
relocating to states that provide more attractive services at lower prices. This has essentially no

                                                  3
effect on nationwide totals and means, but increases the dispersion in needed revenues among
states. States whose governments require the largest increases relative to GSP, such as Ohio,
Oregon, New Mexico, and Illinois, would need the immediate increase to be several hundred
dollars larger per household under a sensitivity parameter of two (two percentage point reduction
in long-run GSP growth per percentage point of GSP raised in revenues), whereas states whose
governments require the smallest increases see their required increases decline. The effects grow
as the sensitivity parameter increases.
        Measuring the revenue demands of public pension systems under current policy requires
calculating “service costs” for the workers in the plans. These quantify the present value of
newly accrued benefits, which is the cost of the increase in pension benefits plan participants
earn by working one more year. State and local systems follow GASB rules and discount the
pension liabilities using expected returns on assets. Using Treasury inflation-linked yield curves
to measure the present value of deflated benefit promises, we find that with the possible
exception of Indiana, there is no state for which the current total contributions by all state and
local government entities are greater than the present value of newly accrued benefits for those
entities. At least thirteen states would need to double contributions just to pay this service cost.
        The paper then examines how much the required contribution increases would be reduced
under several policy changes that reduce future benefit accruals. To start, we perform the
analysis assuming that all new hires receive defined contribution (DC) plans, as has happened in
Utah and Alaska and been proposed in Florida.3 We assume that the DC plan will cost the
employer 10% of payroll. Assigning new hires to DC plans is known as a “soft freeze” of the DB
plan. We also assume that new workers in plans whose workers are currently excluded from
Social Security (representing around 30% of today’s public employees) would have to be
enrolled in Social Security. We model two scenarios for the allocation of the 12.4% of payroll
cost of the new Social Security contributions: either it is borne entirely by the employer, or it is
shared equally between employer and employee.4
        Our analysis shows that soft freezes have moderate revenue-saving effects. The required
increases decline from $1,385 to $1,210 per household, excluding Tiebout effects and wage risk,

        3
           In the baseline analysis under no policy changes, we have incorporated the fact that soft freezes are
already effective in Utah and Alaska.
         4
           From a statutory perspective, employers and employees share the Social Security contributions equally.
The question is whether employees would need to be given a pay increase of up to 6.2% in order to accept the
arrangement.

                                                         4
and assuming the employer bears the full cost of new Social Security entrance. By making the
employer responsible for DC contributions of 10% of payroll plus the entire 12.4% Social
Security contribution, these calculations by assumption make the soft freeze relatively expensive
for systems where employees are not in Social Security. As a result, soft freezes under the above
parameters reduce the fiscal burden for all but seven of the states that have not already closed
DB plans to new workers. The exceptions are states that have relatively high employee
contribution rates with low Social Security coverage: Ohio, Illinois, Colorado, Massachusetts,
Missouri, Louisiana and Maine. For those states, moving to a cost structure where the
governments bear the costs of paying 10% of payroll into a DC plan plus the entire 12.4% Social
Security contribution would be more costly than actually funding the DB promises for new
workers. If Social Security costs are shared, then Ohio, Colorado, and Maine are the only states
that still do not benefit from a soft freeze with no other plan changes.5 These results also vary
with return assumptions and the correlation of wages with returns. At the 90th percentile return,
soft freezes would have very little cost savings.
        An alternative policy that has not, to our knowledge, yet been implemented by any public
DB system but that is not uncommon in the private sector, is a “hard freeze.” Under a hard freeze
all future benefit accruals are stopped, even for existing workers. No earned benefits, including
cost of living adjustments (COLAs) are revoked, but benefits cease to grow with service and
salary. We assume that retirement benefits for all future work under a hard freeze would be
compensated with a DC plan with the same parameters and cost sharing as in our soft freeze
scenario, including Social Security for those employees currently excluded from the system.
Hard freezes have more significant revenue-saving effects. If all plans were hard-frozen, total
increases would average only 4.8% of own-revenue, or $800 per household. This analysis
assumes that public employees would accept DC plans with a 10% employer contribution (which
is relatively generous by private sector standards) without compensating salary increases, with
the employer picking up the full cost of any Social Security enrollment. If Social Security costs
for new entrants could be shared equally between employer and employee, the total increases
decline to 4.2% of total own revenue or $701 per household. Under a soft freeze, the effect of



        5
          Such an analysis necessarily does not reflect one advantage of DC plans, namely that their transparency
ensures there will be no unfunded liabilities or unrecognized public sector borrowing through pension promises.

                                                         5
different asset return assumptions is somewhat more muted than under the baseline, and under a
hard freeze it is even more muted.
       This paper proceeds as follows. In Section I we explain the institutional background
behind public sector DB plans in the U.S. and detail this paper’s contribution to the literature. In
Section II we describe the data and the aggregation of the systems to the state and local level,
and sketch out current revenue and pension contribution policy. In Section III, the model for
making these calculations is presented in detail. In Section IV we present and discuss the results.
Section V concludes.

                           I. Institutional Background and Literature
       Most U.S. state and local governments offer their employees DB pension plans. This
arrangement contrasts with the defined contribution (DC) plans that now prevail outside the
public sector, such as 401(k) or 403(b) plans, in which employees save for their own retirement
(often with matching employer contributions) and manage their own investments. In a DB plan
the employer promises the employee an annual payment that begins when the employee retires,
where the annual payment depends on the employee’s age, tenure, and late-career salary. For a
sample of the large public finance literature on the costs and benefits of DB and DC plans, see
Bodie, Marcus, and Merton (1988), Samwick and Skinner (2004), and Poterba, et al (2007).
       When a government promises a future payment to a worker, it creates a financial liability
for its taxpayers. When the worker retires, the state must make the benefit payments. To prepare
for this, states typically contribute to and manage their own pension funds, pools of money
dedicated to providing retirement benefits to state employees. If these pools do not have
sufficient funds when the worker retires, then the states will have to raise taxes or cut spending at
that time, or default on their obligations to retired employees. When governments promise
deferred compensation in the form of DB pensions to employees when they retire, but do not set
aside sufficient funds to honor those promises, they are effectively borrowing from future
taxpayers. As a result, the definition of “sufficient funds” is important.
       Government accounting procedures in this area contrast with the financial dictum that
cash flows should be discounted at discount rates that reflect their risk. Under guidelines
established by the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) state and local
governments discount their pension liabilities at expected returns on their plan assets. Plans’
actuarially recognized liabilities are therefore mechanically decreasing in the riskiness of the
                                                  6
investments. Plan actuaries typically assume that the expected return on their portfolios will be
about 8 percent, and then measure the adequacy of assets to meet liabilities based on that
expected return. This accounting standard sets up a false equivalence between relatively certain
pension payments and the much less certain outcome of a risky investment portfolio (see Gold
2002; and Bader and Gold 2004).
         As Brown and Wilcox (2009) point out, DB pension promises based on current levels of
service and salary are likely to be paid in full.6 Novy-Marx and Rauh (2008, 2009, 2011a, 2011b)
discount pension liabilities at rates that reflect their relatively low levels of risk, arguing
primarily for the use of the Treasury yield curve to discount nominal payments. They focus on
the accrual measure called the Accumulated Benefit Obligation (ABO), which essentially equals
the present value of what would be owed if the plan were frozen and workers did not earn the
rights to any benefits beyond what they would be entitled to based on today’s service and salary.
Other possible measures of obligations take into account some of the increase in benefits
expected with future service. The present values of these broader measures, however, cannot be
compared to today’s assets in pension funds since counting the present value of future benefit
accruals would also require calculating the present value of future contributions.
         A key difference between this paper and Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011a) is therefore that
this paper requires an explicit calculation of the annual economic cost of the new retirement
benefits earned by existing workers. In the baseline scenario without pension freezes or policy
changes, the cost for these workers is the annual present value of new benefit promises,
otherwise known as the service cost. In the baseline scenario with no policy changes, we
calculate the contributions necessary to pay off any unfunded ABO liability that exists today
over 30 years, plus the present value of all new benefit accruals over that time period.
         A second important contribution of this paper over Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011a) is that
we explicitly account for the costs of new hires. In the baseline scenario, the annual cost of a new
worker is that worker’s service cost. To model a soft freeze, or closing of the plan to new
workers, the pension cost of new employees is assumed to be that of a DC plan with an employer
         6
           A number of states enshrine the payment of pensions as an obligation within their constitutions, providing
explicit guarantees that public pension liabilities will be met in full. Furthermore, state employees are a powerful
constituency, making it hard to imagine that their already-promised benefits would be impaired. Indeed, Brown and
Wilcox (2009) discuss that in major municipal debt crises of the past, bonds were restructured while pension debt
was honored in full. Some examples of this are Orange County in the 1990s, and the bankrupt city of Vallejo,
California currently. Another consideration is whether the federal government would bail out any state that
threatened not to pay already promised pensions to state workers.

                                                         7
contribution equal to 10% of payroll, plus the cost of providing Social Security to new workers
in those systems that do not currently enroll workers in Social Security. The cost of Social
Security is 12.4% of payroll, which generally is split equally between employers and employees.
Our primary analysis is based on the notion that workers not in Social Security would require
pay increases of 6.2% to pay their share, so that the cost of both the employer and employee
share would effectively be paid by the employer.
         The soft freeze analysis is performed independently of any calculation of service costs. It
is computationally convenient to calculate the contributions necessary to pay off the Present
Value of Benefits (PVB) liability, which forecasts all future accruals for current workers, as
opposed to the ABO. In other words, this calculation solves for the government contribution
rates over the next 30 years that will be necessary, in conjunction with the plans’ assets and
investment return (inflation plus the current real yield), to pay all expected benefits, taking into
account both employee contributions and the costs of paying DC benefits for new employees.7
         We also consider the possibility of hard freezes, in which all benefit accruals are stopped,
including for current workers. In a hard freeze no accumulated benefits are taken away, but
employees stop accruing defined benefits with additional years of service and salary increases.
Instead, each employee receives a DC account (in the case of corporations this is generally a
401(k) plan) and all contributions from the date of the freeze go into that account. Major
corporations that have undertaken freezes include Verizon Communications, IBM, and Alcoa. In
our modeling of a hard freeze, we assume that the governments need only pay off today’s
unfunded ABO liability over 30 years, with DC contributions for everyone going forward and
the complete loss of future employee contributions to DB plans.8
         An important issue is the treatment of inflation assumptions. In this paper, we model real
cash flows, deflating nominal cash flows forecast along the lines of Novy-Marx and Rauh
(2011a, 2011b) using the inflation assumption built into the forecast nominal benefit payments.
Accordingly, our baseline assumption is that the real value of assets grows at the point on the
TIPS yield curve that corresponds to the average duration of real liabilities (21 years), which is

         7
            We also account for contributions that current workers make to the DB plans after the amortization
period, but these have essentially no impact on the results as very few current employees will still be working for the
plans in 30 years. See Section III for further details.
          8
            Our analysis of pension freezes thus relates to a small academic literature on the effects of freezes on
costs or firm value, including Comprix and Muller (2010), Milevsky and Song (2010), and Rauh and Stefanescu
(2009).

                                                          8
1.7%. This assumption implies that the nominal value of assets grows at inflation plus 1.7%. In
calculating service costs, we again use real Treasury yields (based on TIPS) to discount deflated
cash flows, rather than nominal Treasury yields to discount nominal cash flows, to calculate the
change in the present value ABO liability resulting from an additional year of work.

                   II. Data on Pension Systems at the State and Local Level
       This section describes the data sources used in this study. Our ultimate analysis, given the
potential fluidity of whether state or local governments are responsible for unfunded liabilities,
aggregates all state and local pension systems within each state. Similarly, we aggregate revenue
sources from the level of state governments and local governments to the state level. A key
element of the descriptions in this section is therefore how the state and local government data
are aggregated to the state level.

                           A. Data on Defined Benefit Pension Systems
       Key ingredients in the calculations include all of the inputs that go into the cash flow
calculations in Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011a, 2011b), as well as data on pension fund assets from
those same sources. The primary dataset consists of information from Comprehensive Annual
Financial Reports (CAFRs) of 116 pension systems at the state level used in Novy-Marx and
Rauh (2011a), and information from the 77 local-system CAFRs used in Novy-Marx and Rauh
(2011b), for a total of 193 pension plan systems. The sample plans consist of the universe of
plans with more than $1 billion in assets. The critical inputs to the model from these reports are:
the system’s own reported liability, the discount rate used by the system, the accrual method
employed by the system, the average and total salary of active workers, the ratio of workers who
are separated and vested but not yet retired to those who are retired and drawing a benefit, the
benefit factors in the benefit formulas, the actual benefit payouts in 2009, the cost of living
adjustments, and the assumed inflation rates. These variables are all summarized in Novy-Marx
and Rauh (2011a, 2011b).
       We explain the methodology for estimating the cash flows on a plan-by-plan basis in
Section III. The study provides estimates for the universe of state and local defined benefit plans
by scaling up the cash flows from the state and local plans that we have to match the benefit
payouts from the U.S. Census Bureau (2010a) at the level of each state. The Census Bureau
provides measures of benefit payments at an aggregated level to all state and local government

                                                  9
employees within each state. The scaling factor used is simply the ratio of total benefits of in-
state public pension systems provided by the Census to benefits of in-state plans in our CAFR-
based sample. The implicit assumption is that the trajectory of future cash flows of local plans
that are not covered in our local-system sample are similar to those of the state and local plans
for which CAFRs were obtained. The average adjustment across the 50 states is 6.7% and the
median is 3.5%. The largest adjustment factors were for Nebraska (56.9%), Louisiana (35.6%),
and Michigan (30.9%). The Census of Governments lists substantial numbers of small local
plans in those states that are not captured in our sample of local reports.
         To calculate pension assets at the state level, a similar procedure was followed. We
aggregate all state and local plan assets as of June 2009 to the state level. We apply the
adjustment factors above, which again are based on ratios of benefits for covered versus not-
covered plans. Finally, we increase plan assets to reflect the higher levels of assets in 2010 than
in 2009. We use an adjustment factor of 1.235, based on the 23.5% increases over this 18 month
period documented in the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds.
         To bring estimated liabilities to December 2010, we calculate from the CAFR database
that stated liabilities grew at a 5.52% annual rate between plan years 2007 and 2008, and at a
5.51% annual rate between plan years 2008 and 2009.9 Given the stability of this growth rate, we
applied a 5.5% annualized growth rate to liabilities between June 2009 and December 2010, in
order to predict the value of what stated liabilities under the systems’ own accounting methods
would be if they were disclosed as of December 2010.
         Our calculations also require knowing which systems include their workers in Social
Security. For this purpose, we begin with data from the Center for Retirement Research (2011)
and augment it with searches of the systems' own websites. Of the state-level plans in our sample
we find that 16% of plans do not participate in Social Security, representing 24% of total payroll.
At the local level, there is less Social Security coverage. Around 36% of locally sponsored plans
in the sample had no Social Security coverage, due in large part to the fact that many systems for
public safety officials do not participate. Around 52% of the locally sponsored plans have all
participants in Social Security. In the remaining 12% of the local plans, some groups (usually



         9
           Casual observation of actuarial reports suggests that some of the liability growth was predicted by state
and local actuarial models, but some is from the “actuarial loss” of realized outcomes on job separation and
mortality being out of line with predicted values.

                                                          10
public safety officials) were excluded from Social Security whereas the rest of the employees
were in Social Security.10

                                     B. Contributions to Pension Systems
         The study requires measures of contributions to state and local pension systems from
both employees and governments. U.S. Census Bureau (2010a) contains data on total pension
contributions to plans at each level of government, decomposed into government contributions
and employee contributions, for 2008. Using calculations on contribution growth rates from
Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011a), we estimate 2009 contributions based on the growth rate of
employee and government contributions in the state plans covered by that study. When looking
at contribution measures in systems that include Social Security, we add 6.2% of payroll to
employer (and employee) contributions. The Appendix (Section A) provides further details.

                             C. State and Local Revenues, Debt, and Payrolls
         The study also requires data on a number of revenue and spending figures at the state and
local level. These variables are primarily used as scaling variables in our analysis, although
historical growth in GSP is used in some of the scenarios to project future state-level income
growth. Payroll of employees in the plans comes from the CAFRs themselves, with the scaling
factors described above applied so as to capture workers in plans that our samples do not cover.
         Revenue data from the U.S. Census Bureau 2010b are collected separately for the state
and local level and then aggregated to the state level, so that the government revenues for a given
state again reflect the aggregate of the state government and all local government entities within
the state.11
         We focus on two revenue measures. First, we consider a broad measure called Total Own
Revenue that includes all revenue except (i) the “insurance trust” revenues reflecting the returns
of pension funds themselves; and (ii) intergovernmental revenues, which are primarily transfers
from the federal government but also transfers from state governments to local governments and


         10
            Specifically, out of the 77 local plans, we located Social Security information for 67 of them. Of these,
35 had full participation, 8 had some employees exempted, and 24 did not participate in Social Security at all. Of the
8 that had some employees exempted, we assumed 80% of employees were covered, based on rough averages in the
plans for which we could obtain precise information. For the 10 plans for which information was not available, we
assumed coverage at the average level over all 77 local plans.
         11
            Revenues at the state level are available for 2009. Local-level revenues are only available for 2008, so we
assume that the 2009 ratio of local to state revenues remains the same as the 2008 ratio for each state.

                                                         11
vice-versa. The need to exclude transfers between state governments and local governments is
obvious, as otherwise revenues would be double counted. We exclude federal transfers as the
point of the exercise is to examine how much state and local revenues will have to grow to pay
pensions in the absence of an expansion of federal assistance.
        Second, we examine Tax Revenues alone. These exclude fees and charges, most of which
are for services rendered. The idea here is to consider how state and local governments could pay
for unfunded pensions through traditional taxation sources like income taxes, sales taxes, and
property taxes. Compared to Total Own Revenue, scaling by Tax Revenues assumes that states
will not raise fees for services such as university tuition to pay for unfunded pension liabilities.
        The U.S. Census Bureau 2010b also contains data on debt outstanding at the state and
local level, using a definition that excludes unfunded pension liabilities. As with revenues, debt
information is collected separately for the state and local level and then aggregated to the state
level, so that the government debt measures for a given state in our study again reflect the
aggregate of the state government and all local government entities within the state.12

                                           D. GSP and Population
        Gross state product is from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2010). We examine a 10-
year history of gross state product growth by state for the baseline scenario in which the future
growth rate for a state is assumed to be the 10-year historical average growth rate for the state.
Population estimates are from the U.S. Census Bureau for the year 2009. To calculate the
number of households we use the estimate from the latest decennial census of 2.59 individuals
per household.13

                                            E. Summary Statistics
        Table 1 shows summary statistics. The level of observation is the state. The table begins
with the levels of the key revenue and income variables. Total tax revenue was $1.2 trillion in
2009, and total own revenue was $1.9 trillion in 2009. Note that this includes revenues from both
the state and local levels of government. Total GSP was $14.1 trillion, and there were 117.85
million households.

        12
            As with revenues, the state-government information is available for 2009 whereas the local-government
information is only available for 2008. In estimating total state and local debt aggregated at the state level, we
therefore assume that the 2009 ratio of local to state debt remains the same as the 2008 ratio for each state.
         13
            See http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/00000.html.

                                                        12
       The rest of Table 1 shows payroll, government contributions to DB pension plans, and
employee contributions to DB pension plans, scaled by each base variable: tax revenue, total
own revenue, GSP, and number of households. Total government payroll was $678 billion in
2009, amounting to 55.8% of tax revenue, 34.8% of total own revenue, 4.8% of GSP, and $5,757
per household. There is dispersion in these quantities. For example, Nebraska spends only 2.9%
of GSP on state and local payroll, while New Mexico spends 6.2% on state and local payroll.
       Government contributions are shown two ways: first including the employer’s share of
Social Security (6.2% of payroll) in systems that participate in Social Security, and then
excluding the employer’s share of Social Security. In states where no public workers covered by
DB pension plans participate in Social Security, the contributions including Social Security and
excluding Social Security are the same.
       Total government contributions in 2009, including Social Security contributions,
amounted to $110.9 billion, and excluding Social Security contributions were $80.7 billion. The
Social Security contributions comprise 4.5% of aggregate payroll, suggesting a Social Security
coverage ratio of around 73% of payroll. Aggregated across the 50 states, total government
contributions average 16.3% of payroll, 9.1% of tax revenue, 5.7% of total own revenue, and
0.8% of GSP. The average per household government contribution to DB pension systems plus
Social Security at the state level is $941. Excluding Social Security, the government
contributions are lower on average by 2.5% (= 9.1% - 6.6%) of tax revenue and by 1.6% (= 5.7%
- 4.1%) of total own revenue, and average to $684 per household.
       Similar to the treatment of total government contributions, total employee contributions
are shown two ways in Table 1: first including the employee’s share of Social Security (6.2% of
payroll) in systems that participate in Social Security, and then excluding that share. Across the
50 states, total employee contributions average 10.2% of payroll, 5.7% of tax revenue, 3.5% of
total own revenue, and 0.5% of GSP.
       Appendix Table A1 shows levels of contributions, payroll, and revenues for state and
local systems, aggregated to the state level. The table is in descending order of per-household
government contributions to DB plans, including Social Security. Colorado, whose workers do
not participate in Social Security, contributed only 2.8% of total own revenue towards public
employee pensions in 2009, the lowest value across the states, while Rhode Island contributed
9.3% (including to Social Security); the highest value. Colorado also contributed the lowest per

                                                13
household amount of $463, whereas New York contributed $1,739, the highest per-household
amount. Excluding Social Security, North Carolina contributed the lowest per-household amount
at $173 per household, while New York contributed $1,291 (as shown in Table 1).
       Government contributions to DB systems are not mandated by any federal rules. GASB
standards specify how state and local governments are to calculate service costs, or the present
value of newly accrued benefits. These standards further guide state and local governments in
calculating an Actuarially Required Contribution (ARC), which consists of paying the present
value of newly accrued benefits plus a portion of the unfunded liability each year.
       Not all governments contribute the ARC. Approximately 45% of state government
systems in our sample paid less than the full ARC in 2009, 40% paid less than 90% of the ARC,
and 25% paid less than 80%. Some systems paid very little, as reflected by the fact that the mean
system that did not pay the full ARC paid only 73% of the ARC. Furthermore, the part of the
ARC that represents the cost of new service (as well as the unfunded liability) is itself calculated
using the expected return discounting methodology and therefore understates the true economic
cost of new benefits. As a starting point for our analysis, we calculate the true present value of
newly accrued annual benefits as a percentage of payroll, based on discount rates that reflect the
risk properties of the benefit promises themselves.

                                         III. Methodology
       This section explains the methodology employed to determine benefit payments,
calculate new service costs, and evaluate the contribution increases necessary to pay off states’
unfunded pension obligations.

                                 A. Forecasting Benefit Payments
       A starting point for the analysis is the stream of cash flows that each system will pay out
to beneficiaries. There are two fundamental challenges. First, the governments themselves do not
disclose the series of cash flows that they have discounted. They disclose a present value of
liabilities, a discount rate, and actuarial assumptions. As a result, the streams of cash flows must
be reverse-engineered on the basis of the information provided.
       Second, different calculations require cash flows related to liabilities that reflect service
and salary as of different points in time. For example, in the baseline scenario with no policy
changes we calculate the contributions necessary to pay off any unfunded ABO liability that

                                                 14
exists today over 30 years, plus the present value of all new ABO benefit accruals over that time
period. The ABO is often referred to as the “termination liability,” because it recognizes only the
portion of expected future pension benefits payments due to an employee’s current wages and
service. In the soft-freeze calculations, however, the most convenient formulation calculates the
contributions necessary to pay off a broader liability concept, the PVB, which forecasts all future
accruals for current workers including projections of estimated future service and salary growth.
        The exercise of separately estimating ABO and PVB cash flows is further complicated by
the fact that the actuarial liability employed by most systems is calculated from neither the ABO
cash flows nor the PVB cash flows but rather (in the grand majority of cases) from a concept
called Entry Age Normal (EAN). The EAN recognizes future liabilities in proportion to the ratio
of the present value of a worker’s wages earned to date and the present value of lifetime wages,
which leads to service accruals that are a constant fraction of an employee’s wages throughout
the employee’s career. In addition to presenting our baseline analysis under ABO benefit
recognition, we also present alternative calculations using the EAN method of benefit
recognition and demonstrate that the required tax increases are quite similar.14
        Future payments to plan participants are estimated from the procedure detailed precisely
in the Appendix, Section B. Here we describe the calculations in general terms. This is the same
methodology as that employed in Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011a, 2011b) with two notable
differences. First, the model is calibrated to match not only the expected first year payout to
beneficiaries and the stated liability, but also the total wages of each plans’ current active
workers. Second, because we are interested in the plans’ future real liabilities, we forecast real
liability cash flows using the uniform inflation assumption of 2% per year, adjusting COLAs and
wage growth assumptions appropriately to reflect the differences between this rate and the plans’
stated inflation rate assumptions, for reasons discussed below.
        There are three groups of plan members that must be considered: current employees,
retirees, and separated vested workers (individuals that are no longer in public employment, are
not currently receiving pension benefits, but are entitled to take them at some point in the future).
        For each plan, we first forecast the nominal pension payouts to current employees
recognized under the plan’s own stated accounting method. We assume active workers’ age and

        14
         This similarity is not surprising since for a career worker the accrued cash flows under all the methods
(ABO, EAN, and PVB) converge at retirement. Under EAN accounting, today’s unfunded liability is larger than
under ABO accounting, but benefit accruals going forward are smaller.

                                                        15
service distributions, as well as the average wages of employees at each level of age and service
relative to the overall plan average wage, are consistent with their averages from a sample of
CAFRs of the states with the largest total liabilities.15 Total wages of active workers are taken
directly from the plans’ CAFRs. For each age and service level we assume workers are split
evenly by gender, and forecast the expected number retiring at each year in the future, and their
salaries at the time they retire, using assumptions on wage growth and separation probabilities by
age derived from the same CAFRs used to calculate the age-service matrix.
        Based on common practice and the observed age distribution of retirees, we assume that
retirees are eligible for full benefits at age 60, but can start taking benefits as early as 55 by
taking a linear 6% benefit reduction for each year they start taking benefits before age 60,
consistent with common practice in state public pension systems.
        This schedule, together with the fact that COLAs only apply after retirement, make early
retirement more than actuarially fair to plan participants, so we assume that workers retiring
younger than 55 will begin taking benefits at age 55, while workers retiring older than that will
begin taking benefits immediately. For each retiring worker we calculate initial benefit payments
using the worker’s service and salary at the time of separation and the plan-specific retirement
benefit factor. Expected nominal cash flows at each year in the future are then forecast using
plan-specific COLAs and the RP-2000 mortality tables (combined employee/retired healthy),
assuming that 60 percent of participants are married at the time they retire to a spouse of the
same age and that plans allow for 50 percent survivor benefits.
        For retired workers we assume a distribution of retiree ages, and for each age an average
annuity benefit relative to the overall average plan annuity benefit, derived from CAFRs for
which this information is available. Total benefits paid are taken directly from the CAFR of each
plan. We then forecast nominal cash flows at each year in the future, again using plan-specific
COLAs, and the RP-2000 mortality tables assuming that 60 percent of participants are married at
the time they retire to a spouse of the same age and 50 percent survivor benefits.
        The number of vested, separated members not yet receiving benefits is taken directly
from CAFRs. Vesting typically requires five years of service, and workers rarely leave public
employment with more than 15 years of service without retiring and taking benefits. We
consequently assume that these members have between 6 and 15 years of service (each level

        15
             See the Internet Appendix Table II.C. in Novy-Marx and Rauh 2011a for the precise age-service matrix.

                                                         16
equally likely), and that the age distribution at each service level is the same as that for currently
employed workers with the same level of service. We assume a participant’s benefits eligible
salary is equal to the current average salary across plans of active workers with the same age and
service. We then adjust this to reflect the experience of current retirees, by assuming that
separated workers in plans in which current retirees receive large benefit payments relative to
those in other plans will also receive similarly larger benefits when they retire. We assume
separated workers will begin taking benefit payments at age 55, initially equal to 70% of their
benefits eligible salary times their service times the plan-specific benefit factor. This 70%
reflects the impact of taking payments five years before the age of full retirement under the linear
6% per year adjustment schedule. We then forecast cash flows at each year in the future using
our standard methodology, employing plan-specific COLAs and the RP-2000 mortality tables
with a 60% married rate and 50% survivor benefits.
        In the final step of estimating the nominal cash flows, we calibrate our model to plans’
stated liability by multiplying each series by a geometric sequence that starts at one, such that the
total model generated cash flows recognized under the accounting methodology employed by the
plan yields the plan’s stated liability when discounted at the plan-chosen discount rate. This
procedure uses the information contained in the plan level variation in stated liabilities to proxy
for unobserved state level variation in other variables (e.g., the age-service distribution), without
altering either the total salaries of the plan’s current workers or the first year benefits payments
to a plan’s current annuitants. The average rate at which this geometric sequence grows is -
0.35% for state plans and -1.48% for local plans, with standard deviations of 1.63% and 1.56%,
respectively.
        These cash flows are then calculated under each of four different accrual concepts: the
three described previously (ABO, EAN, and PVB), as well as one other concept used in the
reports of some plans called the Projected Benefit Obligation (PBO), which accounts for future
expected wage increases but not future service.16 Note that this adjustment only affects the cash
flows related to the currently active workers.
        The procedure up to this point yields a stream of nominal cash flows. For most of our
calculations in this paper, however, we require cash flows in real terms. One way to obtain these

        16
           In state and local government reports the PBO is generally referred to as a Projected Unit Credit (PUC)
method. Under FASB accounting, firms calculate PBO liabilities and report unfunded PBO liabilities on their
balance sheets.

                                                        17
is to deflate the cash flows using the states’ own inflation assumptions. Doing so would,
however, understate the true liability represented by participants not yet receiving benefit
payments. This is because these participants’ liabilities have a nominal component that is
undervalued using the states’ inflation rate assumptions, which are higher than consensus
estimates or those implied by the bond markets. Benefit payments essentially represent a real
liability once they begin because of the COLAs, but COLAs do not apply until a participant
starts taking benefits. High assumed inflation rates consequently excessively deflate the
liabilities of participants who are separated and vested but not yet receiving benefits, as well as
those of any workers who will retire before the age at which they can start taking benefits.
        When calculating the real liability cash flows we consequently use a uniform inflation
assumption of 2% per year across plans, taken from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland’s
estimates of inflation expectations.17 When doing so we adjust COLAs downward by the
difference in a plan’s own inflation rate assumption and the uniform 2% assumption. We also
reduce the wage growth by age assumptions to reflect the lower assumed rate of inflation,
reducing assumed wage growth by the difference between the average inflation assumption
across plans and 2%. This results in a new set of forecast nominal liability payment streams for
each plan. These are then deflated using the 2% per year inflation assumption, yielding each
plan’s forecast real benefit payments.
        As a final step, the resultant calibrated real liability streams are aggregated to the state
level using the methodology explained in Section II. The scaling factor used for each state is
simply the ratio of total benefits of in-state public pension systems provided by the Census to
benefits of in-state plans in our CAFR-based sample. The implicit assumption is that the cash
flows of local plans that are not covered in our local-system sample are similar to those of the
state and local plans for which CAFRs were obtained. The average adjustment across the 50
states is 6.7% and the median is 3.5%.
        We also calculate risk neutral expected benefit payments each year in the future, using
the same methodology, under the assumption that public sector wages covary systematically with
priced risk factors (i.e., the market), as in the models of Lucas and Zeldes (2006) and Benzoni,
Dufresne, and Goldstein (2007). This has no impact on the ABO liability payments, as these


        17
          The estimates, as well as the methodology employed to calculate them, can be found at
http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/data/inflation_expectations/index.cfm?DCS.nav=Local.

                                                       18
contain no wage risk, but do affect the forecast recognized benefit payments under the EAN,
PBO and PVB, which all account for expected wage growth. When public sector salaries are
exposed to priced risks, then expected wages grow more slowly under the risk neutral measure
than under the objective measure. The risk neutral growth in wages is reduced in proportion to
both 1) the extent to which wages load on the market (their market beta), and 2) the magnitude of
the equity risk premium.
         We consider various assumptions regarding these two determinants of the risk premia
associated with wage risk. The baseline analysis is conducted assuming zero effect, but we also
present wage-risk scenarios based on the calibration in Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011a). Under a
correlation of liabilities with the stock market of 0.25, a 6.5% equity risk premium, a market
volatility of 0.16, and a volatility of liabilities of 0.05, one obtains a risk premium of 51 basis
points. Evidence suggests that liabilities are not this correlated with the market over a 30 year
horizon, although admittedly correlations could be very large on a long horizon. In untabulated
results we also consider the effects if the wage-risk is 2 and 4 times larger and observe that the
effects of additional wage risk on required contribution increases is close to linear.18

                                      B. Calculating New Service Costs
         The annual cost of a worker’s new service accrual is the difference in the present value of
expected future benefit payments calculated using the worker’s current age, wages and service,
and those calculated using the worker’s age, wages and service from the previous year. We
calculate the state-level service costs under both the ABO and EAN, which, as explained above,
recognize future benefit payments differently. We also calculate the present values of the
increases in the recognized expected liability payments both 1.) by using states’ own assumed
discount rates; and 2.) by deflating nominal cash flows at the inflation rate and discounting the
resulting real cash flow stream using the December 2010 zero-coupon TIPS yield curve.
         When calculating the service costs using states’ own discount rate assumptions we
forecast nominal liability payments using the states’ own inflation assumptions and discount
using the state-chosen nominal discount rates. However, for the reasons explained in Section
III.A, when calculating the real liability cash flows we use a uniform inflation assumption of 2%

         18
           Geanakoplos and Zeldes (2010) consider these issues in the context of Social Security. Note that there is
less wage risk in a public employee DB pension formula than in the Social Security formula due to the fact that
when a public employee separates from the job, all wage risk is gone. In Social Security, the earnings history is re-
indexed to wages when the employee claims retirement benefits, which is not until age 62 at the earliest.

                                                         19
per year across plans, taken from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland’s estimates of inflation
expectations. We discount these real cash flow streams using the December 2010 zero-coupon
TIPS yield curve.
       For the service cost calculation, we begin with the calculation of the stream of benefit
payments (under the relevant actuarial method - i.e., ABO or EAN) to all current workers not
retiring over the coming year. Because we exclude retiring workers, these forecasts do not
include any payments in the following year. We then forecast the expected benefit payments to
all workers one year later. We use two different methodologies for forecasting continuing
workers’ wages. We either assume that they grow in accordance with our model’s assumptions
regarding wage growth with age, or that they are consistent with the salaries of workers one year
older and with one year more service from the preceding year, adjusted upward to reflect
inflation. The two methodologies yield almost identical results, and the numbers we present in
the tables that address this question (particularly Table 2) are averages of the two.19
       Finally, plan service costs are aggregated to the state level, and adjusted to reflect plans
not covered in our CAFR database, using the same procedure described in Section II, and
reviewed at the end of Section III.A above.
       As with the benefit payments, we also calculate service costs under the assumption that
public sector wages covary systematically with priced risk factors. This is done using the
methodology described above, using the risk-neutral expected growth in wages, where the wage
growth is adjusted downward from the objective expected rate of wage growth to reflect various
assumptions regarding the extent to which wages load on the market and the equity risk
premium.

                   C. Amortizing Legacy Liabilities While Keeping Current DB Plans
       This section explains how we calculate the rate, relative to wages or GSP, at which states
and localities need to contribute for the next 30 years to completely amortize the unfunded
pension liability, measured under either the ABO or EAN. After the 30-year amortization period
the contribution rate is assumed to drop to the level required to fund new service accruals.
       In the baseline scenario, each year plan assets are assumed to grow at a real rate of
1.71%, the 21 year zero-coupon TIPS yield, where this maturity is picked to match the duration


       19
            See Appendix (Section C) for further details.

                                                            20
of the real pension liabilities at the corresponding yield. This is the real rate that may safely be
achieved when assets are picked to match liabilities, and is equivalent to assuming that assets
will grow at inflation plus 1.71%. Assets are then reduced by the benefit payments made that
year, to reflect outflows to plan participants.
       To these assets we add the contributions from plan participants, which are assumed to be
a constant fraction of wages. For each state the contribution rate for plan participants is taken
from the data, and averages just under 6%, though there is a great deal of variation across states.
In Oregon, for example, plan participants make essentially no contributions to the DB plan,
while in Massachusetts the employee contribution rate exceeds 10%. Plan participants’ aggregate
salaries are taken from the model, and account for mortality, retirement, and wage growth.
       Finally, we add the contributions from employers, less the cost of new service accruals.
State and local governments are assumed to contribute a constant fraction of total adjusted
payrolls for the next thirty years, the “amortization rate.” Total payrolls, as well as GSPs, are
assumed to grow at a constant real rate, and we consider several different scenarios: growth
consistent with individual states’ experiences over the last ten years, growth consistent with the
national experience over the last ten years, and each of these scenarios reduced by one percent.
       Total assets T+1 years in the future,         , are therefore given by
                                    ∗
                  1                                             1                     ,

where r is the asset real return assumption (1.71% real in the baseline), AR* is the amortization
rate (our primary object of interest),       is the normal cost rate (service cost relative to wages,
which in some scenarios is accounted for assuming priced wage risk),                  is the employee
contribution rate, g is the assumed growth rate in the state’s economy and government sector,
        is total wages today, and        is the deflated time-T benefit cash flows to retirees currently
recognized under the accounting methodology (ABO or EAN). We search for the amortization
rate AR* such that assets thirty years in the future are just sufficient to pay the remaining
recognized benefit payments owed to current workers, i.e., such that

                                                                 ,
                                                     1
where rf is picked to match the 21 year TIPS rate of 1.71%. If the assets together with expected
investment earnings are insufficient to pay remaining future benefit obligations, then the


                                                   21
algorithm tries a higher employer contribution over the next thirty years. If they are more than
sufficient, then we try a lower rate. The algorithm searches until it finds the rate that just fully
amortizes the legacy liabilities over the thirty year period.
           We also consider the cost of amortizing the legacy liabilities under "high" and "low"
asset growth rate scenarios. In these scenarios the assets are assumed to grow each of the next
thirty years not at the real rate of 1.71%, but at the geometric average rate of return from the 90%
and 10% levels of the risk-neutral distribution under an assumed 12% volatility on plan assets.
The median outcome is lower than the mean outcome by the convexity adjustment, which with
our assumed volatility on plan assets of 12% is given by                     /2 = 0.122/2 = 0.72% per year, while
thirty year average annual returns at the 10% and 90% levels of the distribution are higher or
lower than the median outcome by                      90%     /√30 = 1.28 x 12% / 5.477 = 2.81% per year. To
                          th         th
implement the 10 and 90 scenarios, we also assume that the assets that are funding the new
benefit promises will earn the scenario return out to the end of the 30-year amortization period.
So the normal costs (cNC) in the 10th percentile scenario are substantially higher than the normal
costs in the baseline scenario and the normal costs in the 90th percentile scenario are substantially
lower than in the baseline scenario.
           We also account for the impact of wage risk in the high and low asset return scenarios.
Under the 10th percentile scenario, for example, benefit promises grow more slowly when wages
are correlated with the market, which partially offsets the increase in cNC arising from the low
asset return assumption. Conversely, under the 90th percentile scenario, wages and benefit
promises grow more rapidly, which partially offsets the decrease in cNC arising from the high
asset return assumption.20


                                           D. Incorporating “Tiebout” Migration


           20
                    Log-wage          growth     under      the     risk      neutral     measure       is   distributed
                               ,
            ,                          ,   ,       , where g is the expected growth in wages under the objective

measure,        ,   is the loading of wage growth on the market,           is the equity risk premium, and    is market
volatility. With      ,            = 0.51%, a 6.5% equity premium and market volatility of 18% this implies thirty year
risk-neutral growth rates in wages in the 10% and 90% scenarios 0.83% and 0.17% below the objective expected
growth rate in wages, respectively.

                                                              22
         If a state has to raise taxes and/or cut services more than other states to pay for legacy
pension obligations, it makes residency in the state relatively unattractive. This affects the
marginal decisions of both state residents considering out-migration and other states’ residents
considering in-migration. While this should be at least partially reflected in lower property
values, it also reduces the state’s rate of economic growth, as taxpayers choose to locate in states
that provide better government services at lower prices.
         The effect of taxes on economic growth is a question with some history in the
macroeconomics and public finance literatures. Romer and Romer (2010) for example find that a
tax increase of 1% of GDP reduces aggregate GDP growth by one percent per year over the
following three years. Helms (1985) finds in a panel of states that an additional 1% of personal
income raised through property taxes in the state reduces the level of personal income by 1.21%
in the first year and in the long run by almost 15%, suggestive of a persistent impact on long-
term income growth within the state. The fact that estimates at the state level are larger than
estimates at the national level is consistent with the hypothesis that part of the state-level effect is
due to individuals voting with their feet and leaving high-tax areas. In a municipal setting,
Haughwout, et al (2004) find evidence suggesting that a number of cities are at the peak of their
Laffer curves so that no additional tax revenue can even be raised. In these settings, raising a tax
rate reduces the taxable income base proportionately, as residents move to lower taxed areas or
into less heavily taxed activities.21
         The analysis in this paper occurs at the level of the state. Our hypothesis is that the
sensitivity of state GDP growth to taxation must be larger than that of the US as a whole.
Compared to cities, however, states presumably have more capacity to increase tax revenues, as
the ability of residents to relocate from one state to another is lower than their ability to move out
of a city.
         We model this change in economic growth rates in response to changes in taxes and
services using a linear specification. Specifically, we assume that an increase in the revenues
raised by state and local governments, and/or a reduction in the services they provide, measured
as a fraction of GSP, relative to the national average, reduces the real growth rate of state GSP.
That is, we assume that state i’s adjusted GSP and public sector growth rate is given by


         21
         Other papers in public finance focusing on the elasticity of taxable income to tax rates at the
macroeconomic level include Feldstein (1995) and Gruber and Saez (2004).

                                                         23
                                     ∗                 ∑           ∗
                 ∗
                                                                                         ,
                                                               ∑
where g is the growth rate absent Tiebout effects,     is the sensitivity of GSP growth to tax
increases and/or service cuts, AR* is the amortization rate accounting for Tiebout effects,           is
the old contribution rate to pension plans, and          is total public sector wages.
       The literature cited above (Romer and Romer 2010; Helms 1985) is broadly consistent
with   = 1, i.e., an increase in taxes by one percent of GSP reduces GSP growth by one
percentage point. In our analysis we consider a range of parameters. Specifically, we assume that
an increase in taxes and fees (or reduction in services) of one percent of GSP greater than the
average states’ reduces the GSP growth rate by either one percentage point ( = 1), two
percentage points ( = 2) or three percentage points ( = 3).

                                 E. Accounting for Municipal Debt
       States may use off-balance-sheet debt, in the form of pension underfunding, as a
complement (not substitute) to municipal debt. Alternatively, the revenue demands of
dramatically underfunded pension plans may force these plans’ states to finance their operations
at least partly through municipal borrowing. In either case, ignoring municipal debt understates
the dispersion in the states’ financial well-being. There are limits to the extent to which states
that are currently issuing a high volume of bonds can continue to do so, while states with very
little general obligation or pension obligation bond debt could begin to pay some obligations
through municipal debt issuance.
       A more sophisticated analysis of the amortization of states’ legacy pension liabilities
accounts for variation in municipal indebtedness. We do this by adjusting current pension fund
assets to reflect differences in non-pension debt. Specifically, we replace state i’s pension fund
asset with its “adjusted assets,” given by

                                 ∗
                                                   ∑
                                                                       .
                                                  ∑
If a state’s aggregate municipal debt relative to GSP exceeds aggregate national municipal debt
relative to national GDP, we reduce its pension fund assets to reflect the difference. Conversely,
if a state’s debt is relatively small relative to its economy, we add the difference to its pension
fund assets.


                                                  24
                       F. Amortizing Legacy Liabilities Under a Soft Freeze
        Under the soft freeze scenarios, we calculate the amortization rate, relative to wages or
GSP, at which states and localities need to contribute for the next 30 years to completely
amortize the legacy liabilities associated with old DB plans, under the assumption that all new
hires participate in Social Security and a DC plan.
        New employees are assumed to receive pension benefit contributions from their
employers totaling 16.2%. They receive 6.2% in the form of employer contributions to Social
Security, and 10% in the form of higher wages, employer contributions to a defined contribution
plan, or some mix of the two. That is, we effectively assume that new employees are
compensated for the loss of DB pension accruals with an increase in other total compensation of
10%, plus inclusion in Social Security if not previously enrolled. In our "Employer" scenarios
salaries are adjusted up 6.2% for new hires in entities that were not previously part of Social
Security, to offset the effective pay cut these workers receive when they are asked to contribute
to the system, while in our "Employer-Employee" scenarios employees bear this cost themselves.
The employer contribution to the old DB plans is the portion of the total employer payroll that
does not go to new workers.
        Future benefit payments are funded using plan assets and investment earnings, new
contributions from plan participants, and new contributions from the states and localities. State
and local contributions to old plans are equal to their total contribution to all plans, less their
contribution to new plans. Total assets T+1 years in the future,         , are consequently given by
                                                            ∗
                 1                            ∙                 1
                                                    1                                  ,
where                 is the employee contribution rate of old workers to their DB plans,             is
these workers’ wages,                  is the effective employer contribution rate for new hires on
DC plans, and         is the total risk-neutral expected benefit cash flows paid to retirees, which in
some scenarios is accounted for assuming priced wage risk. The first term represents principle
and investment earnings on the previous year’s assets, the second term is the contributions of
working plan participants, the third term is the total contribution of employers to pension plans,
both old and new, the fourth term is the employer contributions that go to new workers’ DC
plans, and the last term is the payout to DB plan beneficiaries.


                                                  25
        At the end of 30 years we require that plan assets, in conjunction with the negligible
future contributions on the salaries of the remaining active workers covered by the old DB plan
(employee, plus employer at the DB contribution rate), are just sufficient to pay the plan’s
remaining liabilities. That is, we require that

                                                                                  .
                                                   1
        We also again consider "high" and "low" asset growth rate "scenarios" when calculating
the cost of amortizing the legacy liabilities under a soft freeze. In these scenarios the assets are
again assumed to grow each of the next 30 years not at the real rate of 1.71%, but at the
geometric average rate of return from the 90% and 10% levels of the risk-neutral distribution.

IV.G. Amortizing Legacy Liabilities Under a Hard Freeze
        We calculate the amortization rate under the hard freeze scenarios in the exact same way,
except that we 1) use the ABO instead of the PVB to determine cash outflows to retired plan
participants; 2) assume that participants in the old DB plans stop contributing to these plans, as
they are no longer accruing new benefits; and 3) assume that participants in the old DB plans
also receive new DC plans, and Social Security if they previously lacked it, and that employers
contribute to these plans at the same rate that they do for new hires.
        That is, total assets T+1 years in the future,     , are given by
                                     ∗
                    1                                      1                          .
We again search for the amortization rate AR* such that assets 30 years in the future are just
sufficient to pay the remaining benefit payments owed to participants of the old, frozen DB
plans, i.e., such that

                                                               .
                                                   1
        As in the soft freeze scenarios we also consider high and low asset growth rate scenarios,
where the risk free real rate in the asset evolution equation is replaced by the geometric average
rate of return from the 90% and 10% levels of the risk-neutral distribution.

                                             IV. Results



                                                  26
        In this section, we discuss the results. Section A presents our calculations of the service
costs, the true present value of newly accrued benefits. Section B presents calculations of the
necessary contributions for pension systems to be fully funded in 30 years’ time, assuming no
policy changes. Section C discusses how that calculation would vary if the tax base shifts from
states that have to raise taxes more to states that have to raise taxes less. Section D presents the
results that consider the impact that limits to debt issuance might have on the calculations.
Section E discusses the effects of soft and hard freezes on the calculations.

                                                A. Service Costs
        If governments are conforming to GASB standards and paying the ARC, then they are
paying this present value under their returns-based discount rates, as well as making some
payments towards amortizing unfunded liabilities. Of course, as explained in Section II, not all
states pay the ARC. Furthermore, even states that do pay the ARC are valuing new benefit
promises using the expected return assumptions used to discount pension promises more
generally.
        We begin with calculations of the service costs as a percent of payroll for state and local
systems aggregated to the state level, under both stated discount rates and Treasury discount
rates, and using both the ABO and the EAN methods. Most state and local governments
themselves use the EAN method, which as explained in Section III recognizes liabilities earlier
in worker careers in such a way as to make the service cost a constant fraction of wages over the
worker’s lifetime, but it is the ABO method that reflects the actual market value of benefits
earned in a given year. Compared to the EAN method, the ABO method involves higher service
costs but lower recognized liabilities today.
        Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of how the service costs are calculated. The
top two lines in Figure 1 show the year by year forecast of the expected benefit payments
recognized under the EAN (solid line), and those recognized the previous year under the EAN
for the same workers (dashed line). 22 The bottom two lines show the expected benefit payments
recognized under the ABO (dotted line) and those recognized the previous year under the ABO
for the same workers (lowest line). The present value of the difference in the top two lines yields


        22
            A similar analysis of the year by year benefit payment recognized under the PVB, which accounts for all
future wage growth and service accruals, and those recognized the previous year for the same workers, yields
essentially no difference, providing additional validation of the model.

                                                        27
the EAN service cost, and the present value of the difference in the bottom two lines yields the
ABO service cost. Note that these service cost calculations exclude Social Security. In the
analysis presented in our main results tables, Social Security is treated as costing 6.2% of payroll
for both employer and employee, and we assume that employers who newly enroll employees on
Social Security must provide a 6.2% pay increase.
         Table 2 provides the service costs for each state under each of the two liability
recognition methods (EAN and ABO) and each of the two discount rate methods (state-chosen
and Treasury yield curves). Again, each row represents the total of all state and local government
systems within a given state. In total, ABO service costs under state-chosen discount rates are
17.8% of payroll, whereas under Treasury rates they are 29.5% of payroll, a difference of 11.7%
of payroll. EAN service costs under state-chosen discount rates are 13.9% of payroll, but under
Treasury rates they are 28.2% of payroll, a difference of 14.3% of payroll.23 The true present
value of new benefit accruals thus averages 12-14 percent of payroll more than the costs
recognized under GASB.
         The 28.2-29.5% of payroll cost of the DB pensions compares to total (employer plus
employee) contributions to DB plans of 17.7%. Those contributions are roughly equal to ABO
service costs under state-chosen discount rates, but are 10-12 percentage points of payroll less
than service costs calculated using Treasury rates.
         The table is sorted in descending order of the ratio of service costs under the ABO
method using Treasury discounting to actual contributions made. The ratio of service costs under
the EAN method using Treasury discounting is also provided. The table shows that in all cases
except one (Indiana under the EAN method), contributions in 2009 fell short of the present value
of new benefit promises when measured under the Treasury rate. In Oregon, the true present
value of benefits is 3.2-3.6 times the amount contributed, and in thirteen states it is over 2 times
on both the ABO and EAN recognition methods, and in two additional states it is over 2 times
the ABO but not the EAN service cost.24
         Appendix Figure A1 shows the close relationship between our calculations of service
costs and the plans’ benefit factors. Initial benefit payments are proportional to final wages,

         23
            The difference between the ABO and EAN service costs essentially represents the difference between the
growth, due to one year's less discounting, of the EAN and ABO liabilities.
         24
            If a state or local government contributes the full present value of new services accruals, but undertakes
no actions to reduce the unfunded liability, then the unfunded liability continues to grow at the risk-free rate,
adjusted for any exceptional returns realized by the fund’s assets.

                                                         28
service at the time of retirement, and the benefit factor employed in the benefits calculation. The
primary determinant of annual service costs is therefore not surprisingly the product of total
wages and the benefit factor.

                  B. Economically Required Contributions without Policy Changes
        Paying the full present value of the service cost would not address the unfunded liability.
In fact, the unfunded liability would still continue to grow, just as any debt that is not being
serviced continues to grow. The left two vertical panels of Table 3 summarize the contributions
necessary to pay the present value of new benefits and amortize today’s unfunded liabilities over
30 years. In other words, the goal is to end up with fully funded systems in 30 years. In Table 3,
the present value of new promises and the amortization of unfunded legacy liabilities are
calculated under the Accumulated Benefit Obligation (ABO) accrual method. In Appendix Table
A2, we present similar analysis using the EAN accrual method, which results in greater unfunded
liabilities that must be amortized, but lower service costs that must be paid as they are accrued.
        The first column of Table 3 shows that if each state is given its 10-year average real GSP
growth rate going forward, contributions must rise in aggregate to 40.4% of payroll per year
across public employee pension plans in the United States. The mean is 38.3%, and the standard
deviation is 6.6%. North Carolina requires the smallest contribution as a percentage of payroll,
24.7%. Colorado requires the largest, 53.9%.25 As a share of tax revenue, the weighted average
contribution requirement is 22.6%, and as a share of total own-revenue it is 14.1%. As a share of
GDP the overall required contribution is 2.0%. The contribution to pensions per resident
household must rise to $2,326, with Indiana requiring only $1,211 and New York requiring the
largest annual per-household contribution: $3,989.
        The column under “Total Required Contribution: 10yr Average GSP - 1%” models a 1%
smaller GSP growth in each state. This raises required contributions as a share of own-revenue
from 14.1% to 14.8%, as slower growth implies larger contributions today as a share of
revenues, payroll, and GSP.
        Appendix Table A2 provides several robustness checks. In the first vertical panel of
Appendix Table A2, we eliminate the state-by-state variation in GSP growth rates and assume


        25
          This is after the application of the COLA decreases implemented by Colorado in 2010. Similarly, the
2010 COLA decreases for Minnesota were also implemented, as well as the COLA suspensions in New Jersey and
Rhode Island.

                                                      29
that all state economies grow at the GSP-weighted average real U.S. GSP growth rate from the
past 10 years, 1.98%. Harmonizing the growth rates across states has little effect on the averages.
However, eliminating the state-by-state variation in growth rates does reduce the variability of
state outcomes. For example, under its own historical GSP growth rate, state and local funds in
Illinois must contribute 20.2% of own revenues to pensions, the highest of any state.26 Under the
national average GSP growth rate, the highest contribution required by any state as a share of
total own revenue is New Mexico at 19.2%. The standard deviation falls from 3.3% to 3.1%.
        In the second vertical panel of Appendix Table A1, we repeat the first column of Table 3
but under the EAN method instead of the ABO method. This adjustment raises the required
contributions. In this specification, the plans must be fully funded on an EAN basis at the end of
30 years, and the EAN recognizes a greater portion of total expected future benefit payments.
        The left two vertical panels of Table 3 show the total necessary contributions, but of
course state and local governments are already making contributions, so an important question is
how much the contributions must rise. The right two vertical panels present the required
contribution increases. Here we see that the weighted-average contribution increase across all
pension systems is 24.1% of payroll. That means that state and local governments need to come
up with an additional 24.1% of worker salaries if they want to start paying the full present value
of new benefit promises and amortize unfunded liabilities over 30 years to achieve full funding
at that point. These increases amount to 13.4% of tax revenue, 8.4% of total own revenue, and
1.2% of GSP per year. On a per-household basis, the required increase is $1,385 per U.S.
household per year. If GSP growth is one percentage point slower, the required per-household
contribution increase is 8.6% larger.
        Table 4 shows the required contribution increases by state, in descending order of the
required increase per resident household. In twelve states, the necessary increases are more than
$1,500 per household per year, and in five states they are at least $2,000 per household per year.
At one extreme, New York would need to raise an additional $2,250 per household, and at the
other extreme, Indiana requires increases of only $329 per household. As a share of GSP, Ohio
and Oregon require the largest increases, at 1.9% of GSP, followed by New Mexico at 1.8% of
GSP.


        26
            This accounts for the higher retirement ages and other changes implemented for new workers in the
Illinois pension reform of 2010.

                                                        30
         Table 4 also displays the portion of these required increases that would be necessary to
pay only the true present value of new accruals each year. Recall that the total required
contribution equals the required contribution to pay new service accruals plus the required
contribution to pay down the unfunded liability over 30 years.27
         The final row of the table shows that of the $163.2 billion in total required annual
contribution increases, 49% or $79.6 billion is necessary to pay only these service costs. Another
way of interpreting this finding is that the $2.5 trillion in unfunded state pension liabilities
measured in Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011a) plus the $0.6 trillion in unfunded local pension
liabilities measured in Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011b) only represent around half the necessary
required resources to achieve full funding in 30 years, in the absence of further changes to
benefit accruals.
         States whose systems have regularly contributed less than even GASB guidelines have
particularly large required contribution increases to amortize unfunded liabilities. States whose
systems have recently made reforms to the new accruals for some portion of the workforce
(usually just for new employees) have particularly small service cost components. Illinois is an
interesting example. On the one hand, it has very large unfunded legacy liabilities, and current
employees are still accruing benefits under the old rules. On the other hand, employees hired
since January 2011 face stricter parameters, including a full retirement age of 67, a pensionable
salary maximum of $106,800 per year, and a COLA that is the lesser of 3% or half of the CPI.
Thus, most of the Illinois requirement is due to unfunded legacy liabilities, though an increase of
$382 per household is still required just to pay service costs.
         Table 5 shows the sensitivity of these calculations to different assumptions about wage
covariance and asset returns. The first two columns show our baseline results, and are simply a
repetition of the baseline results on contribution increases from Table 3. The second two
columns account for the fact that if government wages covary with priced risk factors, then new
accruals should be discounted at higher rates that reflect these risks. That is, if the wage risk is
exposed to priced risk factors, than wages grow more slowly under the risk neutral measure than
under the objective measure, reducing the value of future benefit accruals. The third and fourth
columns present results generated by incorporating this wage risk, where these risks carry a


         27
            We implement this calculation by considering the (counterfactual) assumption that assets in place are
fully sufficient to pay all accrued legacy liabilities. The remaining contributions are therefore for service accruals.

                                                           31
premium of 51 basis points per year, consistent with aggregate public sector wage volatility of
6%, a 25% correlation with the market, and an equity risk premium of 6.5% as explained in
Section III.
        The remaining columns of the table report results under two different asset return
scenarios: realized 30 year average asset returns at the 10% and 90% levels of the risk neutral
distribution of possible outcomes. The median outcome is lower than the mean outcome by the
convexity adjustment, which with our assumed volatility on plan assets of 12% is given by                      /
2 = 0.122/2 = 0.72% per year, while thirty year average annual returns at the 10% and 90% levels
of the distribution are higher or lower than the median outcome by                   90%      /√30 = 1.28 x
12% / 5.477 = 2.81% per year. In the 90th percentile asset return scenario, contribution increases
are significantly lower, because both the assets that plans currently hold and the new
contributions made to amortize legacy liabilities and fund new benefit accruals generate
additional investment earnings that can be used to reduce the required contribution increases.
Even this rosy scenario requires, however, that states increase contributions, and thus raise taxes,
cut services, or increase employee contributions by 13.4% of pay or 7.3% of tax revenue. In the
10th percentile asset return scenario, contributions would have to rise by 42.9% of payroll or
23.9% of tax revenue.
        Table 5 also shows the effects of wage risk on the required contribution increases under
the 10th and 90th percentiles. With wage risk workers’ salaries, and consequently their benefits,
grow faster in the same states of the world in which plan assets perform well. The results show
that the effects of adding wage risk are larger at the 10th percentile than at the mean, and larger at
the mean than at the 90th percentile. Specifically, at the 10th percentile, wage risk reduces the
required contribution by 3.6% of payroll (= 42.9% – 39.3%), whereas at the 90th it reduces the
required contribution by only 0.4% of payroll (= 13.1% – 12.7%). There exists a point higher in
the risk-neutral distribution of wage growth above which adding wage risk would increase the
required contribution, relative to the required contribution at that point in the distribution without
wage risk.28

                                      C. Effects of a Mobile Tax Base

        28
           Specifically, this would be the case above the point in the risk-neutral distribution where wage growth
equals the objective expected wage growth, which happens at around two standard deviations above the risk-neutral
mean.

                                                        32
        In this section we incorporate the possibility that taxpayers will respond to attempts by
states to increase taxes and/or cut services. Specifically, an increase in the revenues raised by
state and local governments, and/or a reduction in the services they provide, measured as a
fraction of GSP, relative to the national average, is assumed to reduce the real growth rate of
state GSP. Effectively, growth is redistributed from states that have to raise taxes and cut
services a lot to those that have to raise taxes and cut services less.
        The top panel of Figure 2 displays the results for the states facing the largest increases
under four different coefficients for these mobility effects: 0 (the baseline), 1, 2, and 3. The
dispersion among states is increasing with the mobility parameter. At sufficiently high
parameterizations there would be no level of taxation sufficient for Ohio or Oregon to amortize
their legacy liabilities. The tax burdens and service cuts become so onerous that residents flee at
a rate that makes paying the benefits impossible. The bottom panel of Figure 2 displays the
results for states facing the smallest required increases. For public systems in Utah and Indiana,
the Tiebout effects all but eliminate the required contribution increases.
        Appendix Table A3 shows that even incorporating a Tiebout parameter of 2 has only a
very small impact on the average contribution increases, although this does increase the standard
deviation and the extremes. For example, the standard deviation of the contribution increase as a
percentage of own-revenue is 2.6% without this Tiebout effect (see the third set of columns
Table 3) and 3.3% with the Tiebout effect. The small differences in averages, e.g. 24.9% of
payroll with Tiebout and 24.1% without, are due to the fact that the better states have higher
growth rates and therefore rely more on bigger payments at the end of the amortization period.
        Appendix Table A4 lists the required contribution increases by state in decreasing order
of per household dollar amounts, inclusive of these tax base mobility effects. For example, Ohio
now has to raise contributions by $2,552 per household, as opposed to $2,051 in Table 4. The
extent to which systems are affected is related to the required increase as a share of GSP in Table
5. Ohio and Oregon therefore see more substantial tax base mobility effects. Oregon’s
requirements rise from $2,140 per household excluding the Tiebout effects (Table 4) to $2,415
per household including the effects. Outside of the top 10 states, there is relatively little effect.
Inclusive of the mobility effects, the states in the best shape have to increase contributions even
less, because their tax bases grow as people fleeing states with significant tax increases move in.

                                    D. Debt Issuance Limitations
                                                  33
       Some states have issued substantial amounts of general obligation or pension bonds in
order to close deficits and meet pension contributions. As shown in Table 6, state and local
governments in states such as Kentucky, Massachusetts, and New York have debt of more than
25% of GSP when aggregated to the state level. The state of Illinois routinely makes its current
pension contributions by issuing (taxable) bonds. If there is no limit on debt issuance then states
could effectively pay for pensions by borrowing for a long time, at least until the costs of
servicing the debt began to affect the budget in a serious way.
       Municipal debt is positively correlated with pension underfunding. Appendix Figure A2
shows this correlation graphically. Each additional dollar in municipal debt is associated with an
additional 67 cents in ABO pension underfunding, and this relation is highly significant, with a
test-statistic of 3.61. Off-balance-sheet debt in the form of pension underfunding does appear to
be a complement to municipal debt.
       Table 6 shows the effects of the limits on debt issuance for the states with the most
positive and most negative debt effects. We model these effects not as a restriction per se, but as
a reduction in pension fund assets to reflect the difference between a state’s aggregate municipal
debt relative to GSP and the ratio of aggregate national municipal debt to national GDP. This is
the level of pension fund assets that plans would have if highly indebted states used pension fund
assets to reduce their indebtedness down to the national average, while states with low levels of
debt borrowed from muni markets and used the capital raised to fund their pension plans.
       The debt effects we model increase the share of GSP that must be devoted to pension
contributions in the most indebted states by a factor of 0.2-0.3 percent of GSP. In contrast, states
with very little state and local on-balance-sheet debt could conceivably issue some debt to meet
pension funding obligations, and for the states with the least current debt as a share of GSP, this
reduces the share of GSP that must be devoted to pensions by 0.2 percentage points.

                                E. Effects of Soft and Hard Freezes
       In this section we consider the impacts of soft and hard freezes. The top panel of Table 7
shows the necessary contribution increases (without Tiebout effects) for a soft freeze, and the
bottom panel shows the analogous calculations for a hard freeze.
       The top panel of Table 7 shows that soft freezes have moderate revenue-saving effects.
Under the mean, the required aggregate increases decline from $1,385 to $1,210 per household if
the cost of new Social Security enrolments is borne entirely by governments, and to $1,134 if the
                                                 34
cost is shared between employers and employees.29 Soft freezes under the above parameters
reduce required contribution increases for all but seven states even if governments must pay the
full costs of new Social Security enrolments. The exceptions are states that have relatively high
employee contribution rates with low Social Security coverage: Ohio, Illinois, Colorado,
Massachusetts, Missouri, Louisiana and Maine. In Ohio, for example, shifting new workers to a
DC plan actually increases total revenue demands by $489 per household, from an increase of
$2,051 to an increase of $2,540 per household. This can be understood by noting that currently,
employees in Ohio systems contribute about 10% of pay and employers contribute about 11% of
pay, with very little Social Security participation. If new workers are shifted to a DC plan under
the modeled assumptions, employers will have to devote almost all of the 11% of pay they would
otherwise have contributed to DB plans to the DC plan, plus they will have to pay 12.4% for
Social Security inclusion, which is more than the amount by which their current contributions
fall short of normal costs. The new employees’ contributions now go towards their DC plan and
cannot be used in the DB system. If the Social Security costs are shared, then only Ohio,
Colorado, and Maine would still not benefit from the soft freeze.
         Proposals for hard freezes of defined benefit (DB) pensions in the public sector have not
reached the mainstream, but it is useful to examine the extent of cost savings that could
potentially be achieved. The bottom panel of Table 7 shows the necessary contribution increase
calculations under a hard freeze. We assume that in addition to the new workers, all future work
by existing employees is compensated on the DC plan. Specifically, we assume DC plans cost
employers 10% of wages, in the form of plan contributions, higher salaries, or some combination
of the two. Analogous to the analysis of hard freezes, we present two scenarios for Social
Security costs: 100% employer, and a 50-50 split between employer and employee. Under a hard
freeze, the DB cash flows decline from the PVB cash flows to the ABO cash flows.
         The bottom panel of Table 7 shows that for the baseline GSP growth scenario,
contributions now need to rise by only 4.8% of total own revenue, instead of 8.4% in Table 5.
Contribution increases per resident household under a hard freeze are still $800, due to the
amortization of unfunded liabilities. For all states, a hard freeze generates a decline in required
contribution increases, although substantial revenue increases or tax cuts are still required. If


         29
           For Alaska and Utah, the figures going into the top panel of Table 7 are identical to those from the
baseline analysis, as these states have already implemented soft freezes.

                                                         35
employees get DC plans instead of DB accruals, they will likely be compensated with employer
contributions to these DC plans. In our analysis, we have calculated this cost in a similar way to
the cost calculations performed for new hires under soft freezes. If public employees require
even higher levels of compensation for the switch to DC plans then these cost savings would be
even more muted.
        Table 7 also presents the 10th and 90th percentile asset return scenarios for soft and hard
freezes. It is interesting to note that if the 90th percentile return is achieved, a contribution
increase of 13.1% of payroll is required both with the soft freeze (third column of Table 7) and
without it (see the second to last column of Table 5). Without any policy changes, the newly
accrued retirement costs would equal new DB accruals for all employees. Under the soft freeze,
the newly accrued retirement costs are the same for existing employees but they are the DC
contribution rates (plus Social Security where applicable) for the new employees. The fact that
these are roughly the same implies that if 90th percentile returns can be guaranteed then new
benefit promises under today’s plan benefit parameters would not be any more costly than a soft
freeze. The hard freeze scenario reduces required contribution increases to 9.4% of payroll at the
90th percentile.
        At the 10th percentile, the cost savings of a soft freeze are most substantial, amounting to
almost 10% of total payroll. Under the soft freeze new workers get fixed DC contributions,
which are independent of the asset’s performance. The normal costs of the DB plan that these
new workers forego are highly dependent on the assumed discount rate. When new benefit
accruals are discounted at the high returns assumed in the 90% scenario new DB accruals are no
more expensive than the DC contributions, and the soft freeze generates essentially no savings.
Conversely, when new benefit accruals are discounted at the low returns assumed in the 10%
scenario new DB accruals are much more expensive, and the soft freeze generates substantial
savings for the plan sponsor.
        In Table 8 we present analysis that is analogous to Table 7 but incorporating wage risk
with a wage-liability correlation parameter of ρ = 25. The addition of wage risk reduces the
required contributions by 2.8% of payroll at the 10th percentile (from 33.0% to 30.2%), by 1.2%
of payroll at the mean (from 21.0% to 19.8%), and only 0.4% of payroll at the 90th percentile
(from 13.1% to 12.7%). The effects of adding wage risk to the freeze scenarios are therefore
similar to the effects of adding wage risk to the baseline scenarios, albeit slightly smaller in

                                                   36
magnitude. Again, at the 90th percentile, a soft-freeze saves no costs relative to the 90th percentile
without a soft-freeze as shown in the right-most column of Table 5.
       Figure 3 shows the effects in the 10 most populous states of soft and hard freezes under
the mean outcome without wage risk, assuming the government must bear the full 12.4% cost for
new Social Security enrollees. Broadly speaking, the fewer state employees that are in Social
Security, the less the state’s benefit costs will decline when there are freezes.

                                           V. Conclusion
       This paper proposes an alternative measurement for the quality of public pension
funding, namely the extent to which state and local governments will have to raise taxes or cut
spending to pay for pension obligations. Specifically, we calculate how much states have to
increase revenues or cut spending to pay new pension promises to existing employees and pay
down unfunded legacy liabilities over the next 30 years. Given blurred lines between what is a
state obligation and what is a local obligation, our analysis considers all state and local
government DB plans within a state as a unit, and compares that to all revenue sources of state
and local governments within the state.
       Most state and local governments in fact use amortization periods of around 30 years for
unfunded liabilities. We show that actually achieving fully funded systems in 30 years will
require devoting substantially more resources to the systems. Government accounting generally
implements this amortization using smoothed asset values, return expectations of around 8%, and
the assumption that all future benefit accruals will be fully funded, a set of assumptions that does
not imply the state will be at or close to full funding in 30 years.
       One theme that emerges is that substantial revenue increases or spending cuts are
required to pay for pension promises to public employees even if pension promises are frozen at
today’s levels. The cost savings that states would realize through soft or hard freezes depends on
the current level of generosity of the plans, as well as current levels of employee contributions
and the generosity of the DC plan that would replace the DB plan. Hard freezes, even with the
more costly DC transition scenario that we model (an employer DC cost of 10% of pay, plus
Social Security for all employees fully paid for by the employer), reduce revenue demands for all
states. Soft freezes with similar transition modeling reduce revenue demands for all but seven
states with relatively large employee contributions and relatively low current Social Security
coverage. In four of those states, a soft freeze would be cost saving if employees newly enrolled
                                                  37
in Social Security were forced to bear a significant share of that new enrollment. Achieving cost
savings under a soft freeze in the remaining states would require less generous DC plans.
       A significant finding of our analysis is that the GASB rules significantly undervalue the
cost of providing DB plans to state workers, as the true present value of new benefit accruals
averages 12-14 percent of payroll more than the costs recognized under GASB. These distortions
can generate conflicting interests between state and local governments. For example, in states
where the state government is responsible for paying the unfunded liability for plans covering
local workers such as teachers GASB accounting forces states to subsidize local government
employees. In these situations the state effectively must bear the expense of the extra 12-14
percent of payroll that the plans actually cost, potentially encouraging excessive hiring at the
local level. State governments typically bear that burden by taking high levels of investment risk
and requiring taxpayers to underwrite downside insurance. Conversely, in some states the state
government negotiates the pension benefits of local employees, but requires local governments
to fund these benefits, as happens for example with municipal police and fire systems in Illinois.
In that case, the state essentially forces the local governments into a similar arrangement.
       We have modeled some degree of tax base sensitivity to the required increase in revenues
or cuts in spending. An interesting avenue for future research would be to further examine how
these effects would operate at the local level, as cities and counties may be more exposed to the
threat of citizens “voting with their feet” than states. The extent to which such migration might
affect the solvency of local governments is an important area for future research.

                                            References

Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti. 1995. “The Political Economy of Budget Deficits.” IMF
Staff Papers 42, 1-31.
Beshears, John, James Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian. 2011. “Behavioral economics
perspectives on public sector pension plans.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(2):
315‐336.

Bohn, Hening. 2011. “Should public retirement plans be fully funded?” Journal of Pension
Economics and Finance 10(2): 195‐219.

Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2010. “GDP by State,” http://www.bea.gov/regional/gsp/.
Bader, Lawrence N. and Jeremy Gold. 2004. “The Case Against Stock in Public Pension Funds.”
Pension Research Council Working Paper.


                                                 38
Benzoni, L., P. Collin Dufresne, and R. Goldstein, 2007, “Portfolio Choice over the Life-cycle
when the Stock and Labor Markets are Cointegrated,” Journal of Finance 62, 2123-2167.

Black, Fischer. 1989. “Should You Use Stocks to Hedge Your Pension Liability?” Financial
Analysts Journal 45(1): 10-12.
Bodie, Zvi. 1990. “The ABO, the PBO, and Pension Investment Policy.” Financial Analysts
Journal 46: 27-34.
Bodie, Zvi, Marcus, Alan, Merton, Robert. 1988. “Defined benefit vs. defined contribution
pension plans: what are the real trade-offs?” In Pensions in the U.S. Economy, eds. Zvi Bodie,
John Shoven, and David Wise, 139-162. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brown, Jeffrey and David Wilcox. 2009. “Discounting State and Local Pension Liabilities.”
American Economic Review 99(2): 538-542.
Comprix, Joseph, and Karl A. Muller. 2011. “Pension plan accounting estimates and the freezing
of defined benefit pension plans.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 51(1): 115-133.
D’Arcy, Stephen P., James H. Dulebohn, and Pyungsuk Oh. 1999. “Optimal Funding of State
Employee Pension Systems.” Journal of Risk and Insurance 66(3): 345–80.
Feldstein, Martin, 1995, “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study
of the 1986 Tax Reform Act,” Journal of Political Economy 103(3), 551-572.
Friedberg, Leora. 2011. “Labor Market Aspects of State and Local Retirement Plans: A review
of evidence and a blueprint for future research.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance
10(2).
Geanakoplos, John, and Stephen P. Zeldes, 2010, The market value of accrued Social Security
benefits, in Deborah Lucas, ed. Measuring and Managing Federal Financial Risk (University of
Chicago Press, Chicago).
Gold, Jeremy. 2002. “Risk Transfer in Public Pension Plans.” Working Paper 2002-18, Wharton
Pension Research Council.
Gold, Jeremy, and Gordon Latter. 2008. “The Case for Marking Public Pension Plan Liabilities
to Market.” Working Paper.
Gruber, Jon, and Emmanuel Saez, 2004, “The elasticity of taxable income: evidence and
implications,” Journal of Public Economics 84, 1-32.
Helms, L. Jay, 1985, “The Effect of State and Local Taxes on Economic Growth: A Time Series-
Cross Section Approach,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 67(4), 574-582.
Lucas, Deborah and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2006. “Valuing and Hedging Defined Benefit Pension
Obligations: The Role of Stocks Revisited.” Mimeo: Columbia University.
Lucas, Deborah and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2009. “How should public plans invest?” American
Economic Review 99(2): 527–532.

                                               39
Milevsky, Moshe, and Keke Song. 2010. “Do Markets Like Frozen Defined Benefit Pension
Plans? An Event Study.” Journal of Risk and Insurance 77(4): 893-909.
Novy-Marx, Robert, and Joshua Rauh. 2008. “The Intergenerational Transfer of Public Pension
Promises.” NBER Working Paper #14343.
Novy-Marx, Robert, and Joshua Rauh. 2009. “The Liabilities and Risks of State-Sponsored
Pension Plans.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(4), 191-210.
Novy-Marx, Robert, and Joshua Rauh. 2011a. “Public Pension Liabilities: How Big Are They
and What Are They Worth?” Journal of Finance 66(4): 1207-1246.
Novy-Marx, Robert and Joshua Rauh. 2011b. “The Crisis in Local Government Pensions in the
United States.” In Growing Old: Paying for Retirement and Institutional Money Management
after the Financial Crisis, eds. Robert Litan and Richard Herring, Brookings Institution.
Pennacchi, George, and Mahdi Rastad. 2011. “Portfolio allocation for public pension funds.”
Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(2): 221‐245.

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics, MIT Press.
Poterba, James, Joshua Rauh, Steven Venti, and David Wise, 2007. “Defined Contribution Plans,
Defined Benefit Plans, and the Accumulation of Retirement Wealth.” Journal of Public
Economics 91: 2062-2086.
Romer, Christina, and David Romer, 2010. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” American Economic Review 100, 763-
801.
Rauh, Joshua and Irina Stefanescu. 2009. “Why Are Firms in the United States Abandoning
Defined Benefit Plans?” Rotman International Journal of Pension Management 2(2): 18-26.
Samwick, Andrew, Skinner, Jonathan. 2004. “How will 401(k) plans affect retirement income?”
American Economic Review 94: 329–343.
Schieber, Syl. 2011. “Political economy of public sector retirement plans.” Journal of Pension
Economics and Finance 10(2): 269‐289.

Shoag, Daniel. 2011. “The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the Multiplier
from State Pension Plan Returns.” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Tiebout, Charles. 1956 “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures.” Journal of Political Economy
64(5): 416-424.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2010a. “U.S. Census of State and Local Retirement Systems, Fiscal Year
2008.” http://www.census.gov/govs/retire/
U.S. Census Bureau. 2010b. “State Government Finances 2009.”
http://www2.census.gov/govs/state/09statess.xls



                                               40
                     FIGURE 1. ONE-YEAR CHANGE IN RECOGNIZED CASH FLOW PROMISES FOR NON-RETIRING WORKERS
This figure provides a graphical representation of how service costs are calculated. The top two lines show the year by year forecast of the expected benefit
payments recognized under the EAN (solid line), and those recognized the previous year under the EAN for the same workers (dashed line). The bottom two
lines show the expected benefit payments recognized under the ABO (dotted line) and those recognized the previous year under the ABO for the same workers
(lowest line). The present value of the difference in the top two lines yields the EAN service cost, and the present value of the difference in the bottom two lines
yields the ABO service cost.



                                              300
                                                                                                                        EAN this year
                                                                                                                        EAN last year
                                                                                                                        ABO this year
                                              250
                                                                                                                        ABO last year


                                              200
                         dollars (billions)




                                              150



                                              100



                                              50



                                                0
                                                    0   10    20             30          40                50             60             70
                                                                             years from now




                                                                                 41
      FIGURE 2. EFFECTS OF TIEBOUT PARAMETERS ON REQUIRED CONTRIBUTION INCREASES
The figures show required increase in government contributions as a share of GSP to arrive at a fully funded pension
system in 30 years on an ABO basis, assuming no benefit changes, under different Tiebout parameters. In the top
figure, only the five states with the largest necessary contribution increases are shown. In the bottom figure, only the
five states with the smallest necessary contribution increases are shown. The Tiebout parameter is the decline in the
GSP growth rate per additional point of GSP raised in state government revenue.
                 3.5%
                          ΔContributions / GSP
                          No Policy Change


                 3.0%



                 2.5%
                                                                                               Ohio
                                                                                               Oregon
                                                                                               New Mexico
                 2.0%
                                                                                               Illinois
                                                                                               New York

                 1.5%



                 1.0%
                                0.0               1.0               2.0         3.0
                                                    Tiebout Parameter




                  0.7%
                          ΔContributions / GSP,
                          No Policy Change
                  0.6%


                  0.5%


                  0.4%                                                                         Maryland
                                                                                               Arizona
                  0.3%                                                                         Utah
                                                                                               Arkansas
                                                                                               Indiana
                  0.2%


                  0.1%


                  0.0%
                                 0.0               1.0                  2.0      3.0

                                                         Tiebout Parameter




                                                              42
              FIGURE 3. EFFECTS OF SOFT AND HARD FREEZES IN MOST POPULOUS STATES
The top figure shows the 10 most populous states in descending order of per household required contribution
increases if there are no policy changes. The effects of soft and hard freezes are shown assuming that the
government would have to bear the full cost of new social security entrants. The bottom figure shows analogous
calculations for the same states in descending order of the required contribution increase as a percent of payroll.
  $3,000
              Annual Increase ,
              per household
  $2,500


  $2,000


  $1,500


  $1,000


    $500


       $‐




 50%
            Annual increase,
            % of payroll
 40%


 30%


 20%


 10%


  0%




                               No Change   Soft Freeze      Hard Freeze




                                                          43
TABLE 1—SUMMARY STATISTICS: CONTRIBUTIONS, PAYROLL, AND REVENUES (2009) FOR STATE AND
                        LOCAL SYSTEMS, AGGREGATED TO THE STATE LEVEL
                                           mean        std dev   total     min             max


Tax Revenue                                $24.3      $30.8  $1,215.1      $2.5   SD    $160.1    CA
Total Own Revenue                          $38.9      $47.9  $1,947.4      $4.3   SD    $262.0    CA
Gross State Product (GSP)                 $281.0     $337.5 $14,051.7     $25.4   VT   $1,891.4   CA
Households (M)                              2.36       2.62    117.85      0.21   WY      14.22   CA
Payroll
    $ billions                             $13.6      $18.6    $678.4      $1.2   VT    $108.1    CA
    as share of Tax Revenue               54.3%      10.4%     55.8%     35.3%    NE    79.2%     AL
    as share of Total Own Revenue         32.9%       5.7%     34.8%     17.4%    NE    42.5%     TX
    as share of Gross State Product        4.6%       0.8%      4.8%      2.9%    NE     6.2%     NM
    per household                         $5,450     $1,310    $5,757    $3,507   AR    $8,772    WY
Total Government Contributions (Including Social Security)
    $ billions                              $2.2       $3.3    $110.9      $0.2   ND     $19.5    CA
    as share of Payroll                   16.5%       3.9%     16.3%      9.0%    TX    26.7%     RI
    as share of Tax Revenue                8.9%       2.6%      9.1%      4.7%    ND    14.8%     AL
    as share of Total Own Revenue          5.4%       1.6%      5.7%      2.8%    CO     9.3%     RI
    as share of Gross State Product        0.8%       0.2%      0.8%      0.4%    CO     1.3%     RI
    per household                           $892       $280      $941     $463    CO    $1,739    NY
Total Government Contributions (Excluding Social Security)
    $ billions                              $1.6       $2.5     $80.7      $0.1   ND     $15.2    CA
    as share of Payroll                   11.6%       4.3%     11.9%      3.3%    NC    22.4%     NV
    as share of Tax Revenue                6.3%       2.5%      6.6%      2.1%    NC    12.1%     NV
    as share of Total Own Revenue          3.8%       1.6%      4.1%      1.3%    NC     7.6%     NV
    as share of Gross State Product        0.5%       0.2%      0.6%      0.2%    NC     1.0%     RI
    per household                           $628       $275      $684     $173    NC    $1,291    NY
Total Employee Contributions (Including Social Security)
    $ billions                              $1.4       $1.9     $69.1      $0.1   VT     $12.6    CA
    as share of Payroll                   10.6%       2.6%     10.2%      2.6%    NV    15.2%     NM
    as share of Tax Revenue                5.8%       2.0%      5.7%      1.4%    NV    10.7%     NM
    as share of Total Own Revenue          3.5%       1.1%      3.5%      0.9%    NV     6.0%     NM
    as share of Gross State Product        0.5%       0.2%      0.5%      0.1%    NV     0.9%     NM
    per household                           $577       $185      $586     $135    NV    $1,006    WY
Total Employee Contributions (Excluding Social Security)
    $ billions                              $0.8       $1.3     $38.8      $0.0   OR       $8.3   CA
    as share of Payroll                    5.8%       2.5%      5.7%      0.1%    OR     11.2%    MA
    as share of Tax Revenue                3.1%       1.5%      3.2%      0.1%    OR      6.5%    OH
    as share of Total Own Revenue          1.9%       0.9%      2.0%      0.0%    OR      4.1%    OH
    as share of Gross State Product        0.3%       0.1%      0.3%      0.0%    OR      0.6%    OH
    per household                           $312       $154      $330        $6   OR      $644    AK



                                                  44
TABLE 2—SERVICE COSTS AS PERCENT OF PAYROLL, STATE AND LOCAL AGGREGATED TO STATE LEVEL
This table provides the service costs for each state under each of the two liability recognition methods (Entry Age Normal (EAN)
and Accumulated Benefit Obligation (ABO)) as well under each of two discounting methodologies (the state-chosen rate and
Treasury yield curves). Each row represents the total of all state and local government systems within a given state. The ABO is
often referred to as the “termination liability,” because it recognizes only the portion of expected future pension benefits
payments due to an employee’s current wages and service. The EAN recognizes future liabilities in proportion to the ratio of the
present value of a worker’s wages earned to date and the present value of lifetime wages, which leads to service accruals that are
a constant fraction of an employee’s wages throughout the employee’s career. The discounting under the Treasury yield curve is
achieved by deflating nominal cash flows at the inflation rate and discounting the resulting real cash flow stream using the
December 2010 zero-coupon TIPS yield curve.

                       ABO Service Cost            EAN Service Cost           Actual Contributions          Cost / Contribution
                       Stated Treasury             Stated Treasury            Employee      Total             ABO        EAN
                        (1)      (2)                (3)      (4)                  (5)        (6)             (2)/(6)    (4)/(6)
Oregon                 14.8%     30.4%              9.8%     28.5%                  0.1%     8.4%                 3.6        3.4
Wyoming                17.7%     30.3%             14.2%     29.2%                  5.3% 10.3%                    2.9        2.8
Delaware               15.4%     23.1%             13.0%     22.3%                  2.4%     8.3%                 2.8        2.7
North Dakota           17.7%     26.9%             14.7%     25.9%                  4.7% 11.3%                    2.4        2.3
Pennsylvania           18.2%     32.3%             14.6%     31.2%                  7.0% 13.9%                    2.3        2.2
North Carolina         16.6%     22.1%             14.6%     21.4%                  6.2%     9.6%                 2.3        2.2
Wisconsin              16.3%     25.9%             13.0%     24.7%                  6.4% 11.6%                    2.2        2.1
Minnesota              14.0%     26.5%              9.9%     25.1%                  5.4% 11.9%                    2.2        2.1
Vermont                14.5%     26.2%             11.1%     25.1%                  4.8% 11.8%                    2.2        2.1
Texas                  18.2%     28.7%             15.0%     27.7%                  6.0% 13.1%                    2.2        2.1
Utah                   18.3%     32.5%             14.1%     31.1%                  0.9% 15.0%                    2.2        2.1
New Jersey             15.1%     28.7%             10.8%     27.2%                  6.2% 13.4%                    2.1        2.0
Colorado               22.0%     40.8%             15.2%     38.5%                  8.5% 19.8%                    2.1        1.9
Washington             16.7%     26.5%             13.5%     25.5%                  4.2% 12.9%                    2.1        2.0
Kansas                 14.5%     22.6%             12.0%     21.9%                  4.1% 11.5%                    2.0        1.9
Tennessee              16.3%     25.7%             12.8%     24.5%                  3.1% 13.9%                    1.8        1.8
New York               16.9%     30.4%             12.8%     29.1%                  1.9% 16.6%                    1.8        1.7
Nebraska               19.3%     32.4%             14.5%     30.8%                  7.3% 17.9%                    1.8        1.7
Iowa                   14.9%     22.1%             12.4%     21.3%                  4.6% 12.2%                    1.8        1.7
South Dakota           15.9%     24.1%             12.8%     23.1%                  6.5% 13.5%                    1.8        1.7
Florida                15.3%     26.3%             11.9%     25.2%                  1.4% 14.9%                    1.8        1.7
New Hampshire          12.5%     23.7%              9.5%     22.8%                  5.8% 14.0%                    1.7        1.6
Georgia                18.5%     26.0%             15.8%     25.1%                  4.5% 15.5%                    1.7        1.6
New Mexico             23.0%     37.5%             17.9%     35.9%                  9.0% 22.6%                    1.7        1.6
Idaho                  19.4%     28.3%             16.3%     27.4%                  6.4% 17.1%                    1.7        1.6
Kentucky               19.8%     28.1%             17.0%     27.2%                  6.8% 17.5%                    1.6        1.6
Ohio                   21.2%     33.7%             16.7%     32.3%                 10.2% 21.5%                    1.6        1.5
California             20.4%     34.8%             15.3%     33.0%                  7.8% 22.2%                    1.6        1.5
Michigan               14.6%     24.0%             11.3%     22.9%                  3.4% 15.3%                    1.6        1.5
Missouri               19.9%     33.6%             15.4%     32.1%                  7.1% 21.6%                    1.6        1.5
Alaska                 19.4%     33.5%             14.5%     31.9%                  7.6% 22.1%                    1.5        1.4
Montana                16.2%     28.6%             12.1%     27.2%                  8.8% 19.0%                    1.5        1.4
Virginia               16.3%     28.7%             12.6%     27.4%                  0.8% 19.2%                    1.5        1.4
Mississippi            20.0%     29.5%             16.3%     28.3%                  7.4% 20.1%                    1.5        1.4
Nevada                 23.0%     36.4%             18.9%     35.2%                  2.6% 25.0%                    1.5        1.4
South Carolina         16.9%     25.7%             14.0%     24.8%                  7.3% 18.2%                    1.4        1.4
Connecticut            17.4%     26.0%             14.1%     25.0%                  4.4% 19.0%                    1.4        1.3


                                                               45
Alabama         18.3%   24.7%   15.8%   23.9%    5.6%   18.0%   1.4   1.3
Maryland        17.9%   25.8%   14.5%   24.7%    5.6%   18.9%   1.4   1.3
Oklahoma        18.3%   31.5%   14.3%   30.1%    6.8%   23.8%   1.3   1.3
Arizona         16.7%   22.8%   14.6%   22.2%    8.1%   17.4%   1.3   1.3
Hawaii          12.1%   22.6%    8.7%   21.4%    4.5%   17.4%   1.3   1.2
Louisiana       19.6%   34.0%   15.6%   32.8%    8.8%   26.3%   1.3   1.2
Arkansas        15.6%   24.1%   12.1%   22.9%    4.9%   18.7%   1.3   1.2
Maine           22.6%   30.1%   18.7%   28.8%    7.5%   23.5%   1.3   1.2
Rhode Island    21.4%   36.3%   16.8%   34.8%    8.7%   29.1%   1.2   1.2
Massachusetts   18.5%   32.7%   13.4%   31.3%   11.2%   26.6%   1.2   1.2
Illinois        18.4%   31.5%   14.0%   30.1%    8.4%   26.6%   1.2   1.1
West Virginia   18.0%   28.7%   14.8%   27.6%    7.7%   25.6%   1.1   1.1
Indiana         12.4%   16.6%   10.4%   16.0%    3.1%   17.2%   1.0   0.9
Overall         17.8%   29.5%   13.9%   28.2%    5.8%   17.7%   1.7   1.6




                                        46
 TABLE 3—NECESSARY CONTRIBUTIONS AND CONTRIBUTION INCREASES FOR FULL FUNDING IN 30 YEARS WITHOUT POLICY CHANGES
                                                         Total Required Contribution     Required Increase Above Current Rates
                                                      ABO, 10yr             ABO, 10yr      ABO, 10yr             ABO, 10yr
                                                     Average State         Average GSP    Average State        Average GSP
                                                     GSP Growth            Growth - 1%    GSP Growth            Growth - 1%

Contributions / Payroll       Weighted Average       40.4%                42.5%           24.1%                26.1%
                              Mean, StDev            38.3%    (6.6%)      40.2% (7.3%)    21.8% (6.8%)         23.7% (7.4%)
                              Min, Max               24.7%    53.9%       25.1% 58.6%      7.5% 42.5%           8.8% 46.1%
                              Min State, Max State      NC        CO         NC     IL        IN    CO             IN    CO

Contributions / Tax Revenue   Weighted Average       22.6%                23.7%           13.4%                14.6%
                              Mean, StDev            20.8%    (5.4%)      21.8% (5.8%)    11.8% (4.4%)         12.9% (4.8%)
                              Min, Max               12.2%    34.6%       12.9% 36.2%      3.6% 24.7%           4.2% 26.3%
                              Min State, Max State      AK        OR         ND     OR        IN    OR             IN    OR

Contributions / Total Own     Weighted Average       14.1%                14.8%            8.4%                 9.1%
Revenue                       Mean, StDev            12.6%    (3.2%)      13.2% (3.4%)     7.2% (2.6%)          7.8% (2.9%)
                              Min, Max                6.4%    20.2%        7.0% 22.3%      2.2% 13.4%           2.6% 14.7%
                              Min State, Max State      AK        IL         AK     IL        IN   OH              IN   OH

Contributions / GSP           Weighted Average        2.0%                 2.1%            1.2%                 1.3%
                              Mean, StDev             1.8%    (0.5%)       1.9% (0.5%)     1.0% (0.4%)          1.1% (0.4%)
                              Min, Max                1.1%      3.0%       1.1%   3.2%     0.3%   1.9%          0.4%   2.1%
                              Min State, Max State      DE       NM          DE    NM         IN    OH             IN    OH

Contributions / Household     Weighted Average       $2,326              $2,445          $1,385                $1,504
                              Mean, StDev            $2,089   ($623)     $2,193 ($665)   $1,197 ($482)         $1,301 ($521)
                              Min, Max               $1,211   $3,989     $1,267 $4,157    $329 $2,250           $385 $2,419
                              Min State, Max State       IN      NY          IN    NY        IN    NY              IN    NY



                                                                 47
        TABLE 4—REQUIRED INCREASES FOR FULL FUNDING BY STATE, NO POLICY CHANGE
This table shows required contribution increases by state, in descending order of the required increase per resident
household. Columns on the right display the increase required to pay only the present value of new accruals.
                                        For Full Funding in 30 Years                           For Service Costs Only
                      $                    % Tax       % Own                     per                            per
                   Billions   % Payroll   Revenue      Revenue       % GSP    household        $ Billions   household
New York             $16.9      25.7%       12.3%        8.6%         1.5%       $2,250             $9.1       $1,208
Oregon                $3.1      36.1%       24.7%       13.2%         1.9%       $2,140             $1.9       $1,303
Wyoming               $0.4      23.7%       10.3%        6.5%         1.2%       $2,080             $0.4       $1,748
Ohio                  $9.1      33.2%       21.3%       13.4%         1.9%       $2,051             $3.4        $760
New Jersey            $6.7      24.9%       14.1%       10.2%         1.4%       $2,000             $3.2        $966
California           $28.3      26.2%       17.7%       10.8%         1.5%       $1,994            $14.0         $988
Minnesota             $3.9      28.9%       16.9%       11.0%         1.5%       $1,928             $2.0        $971
Illinois              $9.5      32.3%       17.8%       12.3%         1.5%       $1,907             $1.9        $382
New Mexico            $1.4      29.1%       20.4%       11.4%         1.8%       $1,756             $0.7        $900
Colorado              $3.4      42.5%       19.0%       10.6%         1.3%       $1,739             $1.7        $858
Pennsylvania          $7.5      34.9%       14.8%        9.7%         1.4%       $1,550             $4.0         $818
Wisconsin             $3.3      27.0%       14.2%        9.3%         1.4%       $1,522             $1.8        $807
Connecticut           $2.0      22.1%        9.6%        7.5%         0.9%       $1,459             $0.6        $462
Michigan              $5.3      31.7%       15.4%        9.3%         1.4%       $1,386             $1.5        $379
Washington            $3.5      20.8%       13.5%        7.4%         1.0%       $1,371             $2.4        $919
Alaska                $0.4      15.9%        6.4%        3.4%         0.8%       $1,356             $0.2        $777
Hawaii                $0.6      17.2%       10.4%        6.9%         1.0%       $1,288             $0.2         $387
Texas                $12.1      22.1%       15.4%        9.4%         1.1%       $1,271             $8.6        $905
Missouri              $2.9      26.9%       15.5%        9.7%         1.2%       $1,264             $1.3        $563
Kentucky              $2.1      26.4%       15.2%        9.4%         1.3%       $1,260             $0.8         $505
Delaware              $0.4      19.5%       11.6%        6.1%         0.7%       $1,210             $0.3        $917
Kansas                $1.3      19.2%       11.7%        7.1%         1.0%       $1,197             $0.8         $693
Massachusetts         $3.0      21.7%        9.9%        6.4%         0.8%       $1,190             $1.0        $389
South Carolina        $2.1      23.5%       17.7%        7.9%         1.3%       $1,186             $0.7        $380
Vermont               $0.3      23.2%        9.6%        6.5%         1.1%       $1,163             $0.2        $721
Mississippi           $1.3      21.8%       14.5%        8.2%         1.3%       $1,127             $0.6        $484
Louisiana             $1.9      21.9%       11.8%        7.3%         0.9%       $1,118             $0.7         $394
Virginia              $3.2      18.5%       11.1%        6.8%         0.8%       $1,066             $1.7         $550
North Dakota          $0.3      21.3%        7.8%        5.0%         0.8%       $1,042             $0.2        $764
New Hampshire         $0.5      20.6%       11.0%        6.8%         0.9%       $1,010             $0.2        $476
Nevada                $0.9      17.2%        9.3%        5.9%         0.7%         $884             $0.6         $586
Nebraska              $0.6      24.3%        8.6%        4.2%         0.7%         $881             $0.4         $529
Montana               $0.3      19.4%        9.7%        5.8%         0.9%         $872             $0.2        $433
Alabama               $1.6      15.4%       12.2%        6.1%         0.9%        $868              $0.7        $373
Iowa                  $1.0      15.4%        8.5%        5.0%         0.7%         $861             $0.6         $551
Oklahoma              $1.2      19.3%       10.0%        5.9%         0.8%         $850             $0.5         $340
Tennessee             $2.0      20.8%       11.8%        5.8%         0.8%         $837             $1.1        $473
Maryland              $1.8      15.6%        6.7%        4.9%         0.6%         $818             $0.8        $362
Florida               $5.8      20.3%        8.9%        5.3%         0.8%         $813             $3.4         $473
Rhode Island          $0.3      13.9%        7.2%        4.8%         0.7%         $810             $0.0           $4
Georgia               $3.0      20.4%       10.1%        6.1%         0.8%         $803             $1.6         $412
North Carolina        $2.8      15.1%        9.5%        5.7%         0.7%         $784             $2.3         $649
South Dakota          $0.2      15.9%        9.6%        5.7%         0.6%         $776             $0.2        $518
Maine                 $0.4      18.7%        7.1%        4.9%         0.8%         $761             $0.1         $268
Idaho                 $0.4      16.5%       10.2%        6.0%         0.8%         $737             $0.3        $501
Arizona               $1.5      11.6%        7.8%        4.7%         0.6%         $608             $0.7         $281
West Virginia         $0.4      14.7%        6.7%        4.1%         0.7%         $600             $0.1         $125
Utah                  $0.6      13.2%        6.9%        3.6%         0.5%         $538             $0.2        $166
Arkansas              $0.6      15.2%        6.4%        4.1%         0.6%         $534             $0.2         $187
Indiana               $0.8       7.5%        3.6%        2.2%         0.3%         $329            -$0.1        ($23)
Total               $163.2      24.1%       13.4%        8.4%         1.2%       $1,385            $79.6         $676

                                                         48
                            TABLE 5—REQUIRED CONTRIBUTION INCREASES UNDER DIFFERENT SCENARIOS
                                                                     Risk-Neutral Asset Return
                                           Mean                           10th Percentile                   90th Percentile
          Future Wage Risk (ρ)      0.00            0.25                0                 0.25          0                  0.25

Contributions/   Weighted Avg 24.1%             22.5%           42.9%                39.3%          13.1%             12.7%
Payroll           Mean, StDev 21.8% (6.8%)      20.4% (6.6%)    38.7% (10.4%)        35.4% (9.7%)   11.9% (5.4%)      11.5% (5.3%)
                      Min, Max 7.5% 42.5%        6.7% 40.2%     18.8%   67.5%        16.9% 62.0%     1.1% 28.3%        0.8% 27.7%
                 Min, Max State   IN    CO          IN    CO        IN     CO            IN    CO       IN    CO          IN    CO

Contributions/   Weighted Avg 13.4%             12.6%           23.9%                21.9%          7.3%               7.1%
Tax Revenue       Mean, StDev 11.8% (4.4%)      11.1% (4.2%)    21.0%      (7.1%)    19.2% (6.6%)   6.5% (3.1%)        6.3% (3.1%)
                      Min, Max 3.6% 24.7%        3.2% 23.4%      9.0%      40.5%      8.0% 37.5%    0.5% 15.2%         0.4% 14.8%
                 Min, Max State   IN    OR          IN    OR        IN         OR        IN    OR      IN    OR           IN    OR

Contributions/   Weighted Avg     8.4%            7.9%          14.9%                13.7%          4.6%               4.4%
Own Revenue       Mean, StDev     7.2% (2.6%)     6.7% (2.5%)   12.8%      (4.3%)    11.7% (4.0%)   3.9% (1.9%)        3.8% (1.9%)
                      Min, Max    2.2% 13.4%      2.0% 12.7%     5.5%      24.2%      4.9% 22.5%    0.3% 8.1%          0.2% 8.0%
                 Min, Max State      IN   OH         IN   OH        IN        OH         IN   OH       IN    OR           IN    OR

Contributions/   Weighted Avg     1.2%            1.1%           2.1%                 1.9%          0.6%               0.6%
GSP               Mean, StDev     1.0% (0.4%)     0.9% (0.4%)    1.8%      (0.6%)     1.6% (0.6%)   0.6% (0.3%)        0.5% (0.3%)
                      Min, Max    0.3% 1.9%       0.3% 1.8%      0.8%        3.5%     0.7% 3.2%     0.0% 1.2%          0.0% 1.1%
                 Min, Max State      IN   OH         IN   OH        IN         OH        IN   OH       IN    OR           IN    OR

Contributions/   Weighted Avg $1,385            $1,298          $2,468              $2,261           $756              $731
Household         Mean, StDev $1,197 ($482)     $1,121 ($459)   $2,112     ($765)   $1,932 ($707)    $663 ($344)       $640 ($339)
                      Min, Max $329 $2,250       $294 $2,114     $820      $4,026    $736 $3,703      $46 $1,499        $36 $1,461
                 Min, Max State   IN    NY          IN    NY        IN        NY        IN    NY       IN   WY           IN   WY




                                                                49
                              TABLE 6—EFFECTS OF LIMITS ON DEBT ISSUANCE
This table accounts for variation in municipal indebtedness that affect the ability of governments to issue debt to
fund pension liabilities. These effects are modeled as reductions in pension fund assets to reflect the difference
between a state’s aggregate municipal debt relative to GSP and the ratio of aggregate national municipal debt to
national GDP. If a state’s aggregate municipal debt relative to GSP exceeds aggregate national municipal debt
relative to national GDP, its pension fund assets are reduced to reflect the difference. Conversely, if a state’s debt is
relatively small relative to its economy, the difference is added to its pension fund assets. See Section III.D for
details.


                                                                                  Effect of Debt Restriction on
                                       State and Local Debt                       Required Annual Contribution
                                                                                                    % of own
                                    $ billions           % of GSP                 as % of GSP        revenue

5 States with Largest Effects of Debt Restrictions
Kentucky                             42.0                          27%                      0.30%                 2.13%
Massachusetts                        96.3                          26%                      0.26%                 2.05%
New York                            289.6                          26%                      0.26%                 1.43%
Rhode Island                         11.7                          25%                      0.18%                 1.29%
South Carolina                       36.8                          23%                      0.15%                 0.91%

5 States Most Able to Take Advantage of Debt
North Dakota                        3.3                            10%                     -0.20%                -1.22%
Georgia                            52.0                            13%                     -0.20%                -1.58%
Arkansas                           12.5                            12%                     -0.20%                -1.43%
Idaho                               5.9                            11%                     -0.22%                -1.60%
Iowa                               13.6                            10%                     -0.27%                -1.91%




                                                           50
               TABLE 7—NECESSARY AGGREGATE CONTRIBUTION INCREASES FOR SOFT AND HARD FREEZE, NO WAGE RISK
The table shows the required contribution increases for full funding in 30 years under a soft freeze (Panel A) and a hard freeze (Panel B), assuming no Tiebout
effects. In the soft freeze, the DB plan is closed to new hires, and new hires receive a DC plan with a 10% employer contribution, plus Social Security enrolment
where employees do not yet participate. In the hard freeze, all accruals are stopped and replaced with the DC plus Social Security prospectively. In the left
columns, the 12.4% of payroll cost of Social Security for new entrants is borne entirely by the employer. In the right panel, it is shared equally between employer
and employee.

                                                                                   Cost of Social Security Entrants Borne By
                                                                            Employer                                  Employer-Employee
                                       Asset Return          Mean             10th          90th              Mean           10th       90th
                                      Wage Risk (ρ)          0.00             0.00          0.00               0.00          0.00       0.00

Panel A: Soft Freeze
Δ[Contributions / Payroll]                                      21.0%            33.0%            13.1%               19.7%            31.6%            11.8%
Δ[Contributions / Tax Revenue]                                  11.7%            18.4%             7.3%               11.0%            17.6%             6.6%
Δ[Contributions / Own Revenue]                                   7.3%            11.5%             4.6%                6.9%            11.0%             4.1%
Δ[Contributions / GSP]                                           1.0%             1.6%             0.6%                1.0%             1.5%             0.6%
Δ[Contributions / Household]                                    $1,210           $1,901            $753               $1,134           $1,819            $681

Panel B: Hard Freeze
Δ[Contributions / Payroll]                                      13.9%            19.5%             9.4%               12.2%            17.7%             7.7%
Δ[Contributions / Tax Revenue]                                   7.8%            10.9%             5.3%                6.8%             9.9%             4.3%
Δ[Contributions / Own Revenue]                                   4.8%             6.8%             3.3%                4.2%             6.2%             2.7%
Δ[Contributions / GSP]                                           0.7%             0.9%             0.5%                0.6%             0.9%             0.4%
Δ[Contributions / Household]                                     $800            $1,120            $543                $701            $1,021            $444




                                                                                51
              TABLE 8—NECESSARY AGGREGATE CONTRIBUTION INCREASES FOR SOFT AND HARD FREEZE, WITH WAGE RISK
The table shows the required contribution increases for full funding in 30 years under a soft freeze (Panel A) and a hard freeze (Panel B), assuming no Tiebout
effects. In the soft freeze, the DB plan is closed to new hires, and new hires receive a DC plan with a 10% employer contribution, plus Social Security enrolment
where employees do not yet participate. In the hard freeze, all accruals are stopped and replaced with the employer DC contributions plus the Social Security
contributions. In the left columns, the 12.4% of payroll cost of Social Security for new entrants is borne entirely by the employer. In the right panel, it is shared
equally between employer and employee.




                                                                                    Cost of Social Security Entrants Borne By
                                                                             Employer                                  Employer-Employee
                                        Asset Return          Mean             10th          90th              Mean           10th       90th
                                       Wage Risk (ρ)          0.25             0.25          0.25               0.25          0.25       0.25

Panel A: Soft Freeze
Δ[Contributions / Payroll]                                       19.8%            30.2%            12.7%                18.5%            32.8%            11.2%
Δ[Contributions / Tax Revenue]                                   11.1%            16.9%             7.1%                10.3%            18.3%             6.3%
Δ[Contributions / Own Revenue]                                    6.9%            10.5%             4.4%                 6.4%            11.4%             3.9%
Δ[Contributions / GSP]                                            1.0%             1.5%             0.6%                 0.9%             1.6%             0.5%
Δ[Contributions / Household]                                     $1,140           $1,740            $732                $1,065           $1,890            $646

Panel B: Hard Freeze
Δ[Contributions / Payroll]                                       13.9%            19.5%              9.4%               12.2%            17.7%              7.7%
Δ[Contributions / Tax Revenue]                                    7.8%            10.9%              5.3%                6.8%             9.9%              4.3%
Δ[Contributions / Own Revenue]                                    4.8%             6.8%              3.3%                4.2%             6.2%              2.7%
Δ[Contributions / GSP]                                            0.7%             0.9%              0.5%                0.6%             0.9%              0.4%
Δ[Contributions / Household]                                      $800            $1,120             $543                $701            $1,021             $444




                                                                                 52
                                                     APPENDIX

                                      A. Contributions to Pension Systems
           The study requires measures of contributions to state and local pension systems from
both employees and governments. U.S. Census Bureau (2010a) contains data on total pension
contributions to each level of government, decomposed into government contributions and
employee contributions. For example, the data show that in California in 2008 there were $6.04
billion in employee contributions to state-sponsored plans, $11.37 billion in government
contributions to state-sponsored plans, $1.75 billion in employee contributions to locally-
sponsored plans, and $4.39 billion in government contributions to locally-sponsored plans.
           Using calculations on contribution growth rates from Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011a), we
estimate 2009 contributions based on the growth rate of employee and government contributions
in the state plans covered by that study. For example, for California Novy-Marx and Rauh
(2011a) found that between 2008 and 2009, employee contributions grew by 7.2% for the funds
covered in that study (CalPERS, CalSTRS, and the University of California Retirement Plan),
while government contributions shrank by 3.4%, so that total contributions shrank by 0.1%.30
Applying these growth rates to both the state and local cells for California, we estimate that in
California in 2009, there were employee contributions of $6.47 billion to state-sponsored plans
and $1.87 billion to locally-sponsored plans. There were government contributions of $10.95
billion to state-sponsored plans and $4.28 billion to locally-sponsored plans. The total
government contributions were therefore $15.23 billion (= $10.95 + $4.28) and the total
employee contributions were $8.34 billion (=$6.47 + $1.87). These are estimates of total
contributions to all DB pension systems sponsored by government entities in the state of
California.
           When looking at contribution measures in systems that include Social Security, we add
6.2% of payroll to employer (and employee) contributions. For example, given the share of
workers in California systems that are in Social Security, we estimate total government
contributions including Social Security at $19.46 billion in 2009, as opposed to $15.23 billion
excluding Social Security.



30
     Employer contributions to CalPERS shrank from $7.2 billion in 2008 to $6.9 billion in 2009.

                                                         A.1
                                   B. Calculating Liability Cash Flows

      A plan’s total liability cash flow t years in the future, recognized under the accounting
methodology m  abo, pbo, ean, pvb , comes from its promises to current workers, current

annuitants, and separated workers not yet receiving benefits,

                                      Btm  Btactive,m  Btretired  Btseparated .

A plan’s total liability t years in the future due to its promises to its current workers is given by

                                                  RF          a  amin 1 t 1
                             Btactive ,m         N
                                              a  R1  t 1      s 1    r 0
                                                                                 a ,s    a ,a  r S a ,a t bam, s ,r ,t


where R1 is the first age at which workers can start taking benefits (typically assumed to be 55),

RF is the age of forced retirement (typically assumed to be 75), amin is the age of the youngest
workers typically assumed to be 21), N a , s is the number of workers of age a with s years of

service, a ,a  r is the fraction of workers of age a separating in r years, Sa ,a t is the fraction of

workers of age a surviving to age a + t (gender specific, and accounting for survivor benefits
when applicable), and bam,s ,r ,t is the average benefit payment t years in the future recognized

under the accounting methodology m to a worker of age a with s years of service that separates
in r years.
        The benefit payments recognized under the ABO is given by

                                                                                                    t  maxr , R1  a
                                , s , r ,t  1s  v a  r s f wa , s 1  COLA 
                             baabo


where 1sv is an indicator variable that accounts for the v year vesting period (typically assumed

                                                 
to be five years), a  r  1  BOR  min R2  R1 , max  R2   a  r  , 0 and reflects the reduction in      
benefits (BOR, typically assumed to be 6%/year) made to workers that start taking benefits
before the age of full retirement ( R2 , typically assumed to be 60), under the assumption that
separated workers begin taking retirement benefits as soon as they are eligible to do so because
the buyout rate schedules employed by state and local retirement plans make early retirement

                                                                        A.2
actuarially favorable to workers,  f is the benefit factor, and wa , s is the average salary of a

worker of age a with s years of service, and the last factor accounts for the fact that the COLAs
only apply after a worker starts taking benefits, which happens after separation or when a worker
reaches age R1 , whichever comes later.
The benefit payments recognized under the other accounting methodologies are given by

                                                                      r                                 t  maxr , R1  a
              bam,s ,r ,t  am, s ,r 1s  r v a  r  s  r   f   1  g a i   wa ,s 1  COLA
                                                                      i 1            

where ga is the rate of wage growth for a worker of age a, and am,s ,r is the fraction of total

benefit payments to a worker of age a with s years of service separating in r years recognized
under the accounting methodology m. For the PVB, which fully recognizes benefit payments,
apvb
   , s , r  1; for the PBO, which recognizes the benefit payments in proportion to the fraction of


                                                                   s
lifetime service performed to date, apbo
                                      , s ,r                         ; and for the EAN, which recognizes the benefit
                                                                  sr
payments in proportion to the fraction of discounted lifetime wages earned to date,


                                                                         1  rd   j 1 1  g a s  j 
                                                 s

                                                S
                                                                                  i     i 1
                                                       a  s ,a  s i
                                  aean
                                     , s ,r 
                                                i 1
                                                sr

                                                S                       1  rd   j 1 1  g a s  j 
                                                                                  i     i 1
                                                       a  s ,a  s i
                                                i 1



where rd is the rate used to discount cash flows.
A plan’s total liability t years in the future due to its promises to its current annuitants is given by

                                                            A
                                                           amax
                                         Btretired               N aA S a , a  t Aa 1  COLA 
                                                                                                      t

                                                         a  amin
                                                              A




       A        A
where amin and amax are the minimum and maximum age of current annuitants (typically

assumed to be 45 and 95, respectively), N aA is the number of annuitants of age a, and Aa if the
average benefit annual benefit payment to annuitants of age a.




                                                                           A.3
A plan’s total liability t years in the future due to separated vested workers not yet receiving
benefits is given by

                                        smax        R1
                                                                                                                     t  R1  a 
                        Btseparated                         N aS, s Sa ,a t 0 sb f waS, s 1  COLA
                                         s v a  amin  s



where N aS, s is the number of separated vested workers not yet receiving benefits of age a with

service s, and waS, s is these workers’ average benefits eligible salary.

Total liability cash flows are calibrated to a plan’s stated liability using a geometric series


                                                           Btm  1   
                                                                                      t 1
                                                                                             Btm ,

where  is picked such that the calibrated cash flows, recognized under the accounting
methodology employed by the state and discounted at the state chosen discount rate, yields the
plan’s stated liability. That is,  is chosen to satisfy


                                                      1    Btm
                                                                         t 1
                                                                                   stated


                                                                                             Lstated
                                                         1  rstated 
                                                                        t
                                                 t 1




where mstated , rstated and Lstated are the plan’s stated accounting methodology, discount rate and
liability, respectively.


                                                                C. Normal Costs

In order to calculate the cost of new benefit accruals, or normal cost, we first determine the
expected one year change in the benefit payments recognized under each accounting
methodology

                                        RF        a  amin 1 t 1
                                                                                                               
                   Btactive,m                      N                 a,s   a,a r Sa ,a t bam,s ,r ,t   Btnew _ hires ,m
                                   a  R1 t 1         s 1     r 1                                         

where
                                           bam, s ,r ,t  a , s bam1, s 1,r 1,t 1  bam, s ,r ,t

                                                                           A.4
and we assume that either wages for workers of a given age and tenure grow at the rate of
inflation a ,s  1  i where i is the plan’s inflation rate assumption, or that wages for workers of

age a grow at the rate ga so that a , s  1  g a  wa , s / wa 1, s 1 , and

                                                       RF        t 1
                            Btnew _ hires , m        N
                                                   a  R1  t 1 r  0
                                                                          new _ hires
                                                                          a              a ,a  r S a ,a t 1  i  bam,1,r ,t


where we assume that new workers with no previous service are hired to replace those that retire,
and that new hires have the same age distribution as current workers in their first year of service,

                                                      RF aamin 1      RF         
                            N   new _ hires
                                a              Na,1    Na,s a,a  /   N a,1  .
                                                      aamin s 1       aamin    

We calibrate the change in the benefit payments using the same adjustment factor used to

calibrate the currently recognized benefits, Btactive,m  1   
                                                                                                      t 1
                                                                                                             Btactive,m . The normal cost is the

present value of the increase in the calibrated recognized benefits,

                                                                    
                                                   NC m   1  rt  Btactive,m
                                                                                   t

                                                                   t 2



where rt is the discount rate used to discount year t cash flows.


                                   D. Harmonizing Inflation Rate Assumptions

         Each plan’s liability cash flows, as well as the expected cost of new benefit accruals, are
reforecast under a uniform inflation assumption. This is done using the methodology described
above, with two important modifications. First, we reduce the wage growth assumption for
workers of every age by 1.36% per year, the difference between the liability-weighted average
plan inflation assumption and the Cleveland Fed’s forecast of 2% per year. Second, we reduce
the COLA applicable to post retirement benefit payments by the difference between the plan
specific inflation rate assumption and the Cleveland Fed’s forecast. We calibrate these cash
flows using the geometric series retained from the calculations employing the plan specific
inflation assumptions.

                                                                           A.5
                            FIGURE A1. SERVICE COST AS A PERCENT OF PAYROLL AND BENEFIT FACTORS

                            2.5



                                                                                                                                         NM

                                   2
EAN normal cost, % of GSP




                                                                                                                 CA    OH
                                                                                                            RI         NYMS

                                                                                                     AK
                            1.5                                                                 NJ
                                                                                       OR      MO WYNV AL
                                                                                            IL  SCLAKY
                                                                                                  ID
                                                                                                  TX
                                                                            MA           MTMN
                                                                                        WI WVPAWA
                                                                                      UT
                                                                                   HIVA OK
                                                                                       CO
                                                                                        VT   KS
                                                                                        ME           AZ
                                   1                                              MI
                                                                                  CT
                                                                               TNNH
                                                                                 IA MDND NC
                                                                              FL
                                                                               SD    GA
                                                                             NE
                                                                             AR
                                                                                DE
                                                                  IN
                            0.5
                                                               0.04          0.06      0.08        0.1         0.12        0.14      0.16          0.18
                                                                      Payroll-weighted benefit factor times payroll, as a % of GSP



                                                         2.5

                                                                                                                                    NM
                             ABO normal cost, % of GSP




                                                          2                                                           OH
                                                                                                               CA

                                                                                                          RI          NYMS
                                                                                                         AK
                                                                                        OR       NJ
                                                         1.5                                    MO WYNV
                                                                                             IL  SCLAKY AL
                                                                                            MN     ID
                                                                                                   TX
                                                                                          MT
                                                                             MA          WI
                                                                                         OK WVPA
                                                                                        CO
                                                                                    HI UT       WA
                                                                                         VT
                                                                                      VAME    KS
                                                                                                      AZ
                                                                                   MI
                                                          1                        CT
                                                                                TNNH
                                                                                  IA MDND NC
                                                                               FL     GA
                                                                              ARSD
                                                                              NE
                                                                                 DE
                                                                       IN

                                                         0.5
                                                                  0.04         0.06     0.08       0.1      0.12        0.14      0.16      0.18
                                                                         Payroll-weighted benefit factor times payroll, as a % of GSP




                                                                                                   A.6
                                       FIGURE A2. PENSION DEBT AND NON-PENSION DEBT ARE COMPLEMENTS
The horizontal axis is total municipal debt as recognized in the U.S. Census of Governments, as a percentage of
GSP. The vertical axis is the gap between assets and the present value of liabilities on an ABO basis. Each
additional dollar in municipal debt is associated with an additional 67 cents in ABO pension underfunding, and this
relation has a t-statistic of 3.61.


                                      35

                                                                                      IL
                                      30                                                                   RI
                                                                       OH
                                                                                 NM
         ABO underfunding, % of GSP




                                      25                                             NJ
                                                                                 HI ORCA             SC
                                                                 MS                      CO
                                                                                MN                               NY
                                                                             LA         MI                        KY
                                      20
                                                          OK                           PA
                                                                       WI
                                                                        CT
                                                                        MOMT
                                                                      WV
                                                                      AL               AK                       MA
                                      15                             ME
                                                                   VAUT KS    NH
                                           WY
                                                            AR MD         VT
                                                                           FL
                                                                          TX     AZ
                                                              GA                 WA
                                      10                 ID            TN          NV
                                                    IA ND          NE               IN
                                                                  SD
                                                                DE
                                       5                       NC


                                       0
                                           6    8    10   12      14     16      18        20   22        24    26     28
                                                               Total muni debt, % of GSP




                                                                       A.7
   TABLE A1—CONTRIBUTIONS, PAYROLL, AND REVENUES FOR STATE AND LOCAL SYSTEMS,
                                                            Government Contributions Incl Social Security
                 Total Payroll   Own Revenue    GSP        % of      % Own                     per
                     ($B)           ($B)        ($B)       Payroll   Revenues % of GSP household
New York                $65.8         $197.7    $1,093.2      19.9%       6.6%         1.2%      $1,738.8
Rhode Island              $2.4           $6.8      $47.8      26.7%       9.3%         1.3%      $1,557.3
Hawaii                    $3.7           $9.3      $66.4      19.1%       7.7%         1.1%      $1,436.4
Virginia                $17.5          $47.4      $408.4      23.8%       8.8%         1.0%      $1,374.0
California             $108.1         $262.0    $1,891.4      18.0%       7.4%         1.0%      $1,368.8
Alaska                    $2.3         $10.8       $45.7      14.5%       3.1%         0.7%      $1,234.7
Illinois                $29.3          $76.8      $630.4      20.6%       7.9%         1.0%      $1,215.3
New Mexico                $4.7         $11.9       $74.8      19.8%       7.8%         1.2%      $1,194.0
Connecticut               $9.0         $26.2      $227.4      17.8%       6.1%         0.7%      $1,180.6
Nevada                    $5.2         $15.3      $126.5      22.4%       7.6%         0.9%      $1,147.2
New Jersey              $26.9          $65.5      $483.0      13.4%       5.5%         0.7%      $1,078.0
Alabama                 $10.2          $25.6      $169.9      18.7%       7.4%         1.1%      $1,050.8
Maryland                $11.5          $36.9      $286.8      19.5%       6.1%         0.8%      $1,026.0
Oklahoma                  $6.3         $20.4      $153.8      23.2%       7.1%         0.9%      $1,022.2
Wyoming                  $1.8            $6.7      $37.5      11.3%       3.1%         0.6%        $987.3
West Virginia             $2.8         $10.2       $63.3      24.1%       6.7%         1.1%        $980.5
Mississippi               $5.9         $15.6       $95.9      18.9%       7.1%         1.2%        $973.0
Washington              $16.9          $47.2      $338.3      14.7%       5.3%         0.7%        $968.3
Louisiana                 $8.8         $26.3      $208.4      17.5%       5.9%         0.7%        $891.3
Indiana                 $10.8          $37.1      $262.6      20.2%       5.9%         0.8%        $882.1
Massachusetts           $13.5          $46.9      $365.2      16.5%       4.7%         0.6%        $877.6
South Carolina            $8.9         $26.5      $159.6      17.1%       5.7%         0.9%        $862.5
Oregon                    $8.7         $23.8      $165.6      14.5%       5.3%         0.8%        $862.1
Kansas                    $6.8         $18.4      $124.9      13.6%       5.0%         0.7%        $846.6
Minnesota               $13.5          $35.5      $260.7      12.7%       4.8%         0.7%        $843.8
Utah                      $4.4         $15.9      $112.9      20.2%       5.6%         0.8%        $826.9
Arizona                 $13.3          $32.6      $256.4      15.3%       6.2%         0.8%        $799.1
Missouri                $10.8          $30.0      $239.8      16.8%       6.0%         0.8%        $787.4
Michigan                $16.8          $56.9      $368.4      17.9%       5.3%         0.8%        $781.3
Florida                 $28.6         $109.5      $737.0      19.3%       5.0%         0.7%        $771.8
Iowa                      $6.4         $19.8      $142.3      13.8%       4.5%         0.6%        $769.3
Idaho                     $2.7           $7.3      $54.0      17.0%       6.1%         0.8%        $757.4
Delaware                  $2.1           $6.8      $60.6      12.1%       3.7%         0.4%        $748.7
Montana                   $1.7           $5.6      $36.0      16.4%       4.9%         0.8%        $737.6
New Hampshire             $2.5           $7.6      $59.4      14.4%       4.7%         0.6%        $706.2
Arkansas                  $3.9         $14.5      $101.8      20.1%       5.4%         0.8%        $703.9
Ohio                    $27.5          $67.8      $471.3      11.3%       4.6%         0.7%        $697.1
Kentucky                  $7.9         $22.3      $156.6      14.4%       5.1%         0.7%        $685.1
Tennessee                 $9.8         $34.8      $244.5      16.7%       4.7%         0.7%        $674.2
Georgia                 $14.9          $49.6      $395.2      17.0%       5.1%         0.6%        $669.3
Vermont                   $1.2           $4.3      $25.4      13.2%       3.7%         0.6%        $659.3
Maine                     $2.1           $7.9      $51.3      16.1%       4.2%         0.6%        $655.0
Wisconsin               $12.3          $35.6      $244.4      11.4%       3.9%         0.6%        $641.3
South Dakota              $1.5           $4.3      $38.3      13.1%       4.7%         0.5%        $639.7
North Dakota              $1.2           $5.1      $31.9      12.8%       3.0%         0.5%        $627.8
Nebraska                  $2.5         $14.4       $86.4      16.8%       2.9%         0.5%        $610.2
Pennsylvania            $21.5          $77.3      $554.8      13.1%       3.6%         0.5%        $579.9
Texas                   $54.8         $129.1    $1,144.7        9.0%      3.8%         0.4%        $520.3
North Carolina          $18.7          $49.8      $398.0        9.5%      3.6%         0.4%        $495.0
Colorado                  $7.9         $31.8      $252.7      11.3%       2.8%         0.4%        $462.8



                                                A.8
   TABLE A2—NECESSARY CONTRIBUTIONS AND CONTRIBUTION INCREASES FOR FULL FUNDING IN 30 YEARS UNDER ALTERNATIVE
                                                ASSUMPTIONS
                                                         Total Required Contribution      Required Increase Above Current Rates
                                                       ABO, 10yr            EAN, 10yr       ABO, 10yr             EAN, 10yr
                                                      Average U.S.        Average GSP      Average U.S.         Average GSP
                                                      GSP Growth              Growth       GSP Growth              Growth

Contributions / Payroll       Weighted Average       40.0%              43.2%             23.7%                 26.8%
                              Mean, StDev            38.5%     6.1%     41.0%     7.0%    21.8%     6.8%        23.7%     7.4%
                              Min, Max               24.6%    56.1%     26.1%    59.3%     7.5%    42.5%         8.8%    46.1%
                              Min State, Max State      NC       CO        NC       CO        IN      CO            IN      CO

Contributions / Tax Revenue   Weighted Average       22.3%              24.1%             13.2%                 15.0%
                              Mean, StDev            20.9%     5.1%     22.2%     5.7%    11.8%     4.4%        12.9%     4.8%
                              Min, Max               12.7%    35.2%     13.6%    37.6%     3.6%    24.7%         4.2%    26.3%
                              Min State, Max State       IN      OR        ND       OR        IN      OR            IN      OR

Contributions / Total Own     Weighted Average       13.9%              15.0%              8.2%                  9.4%
Revenue                       Mean, StDev            12.6%     2.9%     13.5%     3.3%     7.2%     2.6%         7.8%     2.9%
                              Min, Max                7.3%    19.2%      7.5%    21.3%     2.2%    13.4%         2.6%    14.7%
                              Min State, Max State      NE      NM         AK        IL       IN      OH            IN      OH

Contributions / GSP           Weighted Average        1.9%               2.1%              1.1%                  1.3%
                              Mean, StDev             1.8%     0.4%      1.9%     0.5%     1.0%      0.4%        1.1%     0.4%
                              Min, Max                1.1%     3.1%      1.2%     3.3%     0.3%      1.9%        0.4%     2.1%
                              Min State, Max State       IN     NM         DE      NM         IN       OH           IN      OH

Contributions / Household     Weighted Average       $2,303             $2,486            $1,362               $1,545
                              Mean, StDev            $2,105    $637     $2,240    $677    $1,196    $482       $1,300     $521
                              Min, Max               $1,165   $3,949    $1,268   $4,242    $329    $2,250       $385     $2,419
                              Min State, Max State       IN      NY         IN      NY        IN      NY           IN       NY

                                                                 A.9
                         TABLE A3—CONTRIBUTION INCREASES INCLUDING TIEBOUT EFFECT, NO POLICY CHANGES
                                                           ABO, 10yr         ABO, 10yr         ABO, 10yr          EAN, 10yr
                                                          Average GSP       Average GSP      Average National    Average GSP
                                                            Growth          Growth - 1%        GSP Growth          Growth

Δ[Contributions / Payroll]        Weighted Average       24.9%             27.4%              24.2%             27.6%
                                  Mean, Standard Dev     21.6%     8.7%    23.6%    10.0%     21.8%     7.7%    24.5%     8.6%
                                  Min, Max                5.4%    43.7%     6.3%    53.1%      4.6%    47.1%     7.0%    49.0%
                                  Min State, Max State       IN      CO        IN       IL        IN      CO        IN      CO

Δ[Contributions / Tax Revenue]    Weighted Average       13.9%             15.3%              13.5%             15.4%
                                  Mean, Standard Dev     11.8%     5.6%    12.9%     6.4%     11.9%     5.0%    13.3%     5.6%
                                  Min, Max                2.6%    27.8%     3.0%    30.1%      2.2%    29.1%     3.4%    30.3%
                                  Min State, Max State       IN      OR        IN      OH         IN      OR        IN      OR

Δ[Contributions / Own Revenue]    Weighted Average        8.7%              9.5%               8.4%              9.6%
                                  Mean, Standard Dev      7.2%     3.3%     7.8%     3.9%      7.2%     2.9%     8.1%     3.4%
                                  Min, Max                1.6%    16.7%     1.8%    20.2%      1.3%    15.6%     2.0%    17.3%
                                  Min State, Max State       IN      OH        IN       IL        IN      OR        IN      OH

Δ[Contributions / GSP]            Weighted Average        1.2%              1.3%               1.2%              1.3%
                                  Mean, Standard Dev      1.0%     0.5%     1.1%     0.6%      1.0%     0.4%     1.1%     0.5%
                                  Min, Max                0.2%     2.4%     0.3%     2.7%      0.2%     2.2%     0.3%     2.5%
                                  Min State, Max State       IN      OH        IN      OH         IN      OR        IN      OH

Δ[Contributions / Household]      Weighted Average       $1,435            $1,578            $1,394             $1,591
                                  Mean, Standard Dev     $1,196    $584    $1,305    $666    $1,211     $564    $1,353    $609
                                  Min, Max                $237    $2,553    $274    $3,130    $201     $2,541    $307    $2,634
                                  Min State, Max State       IN      OH        IN       IL       IN      WY         IN      OH



                                                                  A.10
 TABLE A4—REQUIRED CONTRIBUTION INCREASES, 2% TIEBOUT EFFECT, NO POLICY CHANGE
                   Gvt Contributions                     Required Contribution Increase
                 Current     Required    % of         % of Tax    % of Own                   per
                 ($B)        ($B)        Payroll      Revenue     Revenue       % of GSP     household
Ohio                  $3.1      $14.4         41.3%       26.5%       16.7%           2.4%     $2,552.9
Oregon                $1.3        $4.8        40.7%       27.8%       14.9%           2.1%     $2,415.1
New York            $13.1       $31.1         27.4%       13.1%         9.1%          1.6%     $2,399.7
Illinois              $6.0      $17.6         39.6%       21.9%       15.1%           1.8%     $2,336.0
California          $19.5       $49.6         27.9%       18.8%       11.5%           1.6%     $2,122.4
New Jersey            $3.6      $10.6         25.9%       14.6%       10.6%           1.4%     $2,076.7
Wyoming               $0.2        $0.6        23.6%       10.2%         6.5%          1.2%     $2,074.1
Minnesota             $1.7        $5.9        30.7%       17.9%       11.7%           1.6%     $2,046.1
New Mexico            $0.9        $2.5        33.3%       23.3%       13.1%           2.1%     $2,011.0
Colorado              $0.9        $4.3        43.7%       19.5%       10.9%           1.4%     $1,785.3
Pennsylvania          $2.8      $10.5         35.9%       15.2%       10.0%           1.4%     $1,592.8
Wisconsin             $1.4        $4.8        27.7%       14.6%         9.5%          1.4%     $1,563.0
Michigan              $3.0        $8.7        33.9%       16.4%       10.0%           1.5%     $1,482.1
Washington            $2.5        $5.9        20.4%       13.2%         7.3%          1.0%     $1,345.7
Connecticut           $1.6        $3.4        20.3%        8.9%         6.9%          0.8%     $1,340.9
Kentucky              $1.1        $3.3        27.2%       15.7%         9.7%          1.4%     $1,300.0
Missouri              $1.8        $4.7        27.0%       15.6%         9.7%          1.2%     $1,267.1
Texas                 $5.0      $16.9         21.8%       15.1%         9.2%          1.0%     $1,252.2
South Carolina        $1.5        $3.7        24.2%       18.2%         8.1%          1.3%     $1,220.5
Hawaii                $0.7        $1.3        16.1%        9.7%         6.5%          0.9%     $1,205.4
Kansas                $0.9        $2.2        18.7%       11.4%         6.9%          1.0%     $1,168.5
Delaware              $0.3        $0.7        18.7%       11.1%         5.8%          0.7%     $1,162.7
Mississippi           $1.1        $2.4        22.5%       15.0%         8.4%          1.4%     $1,161.6
Alaska                $0.3        $0.6        13.6%        5.4%         2.9%          0.7%     $1,160.1
Vermont               $0.2        $0.4        22.9%        9.5%         6.4%          1.1%     $1,145.9
Louisiana             $1.5        $3.3        20.4%       11.0%         6.9%          0.9%     $1,043.8
Massachusetts         $2.2        $4.8        18.7%        8.5%         5.5%          0.7%     $1,024.3
North Dakota          $0.2        $0.4        20.5%        7.6%         4.9%          0.8%     $1,006.2
Virginia              $4.2        $7.2        17.2%       10.4%         6.4%          0.7%       $993.6
New Hampshire         $0.4        $0.8        19.3%       10.3%         6.4%          0.8%       $949.9
Nevada                $1.2        $2.0        16.3%        8.8%         5.6%          0.7%       $835.5
Montana               $0.3        $0.6        18.4%        9.2%         5.5%          0.9%       $826.1
Nebraska              $0.4        $1.0        22.7%        8.0%         4.0%          0.7%       $825.2
Alabama               $1.9        $3.4        14.6%       11.5%         5.8%          0.9%       $819.5
Iowa                  $0.9        $1.8        14.6%        8.0%         4.7%          0.7%       $811.6
Tennessee             $1.6        $3.6        19.7%       11.2%         5.5%          0.8%       $793.7
Oklahoma              $1.4        $2.5        17.5%        9.1%         5.4%          0.7%       $773.5
Florida               $5.5      $11.0         19.1%        8.4%         5.0%          0.7%       $766.3
North Carolina        $1.8        $4.5        14.7%        9.2%         5.5%          0.7%       $764.3
Georgia               $2.5        $5.4        19.0%        9.5%         5.7%          0.7%       $748.6
Maryland              $2.2        $3.9        13.9%        6.0%         4.4%          0.6%       $732.2
South Dakota          $0.2        $0.4        15.0%        9.0%         5.3%          0.6%       $729.7
Idaho                 $0.5        $0.9        15.8%        9.8%         5.7%          0.8%       $707.1
Maine                 $0.3        $0.7        16.8%        6.4%         4.4%          0.7%       $686.8
Rhode Island          $0.6        $0.9        11.3%        5.9%         3.9%          0.6%       $661.4
Arizona               $2.0        $3.4        10.4%        6.9%         4.2%          0.5%       $544.3
West Virginia         $0.7        $1.0        12.6%        5.7%         3.5%          0.6%       $514.1
Arkansas              $0.8        $1.3        13.3%        5.5%         3.6%          0.5%       $465.2
Utah                  $0.9        $1.3         8.9%        4.7%         2.5%          0.3%       $363.2
Indiana               $2.2        $2.8         5.4%        2.6%         1.6%          0.2%       $237.4



                                             A.11
