                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLAN DISTRIBUTION DECISIONS BY PUBLIC
                            SECTOR EMPLOYEES

                                         Robert L. Clark
                                        Melinda S. Morrill
                                        David Vanderweide

                                        Working Paper 18488
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18488


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




This research was supported in part by a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA)
funded as part of the Financial Literacy Research Consortium. An earlier version of the paper was
presented at the “Retirement Benefits for State and Local Employees: Designing Pension Plans for
the Twenty-First Century” conference, which was funded by the Smith Richardson Foundation. The
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not represent the
opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, or any other institution with which the authors are affiliated. The authors would like to
thank Olivia S. Mitchell, Thayer Morrill, and James Poterba for helpful comments.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18488.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Robert L. Clark, Melinda S. Morrill, and David Vanderweide. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Distribution Decisions by Public Sector Employees
Robert L. Clark, Melinda S. Morrill, and David Vanderweide
NBER Working Paper No. 18488
October 2012
JEL No. H75,J45

                                              ABSTRACT

Studies examining pension distribution choices have found that the tendency of private-sector workers
is to select lump sum distributions instead of life annuities. In the public sector, defined benefit pensions
usually offer lump sum distributions equal to employee contributions, not the present value of the
annuity. Using administrative data from the North Carolina state and local government retirement
systems, we find that over two-thirds of public sector workers under age 50 separating prior to retirement
from public plans in North Carolina left their accounts open and did not request a cash distribution
from the pension system within one year of separation. Furthermore, the evidence suggests many
separating workers, particularly those with short tenure, may be forgoing important benefits due to
lack of knowledge, understanding, or accessibility of benefits. In contrast to prior research in the private
sector, we find no evidence of a bias toward cash distributions for public employees in North Carolina.


Robert L. Clark                                       David Vanderweide
Poole College of Management                           Fiscal Analyst
Box 7229                                              Fiscal Research Division
North Carolina State University                       North Carolina General Assembly
Raleigh, NC 27695                                     Raleigh, NC 27601
and NBER                                              david.vanderweide@ncleg.net
robert_clark@ncsu.edu

Melinda S. Morrill
Department of Economics
North Carolina State University
Box 8110
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
melinda_morrill@ncsu.edu
1.         Introduction

           Each year, millions of American workers leave their jobs either by choice or due to

termination by their employers. Many of these job changers participate in defined benefit

pension plans. On leaving their employers, these workers are often given a choice of keeping

their retirement accounts open, thus maintaining a claim on a future life annuity, or accepting an

immediate lump sum distribution (LS) of their pension assets. Workers who accept the LS are

then given a choice of whether they want to roll the funds over into an IRA or to accept the cash

as taxable income and also pay a tax penalty for early withdrawal if under age 59.5. These

choices can have significant long run implications for future retirement income.

           Economic theory argues that to maximize lifetime utility one should consume such that

utility levels are smooth over time. One method of achieving utility smoothing is through the

purchase of annuities (Yaari, 1965). However, a series of national surveys and economic studies

have found that individuals rarely purchase annuities in the open market (see, e.g., Mitchell, et

al., 1999). Further, when given the choice in their pension plans of a life annuity or a LS,

workers often choose the LS (see, e.g., Brown, 2001; Engelhardt, 2002; Hurd and Panis, 2006).

Thus, workers tend to reject the opportunity to receive a certain flow of income throughout

retirement in favor of receiving cash now, which therefore results in individuals assuming the

task of managing funds on their own during their retirement years. This conflict between theory

and individual choices has been called the “Annuity Puzzle.”1

           Under federal pension regulations, defined benefit plans in the private sector must offer

an annuity and provide participants with information on their future annuities. The LS’s for these


1
    See Benartzi, et al., (2011) for an excellent overview of the ‘annuity puzzle’ literature.


                                                         1
plans are required to be calculated as at least equal to the present value of the retirement annuity

using approved interest and mortality tables.2 Things are very different in the public sector.

Public sector defined benefits plans usually require explicit employee contributions each pay

period, and LS’s are based on the employee contributions and not the present value of the

annuity. Thus, a public sector worker’s choice of whether to take a LS reflects both his/her

individual preference for annuitization and potential differences in the net value of the LS and

annuity options. Defined benefit plans continue to cover most state and local employees and

virtually all of the plans offer workers the option of a LS at job separation or retirement (Clark,

Craig, and Sabelhaus, 2011).

        We examine the choices terminated workers make using data from the North Carolina

Teachers’ and State Employees’ Retirement System (TSERS) and the North Carolina Local

Governmental Employees’ Retirement System (LGERS) using information contained in the

administrative records of the two retirement plans.3 As of the end of 2010, these two public

pension plans covered 803,636 employees and retired workers. Our unique dataset contains all

terminations from state and local government employment in North Carolina between 2007 and

2008 and tracks behavior through the end of 2009, allowing us to observe choices made within

one year of separation for all terminated workers. The dataset includes relevant economic and




2
  The Pension Protection Act requires that beginning in 2008 the LS be calculated using a three-segment
interest rate yield curve based on the rates of return on investment grade corporate bonds of varying
maturities. Purcell (2007) provides additional information on this process and how it affects workers at
various ages at termination.
3
  While these plans have separate governing boards, they are administered by the same staff and have
similar, but not identical, benefits and contributions requirements. Further details of TSERS and LGERS
can be found by visiting the retirement systems’ home page at:
http://www.nctreasurer.com/dsthome/RetirementSystems.


                                                   2
demographic information on all individuals who left state or local employment during this time

period.

          Public sector defined benefit plan participants face a series of choices concerning their

pension accounts when terminating employment prior to retirement, as illustrated in Figure 1.

The first decision a worker must make is whether to maintain his/her pension account or accept

an immediate LS.4 From an economic perspective, a worker should compare the value of the LS

to the present discounted value of the life annuity (PDVA) which is set to begin at some point in

the future. However, as we will see later, there are a number of factors that make this decision

more complicated that a simple wealth comparison.

                                                    [Figure 1]

          The default option is for the worker to maintain the pension account; a departing worker

must file a request with the retirement system in order to receive a LS. Depending on the rules

of the pension plan, a worker might also have the opportunity to return to work with the same

employer and have prior service credits count toward a future retirement benefit.5 Figure 1 also

shows that workers who request a LS must specify whether they want to receive cash or have the

funds rolled over into another approved tax qualified retirement plan such as an IRA. If the

worker is sent a check, she could subsequently deposit the funds into an IRA and avoid current

taxes and penalties if she follows the IRS guidelines. It is important to remember that
4
  The term “maintain” is used because workers may have the opportunity to request a LS at any time after
separating from public employment and prior to starting a retirement benefit; thus not accepting the
immediate LS leaves open the option of requesting such a distribution at some time in the future instead
of waiting until one is eligible to start a retirement annuity from the plan. In our analysis, “immediate”
means that the terminated worker requested a LS within one year of termination.
5
  Returning to work and being covered by the same retirement plan is probably much more likely in the
public sector where a single plan typically covers all state employees and teachers in the state. This
allows workers to change jobs and government agencies and to move within the state while remaining in
the same retirement system.


                                                    3
individuals preferring to insure against longevity risk by annuitizing have the option to withdraw

funds, roll them over into an IRA, and ultimately purchase an annuity. Thus, an informed

worker should decide whether to withdraw funds based on the highest present value of the

distribution options, appropriately measured, taking into account predicted inflation, interest

rates, and various types of risk.

       We calculate how the decisions made by separating workers are affected by the value of

the distributional options available to them. The relative generosity of the two options is

estimated using details of the plan characteristics and information provided by the retirement

system. Surprisingly, we find that fewer than one-third of all terminating public employees

requested a LS within one year of separation, despite the finding that for over 70 percent of

terminations, the LS was larger than the estimated PDVA.

       We offer several potential explanations for why the distributional choice from a public

pension plan is more complex than a simple wealth comparison at a point in time. First,

separating participants in TSERS qualify for retiree health insurance from the State Health Plan

with no premium as long as they are receiving a monthly annuity from TSERS. This option is

available for virtually all vested state employees (participants in TSERS), but local employees

(participants in LGERS) are not covered by the State Health Plan.6 Comparing distributional

decisions by state employees in TSERS to those of local employees in LGERS provides some

indication of the effect of retiree health insurance on the choice to ultimately receive a retirement

annuity. Despite the difference in coverage of retiree health insurance in the two systems, we do


6
  With a few minor exceptions, workers and retirees covered by LGERS are not covered by the State
Health Plan; however, they may be covered by locally-managed health plans that extend coverage to
retirees. We cannot match the local health plans to the LGERS retirement data.


                                                  4
not see a large difference in the distributional choices between separating workers that will

qualify for retiree health insurance and those that will not.

       Second, we consider the likelihood that terminated participants may plan to return to

public employment. The expectation of returning to public employment might make maintaining

the account the optimal choice for these individuals. However, we document that workers who

ultimately returned to work by December 2010 were actually more likely to withdraw funds

within one year of separation. Next, we highlight that maintaining the account still allows for the

option of requesting a LS at some future date. Because the account balance accrues interest at a

guaranteed rate of 4 percent, financially savvy individuals may choose to maintain their account

balances and accept larger LS’s at a future date as part of an investment portfolio. Still, we do

not see a large difference between the disposition choice of non-vested workers (who do not earn

interest) and vested workers. Finally, we address the role that confidence in the retirement

system, financial literacy, and inertia may play in the choice to accept a LS. The default is to

leave funds in the system. The behavior we observe is consistent with many individuals

accepting the default option and forgoing potentially more valuable benefits.

       After the analysis of the decision to accept a LS rather than maintaining one’s account

balance, we then examine the decision between cash and a rollover of pension assets by those

who opted for a LS. The decision on spending versus saving the LS distribution has received

considerable attention by economists; however, only a few studies have been able to observe this

choice in administrative records rather than survey data (see Bryant, Holden, and Sabelhaus,

2011). We find that nearly 90 percent of separating workers that request a LS elect to receive the

funds as cash, rather than rolling over. Of course, individuals who select a cash distribution can



                                                  5
still move the funds into a retirement account, pay off debts, or save in non-retirement accounts,

rather than spending the money on immediate consumption.

       This study finds that separating workers tend to leave their pension accounts open instead

of requesting cash distributions of their pension wealth when leaving these public pension

systems. Thus, among these public employees, there is no obvious annuity puzzle as most

workers retain their option of receiving a life annuity even when the LS is greater than the

PDVA. We do not observe a sharp change in the proportion of separating workers taking a lump

sum distribution by vesting status, nor are workers with a higher present discounted value of

their future annuity substantially less likely to withdraw funds.

2.     Previous Literature Examining Lump Sum Distributions

       Economists have long been interested in how workers access and utilize the wealth

accumulated in their retirement accounts. For the most part, research studies have focused on (1)

the choice between a lump sum distribution (LS) and an annuity at retirement, and (2) the

decision by terminating workers who take a LS to accept a cash distribution or roll over the

funds over into another tax qualified retirement plan. Papers on the first topic are often linked to

the ‘annuity puzzle’ and try to explain why economic theory suggests individuals would prefer

an annuity but retiring workers largely prefer LS’s. Most studies on the second point use survey

data which relies on individuals’ ability to recall whether they spent or saved the LS. There are

only a few papers that consider the choice at termination between a LS and maintaining the

account balance; rarely have any studies explicitly examine terminations from public retirement




                                                 6
plans.7 A notable exception is Warner and Pleeter (2001), who estimate decisions in a military

pension plan.8

        Most studies that have examined the choice of a LS have focused on respondents in large

national data sets (e.g., SIPP, HRS). For the most part, these studies have not recognized the

difference between public and private workers leaving employment. Economic theory indicates

that workers will compare the cost of purchasing an annuity that is based on population age-

specific mortality rates to the present value of the annuity using their personal discount rates and

their own life expectancies. Workers who believe that an annuity based on population life

expectancy will be less than actuarially fair to them should accept the LS (Hurd and Panis,

2006). Individuals with high personal discount rates will place a lower value on the future

annuity and thus be more likely to accept the LS.

        Earlier studies have found that when the value of the cash settlement is relatively small,

there is a greater likelihood that workers will take the LS and not roll these funds over into

another retirement account, thus rejecting a future life annuity (Hurd and Panis, 2006; Poterba et

al., 1998, 2001; Sabelhaus and Weiner, 1999; Engelhardt, 2002). Hurd and Panis (2006) observe

that women are more likely to request cash settlements than men, as are workers with less formal

education. However, others find that men are more likely to take LS’s (Butler and Teppa, 2007;


7
  An expanded model of pension decisions by individuals would include the initial choice of whether to
select a DB plan or a DC plan as their primary retirement plan. This choice is a function of investment
risk, labor market risk, and a variety of other factors including whether the worker prefers their retirement
plan to provide a retirement annuity or a LS. In the past decade, a number of states have given newly
hired employees this option (Clark, Craig, and Sabelhaus, 2011). Several recent papers have examined
the choice of pension plans in the public sector (e.g., Brown and Weisbenner 2012; Papke 2004; Yang
2005)
8
  Other papers that examine distributional choices from public plans include Chalmers and Reuter (2009)
and Butler and Teppa (2007); however, these papers examine the distributional choice at retirement. See
Benartzi, Previtero, and Thaler (2011) for a discussion of distributions at retirement in the private sector.


                                                      7
Purcell, 2009). Older workers are found to be more likely to roll over their pension distributions

(Burman, Coe, and Gale, 1999; Moore and Muller, 2002; Warner and Pleeter, 2001). Many of

these previous studies address workers’ implied discount rates and the effect of high discount

rates that minimize the value of the future annuity compared to the LS.9 The choice between

money now and a lifetime annuity beginning years in the future is also influence by financial

literacy. Considerable recent evidence indicates that American workers have a relatively low

level of financial literacy (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007). Workers that lack a good understanding

of financial mathematics, financial market risks, and the uncertainty associated with mortality

might not be able to determine the optimal choice when faced with important financial decisions

such as the choice of a LS versus a future annuity (see, e.g., Clark, Morrill, and Allen, 2012).

        Despite the impressive list of studies that have examined distributional choices and the

use of LS’s, there remain several important shortcomings in these analyses. First, relatively few

studies have examined the choices made by public sector employees. This is an important gap

because the distributional options in public sector plans quite different than those in the private

sector, and defined benefit plans are much more prevalent in the public sector. Second, most

prior studies used survey data and hence relied on respondents’ recall of decisions made years

earlier. The reliance on memory of these events undoubtedly introduces considerable noise. In

contrast, our analysis focuses on separations from a public defined benefit plan using

administrative records showing real-time decisions.




9
 Other papers that examine the utilization of a LS include Bassett, Fleming, and Rodriguez (1998),
Chang (1996), Copeland (2009), and Yakoboski (1997).


                                                   8
3.      Estimating the Value of Distribution Options in the North Carolina Retirement

        Plans

3.1.    Background on Distributional Choices in State-Managed Defined Benefit Plans

        In public sector defined benefit plans, the default option for departing workers who are

vested is to leave their funds in the pension plan and receive an annuity when they have attained

the required age for starting benefits.10 All public defined benefit plans that we have examined

offer departing workers the option of leaving their funds in the pension system, thus retaining

their eligibility to receive a retirement annuity when they reach the specified age and service

requirements of the plan.11 Most public plans allow separated workers to request a lump sum

distribution (LS) at any point up until the individual starts the retirement annuity.

        Private sector defined benefit plans usually do not entail employee contributions.12 In

public retirement plans, on the other hand, employee contributions are typically required.13 All

state retirement plans that require employee contributions for all plan participants offer a LS


10
   Ultimately, the default is that no benefits are paid. Terminated workers who do not request a lump sum
distribution are defaulted into keeping their account open. When workers finally satisfy age and service
requirements for a benefit, they still must request that their retirement benefits be paid. No request from
the terminated worker means that no benefit is paid. Data from the North Carolina retirement system
show that only in a relatively small number of cases did workers leave public employment and never
request either a LS or the start of an annuity.
11
   Workers who had not yet been employed sufficient years to achieve vesting would have to return to a
public job covered by the same pension and work additional years to satisfy the vesting requirements
before they would be eligible to receive a future pension benefit.
12
   The Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011) reports that only 4 percent of workers that are participating in
defined benefit plans in the private sector are enrolled in plans that require an employee contribution.
13
   According to Clark and Hanson (2011), only a few state retirement plans do not require workers to
contribute a portion of their salary in support of the retirement plan. These plans include Arkansas PERS,
Connecticut SERS, Florida FRS, Hawaii ERS, Michigan PSERS and SERS, Missouri MSEP, Tennessee
CRS, and Utah SRS. In these noncontributory plans, non-vested terminated workers are not eligible to
receive a future retirement annuity, nor are they eligible for a LS. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011)
reports that 79 percent of state and local workers that are participating in defined plans are enrolled in
plans that require employee contributions with the mean contribution rate being 6.5 percent of earnings.


                                                     9
option to terminated employees. Separating workers in these plans are offered a LS at least

equal to their own contributions. In some states, individuals are also awarded interest payments

on their contributions. The interest rate varies across states and is often a function of years of

service. The average interest rate paid on employee contributions among those states with

interest payments is 4 percent per year with a standard deviation of 2 percent (Clark and Hanson,

2011). While the empirical analysis of the distributional choices reported in this paper uses

administrative records only of North Carolina retirement plans, the choices and plan parameters

imbedded in the North Carolina system are similar to those in other retirement plans covering

teachers and state employees.14

3.2.    Choices Facing Separating Public Sector Workers in North Carolina

        Employees who leave public employment in North Carolina must decide whether they

will accept a LS or leave their pension account open in anticipation of a retirement annuity

payable from the required age for retirement benefits. The LS can be known with certainty;

however, the present value of the annuity involves a more difficult calculation which should

reflect personal discount rates, expected inflation rates, and the likelihood of returning to public

employment in North Carolina. In order to understand the choice between accepting a LS and

leaving pension assets in the system, one must consider key parameters of the pension plan and

how they affect the value of the LS that is available at separation versus the annuity expected in

the future. Public sector workers in North Carolina are also covered by Social Security and

Medicare.



14
  Clark and Hanson (2011) provide a detailed summary of the distribution choices available to teachers
and state employees in all 50 states.


                                                  10
        Like most public retirement plans, both retirement systems in North Carolina (TSERS

and LGERS) require employee contributions. The required employee contributions are equal to

six percent of total annual salary and are deducted from paychecks every pay period. These

contributions are deposited in the retirement funds of the two state systems and help finance the

benefits for retirees. In both North Carolina systems, vesting occurs when an employee

completes five years of service.15 If workers leave public employment prior to being vested,

their LS is simply the total of their own contributions to the system; in other words, non-vested

separating workers do not receive any interest credited on these contributions and they do not

receive any portion of the employer pension contributions. Workers leaving public employment

with at least five years of service are offered a LS equal to the total of their own contributions

during their employment plus interest credited at four percent per year. As is typical of most

state defined benefit plans, even once vested North Carolina public employees who request a LS

have no claim on the implied employer contributions to the retirement plan.

        The value of the LS is equal to the total employee contributions (plus interested if vested)

and can be calculated directly from the salary history. Appendix A describes the calculation,

which is a direct function of starting salary, wage growth, years of service, and the interest rate,

but is independent of sex or age. Departing employees can learn the value of their LS by

checking their account balances on-line or by directly contacting the retirement system. Thus,

the value of one’s LS can be known with certainty at the time of separation.




15
   Legislation in 2011 raised the vesting requirement from five years of service to ten years for all newly
hired teachers and state employees; however, in the sample we consider, all workers are covered by the
five year vesting provision.


                                                     11
        The retirement benefit is calculated in a similar fashion to that typically found in the

private sector, using a benefit formula based on years of service and final average salary. The

systems do not provide an estimate of the present discounted value of the annuity (PDVA) to its

members. Using the estimated benefit for each departing worker, we derive the present value of a

future annuity for vested workers in the North Carolina TSERS or LGERS retirement system

using the same assumptions employed by the retirement plans to calculate their pension

liabilities. Details of this calculation are provided in Appendix A. The PDVA is calculated

assuming that the individual will begin receiving an unreduced benefit at age 65.16

        To reiterate, the PDVA is not used by the plan to calculate the LS and this value is never

provided to terminated workers. Instead, the PDVA variable represents our estimate using the

same life tables used by plan actuaries to evaluate the financial status of the plan, along with real

and nominal interest rates, described in Appendix A. Workers with higher personal discount

rates will place a smaller value on the annuity, as will those that believe that they have lower life

expectancies. The value of the annuity is increasing in salary level and the rate of salary growth,

as well as number of years of service, similar to the LS. However, the PDVA is also an

increasing function of age at separation. In addition, because women’s survival probabilities are


16
  Workers with 30 years of service can receive an unreduced benefit at any age; however, in the sample
of separated employees that we examine, there are no individuals with 30 years of service. In addition,
early retirement benefits are available to employees with 20 years of service at age 50; however, there are
substantial reductions for accepting early retirement benefits. The magnitude of the reduction in annual
benefits for starting benefits prior to reaching the normal retirement age vary with age and years of
service. The benefit reductions for TSERS are presented in the employee handbook page 8,
http://www.nctreasurer.com/NR/rdonlyres/223AE566-7BA0-471F-B02C-
0A18ABDB97C0/0/NC_TeaState_070111_Final.pdf. System records indicate that only about 25
percent of terminated vested workers wait until age 65 to start benefits; however, the reduction factors
imposed by the system for early retirement mean that this assumption does not substantially alter the
expected present value of the annuity. In other words, the reduction factors are, on average,
approximately actuarially fair.


                                                    12
higher than men’s, women’s PDVA will be (slightly) higher than men’s with the same annual

retirement benefit.17

        A potentially important component of the retirement benefits for public workers in North

Carolina is that the state will continue to provide health insurance for retirees in the TSERS

system at no premium, provided that they are receiving a retirement annuity.18 Benefits are also

available for the spouses and dependents of retirees, with only an implicit subsidy.19 For retirees

over age 65, Medicare is the primary insurer and the state health plan (SHP) becomes the

secondary insurer. For eligible state employees and teachers, the value of health insurance

should be included in the worker’s decision whether to request a lump sum distribution.

However, as discussed further below, it is difficult to know how much an individual worker

values access to state-provided retiree health insurance. We describe our calculation of the

present value of the health insurance option in Appendix A.

        The literature on the “annuity puzzle” highlights a potentially important role for health

shocks (see, e.g., Brown, 2001). Individuals worried about unanticipated health care expenses

may choose to keep assets liquid in order to have funds accessible in the event of a health shock.

If a retiree does not have access to employer-provided health insurance, she may worry about the


17
   One could instead consider the size and terms of an annuity which could be purchased at the time of
separation with the funds that are withdrawn. In the private annuity market, insurance companies will use
similar interest rates to those we use in our calculations, but may also charge some commission and may
adjust for adverse selection (see, e.g., Mitchell, et al., 1999). Because individuals could chose a variety of
annuity products, we think framing the discussion in present value dollars using the assumptions adopted
by the plan actuaries is a more straightforward comparison.
18
   All states have some form of retiree health insurance for their employees; however, the value of these
plans differs markedly across the states, see Clark and Morrill (2010).
19
   In North Carolina, spouses and dependents must pay the full price of the premium, as calculated based
on prior years’ expenditures, so we do not consider the value of spousal or dependent benefits. There is
an implicit subsidy due to risk pooling. Accounting for this would obviously increase the estimated value
of the health insurance option.


                                                     13
cost of health insurance coverage should an adverse health event occur. Retiree health insurance

insures against this type of risk, and thus may be even more valuable to workers than the

actuarially equivalent value.



3.3.   Simulating the Relative Values of the Annuity and Lump Sum Distribution

       As the above discussion indicates, the value of the LS depends on years of service but not

on age at hire, while the PDVA is higher for those who are closer to the minimum required age

of eligibility for retirement benefits. Thus, as employees accumulate years of service, the present

value of the annuity will grow relative to the lump sum. The top portion of Figure 2 illustrates

this trend using a hypothetical male worker in the TSERS retirement system with a starting

salary of $30,000 who experiences three percent wage growth per year. The values of the LS

and PDVA are calculated for various ages of hire for a person with 10 years of service. The age

where the two lines cross indicates the youngest age of hire at which the present value of the

annuity exceeds the lump sum amount for a person with 10 years of service. The simulations

indicate that for a separating employee with 10 years of service, workers hired at age 35 or older

(thus age 45 or older at separation) have higher PDVA while workers hired before age 35 have

higher LS values.

                                                [Figure 2]

       The bottom portion of Figure 2 illustrates a similar pattern, this time varying the years of

service. For a worker hired at age 30 with a starting salary of $30,000 and wage growth of 3

percent, the LS value will exceed the PDVA until about 15 years of service, at which point the

PDVA becomes relatively more valuable. Figure 2 illustrates how age at hire and years of

service affect the relative values of the LS and the PDVA; separating employees with fewer

                                                14
years of service or who are younger when hired are more likely to be facing LS values that

exceed the PDVA values.

       To get a more complete picture of how the various combinations of age at hire and years

of service yield relative values of the two distribution options, we calculated the LS and PDVA

amounts for a hypothetical worker with starting salary of $30,000 per year and annual wage

growth of 3 percent. Table 1 reports these simulated values for workers hired at various ages as

their years of service increase from 5 to 25 years. The shaded boxes indicate the distributional

option with the larger value for the indicated age/service combinations. One should note the

years of service that must be completed before the PDVA overtakes the LS amount and how this

crossing point varies by age of hire. For workers hired at age 25, the crossover point does not

occur until after 20 years of service. At the other extreme, a worker hired at age 40 should

anticipate an annuity with a present discounted value that exceeds the LS by five years of

service, when vesting begins.

                                                 [Table 1]

       These simple comparisons illustrate why it would not be surprising if a substantial

proportion of terminated employees select the lump sum option. The LS will be greater than the

present value of the annuity for many departing workers. This is in stark contrast to private

sector defined benefit plans which are required by law to price the LS to be at least equal to the

present discounted value of the annuity. These relative values suggest that one should observe a

considerable proportion of vested workers requesting a LS at termination.

       It is important to recognize that if one were to add the estimated present value of health

insurance (calculation described in Appendix A) to the discounted value of the annuity for

participants in TSERS, the value of the (cash plus health insurance) annuity is larger than the LS

                                                15
for vested terminated workers throughout their career. Thus, for vested workers who are eligible

for retiree health insurance when they start receiving their retirement annuity, the simple present

value calculation would suggest that virtually all of these terminated employees should maintain

their funds with the state retirement plan. The value of retiree health is not very sensitive to age

at separation due to the assumption that medical care costs are increasing at about the same rate

as inflation, so the discounting effect on future health insurance is relatively small. For this

calculation we assumed that workers retire at age 65 and do not claim retiree health insurance

benefits until age 65, at which point they are eligible for Medicare as the primary insurer. If

workers were to request an annuity and claim retiree health insurance earlier, the value of health

insurance would obviously be larger, and we would predict even more individuals to choice the

annuity option.

4.     Separating Public Employees in North Carolina: 2007 and 2008

       The state retirement system maintains records on current employees, terminated workers,

and retirees consistent with the data needed to calculate and pay retirement benefits to plan

participants. The data presented here are from the State of North Carolina’s retirement systems

(TSERS and LGERS) and contain information on all workers who left public employment

during 2007 and 2008. The data include the employee’s date of birth, sex, salary, and the

retirement plan. In addition, the status of the account is included indicating whether the retiree is

currently receiving retirement benefits (and when the benefits were initiated), whether and when




                                                 16
she took a lump sum distribution (LS), or whether she left the funds in the plan and the account

remained active (the retirement system refers to these as “dormant” accounts).20

        Our sample includes workers who terminated employment in 2007 and 2008 and who did

not retire and begin an annuity within one year of leaving the system. We restrict our attention

to separating employees younger than 50 years old, in order to more closely approximate a

sample that is not eligible to immediately begin a pension, even at a reduced level. Our sample

includes 11,368 vested and 35,545 non-vested separating employees. Appendix B provides

details on the data construction and how specific variables are defined, including vesting status

and years of service.

        To illustrate the distribution choices made by departing workers, Table 2 reports the

number of vested and non-vested workers who left public employment in each year and the

percent of each of the groups that accepted the LS within one year of separation. In the first

column of Table 2, we see that about one-third of vested workers who left the retirement systems

requested a LS within a year of termination. The second column of Table 2 reports a similar

breakdown for non-vested workers. These are individuals who, based on service to date, will not

be eligible for a retirement annuity and will not receive any interest on funds left with the

system. While one might have predicted that nearly all non-vested terminated workers would

select a LS, this is clearly not the case. Thus, it is important to attempt to explain why

individuals made a choice that, on its face, seems to be financially costly. The patterns of




20
  In 2007, the state adopted a new reporting system, ORBIT, that records much more detailed
information about the workers’ separations. Data from earlier years do not provide sufficient information
to analyze economic factors that influence the distributional choice.


                                                   17
distributional decisions are reported separately for vested and non-vested workers for subgroups

based on economic and demographic characteristics.

                                                       [Table 2]

           Several similarities are observed in the behavior of vested and non-vested workers

reported in Table 2. Interestingly, roughly one-third of both groups, vested and non-vested,

accepted the LS within one year of termination. Women in both groups were significantly less

likely to withdraw funds. Older workers in both groups were more likely to request a LS and

those with more years of service in the non-vested group were also more likely to withdraw their

pension funds, perhaps due to having a larger payment. All of the non-vested workers had

relatively small account balances. For example, an individual that separated after three years of

service whose annual salary was $30,000 would have had approximately $5,500 in his retirement

account. Hence, there may be a threshold level that provides an incentive for workers to make a

positive election for a LS, while those with only a few thousand dollars in their account may be

less inclined to seek an immediate distribution.21 In contrast, among vested workers, those with

the most years of service were the least likely to withdraw, which is not surprising given that the

pension system is most generous for longer tenure workers. This is also consistent with findings

that private sector workers tend to be less likely to request a LS the larger the account balance.

Vested and non-vested participants in the LGERS were more likely to desire a cash distribution

than those in the TSERS system. As described above, workers in TSERS are covered by the

state health plan (SHP) and are eligible for free retiree health insurance, but only if they are

currently receiving a retirement annuity from TSERS.


21
     See Benartzi, et al., 2011, for a discussion of threshold levels from behavioral economics.


                                                       18
        There are interesting differences in the desire for a LS across employment groups. The

administrative records sort individuals by broad job classifications. Teachers and other

educational professionals were much less likely to request a LS compared to other groups, with

only about 20 percent having cashed out their pension accounts. On the other hand, skilled labor

and public safety officers are among the most likely to have withdrawn.

        For each of the individuals in our data, the exact value of the LS that they could have

received at the time of separation is reported. For those that have non-missing salary and sex

information, we use the assumptions described above to calculate an estimated present

discounted value of the retirement annuity (PDVA) for vested participants. The value of the LS

for each worker is then compared to our estimate of the PDVA. The bottom rows of Table 2

show that, of the 10,818 vested terminated workers for whom we can calculate the PDVA, the

LS exceeds the PDVA for 7,977 individuals (73.7 percent of all vested terminations).22

Surprisingly, only about one third of separating workers in both groups (those where the LS

exceeds the PDVA and those where the LS is less than the PDVA) requested a LS within one

year of termination. This suggests that the relative value of the two distribution options did not

strongly influence the choice made by separating employees.23




22
   Remember that this measure of PDVA includes only the value of the cash retirement benefit and does
not include the estimated value of having access to the subsidized retiree health insurance. When this
value is included, practically all vested workers have a higher PDVA compared to their account balance.
23
   Butler and Teppa (2007) describe a traditional measure of an annuity’s value as its Money’s Worth
Ratio (MWR), which is the ratio of the present discounted value of the annuity payments and the initial
cost. The MWR is then determined to be equal to one if the annuity is well-priced, with the difference
usually attributed to adverse selection and administrative costs. In our formulation, the PDVA equal to
the LS would be theoretically equivalent to a MWR of one.


                                                   19
5.      Distributional Decisions of Vested Workers
        Next, we conduct a multivariate regression analysis of the choice to withdraw funds and

accept a lump sum distribution (LS) within one year of separation for vested workers.

Theoretically, this assumes that the decision to leave is made and then the individual considers

what to do with his retirement accounts. Access to a LS option and the size of account balance

may influence a worker’s decision to leave government employment; however, we do not model

this relationship.

        Earlier discussion has shown that we should anticipate differences in distributional

choices based on certain personal and plan characteristics for two reasons. First, as the

simulations reported in Section 3 demonstrate, the relative values of the distribution options are a

function of a worker’s age at hire, years of service, sex, and salary. Given differences in the two

pension plans, one might also anticipate that distributional decisions will vary by participation in

TSERS or LGERS. Second, previous research has shown that the choice to annuitize, holding

constant the relative generosity of the distribution options, varies by sex, age, and the size of the

pension account.

        We seek to determine whether the choice to withdraw funds is due to underlying

demographic characteristics affecting desire to annuitize, or to plan parameters affecting the

relative generosity of the distribution options. We attempt to measure these two avenues by

including both demographic controls (to the extent available in the data), as well as the size of

the LS and our approximation of the present discounted value of the annuity (PDVA). Not only

are some of the variables closely related, but the size of the LS and PDVA are both functions of

salary and years of service, and age is an important determinant of the PDVA through its

discounting effect (i.e., the same annual retirement benefit starting at age 65 has a higher present

                                                 20
value for those age 45 compare to those age 35). The annual retirement benefit is exactly

determined by annual salary and years of service, and the present value of this benefit is based on

the assumed interest rate and age of the employee at termination. Thus, one should be concerned

about the inclusion of age, years of service, salary, the value of the LS and the PDVA in the

same specification, and we should expect that the estimated coefficients will be sensitive to the

inclusion of all of these variables in the same specification.

        With these caveats in mind, Table 3 presents coefficients estimated from a linear

probability model of the decision to withdraw funds within one year of separation (request a LS)

among workers who were vested in the retirement plan.24 We estimate the LS decision as a

function of the value of the LS (the worker’s account balance at separation), the calculated

PDVA, and an indicator for whether the value of the LS exceeds the PDVA. We also include a

separate intercept by year of termination to account for differences in economic conditions

between 2007 and 2008. In columns (2) through (5), we incrementally add variables controlling

for gender, state or local retirement plan (TSERS versus LGERS), a quadratic in final average

salary, a quadratic in age at separation, a quadratic in years of service to observe how these

variables affect the estimated coefficients on the values of the LS and PDVA.

                                                    [Table 3]

        First, we observe that the value of the LS, which is equal to the employee contributions (6

percent of salary) plus interest, has a quadratic relationship whereby workers with larger values

are less likely to request a LS until the account balances reaches approximately $73,000.

Similarly, the estimate of the PDVA has a nonlinear effect on the distributional decision with

24
 The coefficients reported in Tables 3, 4, and 5 were estimated using linear probability models.
Marginal effects from probit models are nearly identical and are available from the authors upon request.


                                                   21
greater values increasing the likelihood of selecting a LS up to about $93,000 and larger values

reducing the probability of requesting a LS. The final variable in column (1) is an indicator

variable for having an account balance (value of the LS) larger than the approximated PDVA.

The estimated coefficient indicates that having a LS that is larger than the PDVA is associated

with a 5.4 percentage point higher probability of requesting a LS. This is consistent with

expectations, although, as discussed further below, the effect disappears when age at separation

is added in Column (4). The estimates indicate that workers separating in 2008 were about 2

percentage points more likely to request a LS than those who terminated in 2007, and this

difference becomes slightly larger once additional covariates are added to the model.

       Columns (2) through (5) of Table 3 sequentially add covariates to the model. First, in

Column (2), we see that men were 10 percentage points more likely to request the LS than were

women who terminated employment. This is consistent with women being more likely to accept

defaults. Terminated workers in TSERS were approximately 10 percentage points less likely to

request a LS compared to comparable workers leaving LGERS, which is expected given the

potential value of retiree health insurance for workers covered by TSERS. Introducing these two

variables has virtually no effect on the estimated coefficients in the specification shown in

Column (1).

       In Column (3), we observe that the final average salary (i.e., the average salary over the

past four full years of employment) has a u-shaped relationship with the probability of requesting

a LS. The effect is negative up until a salary of over $112,500 (depending on the specification)

and then for higher salaries becomes positive. Adding the salary variable also has little effect on

the other coefficients. Columns (4) and (5) report the estimates when age at separation and years

of service are added to the model. Age has an inverted u-shaped relationship with distributional

                                                 22
choice, where the youngest and oldest workers are least likely to choose a LS. Depending on the

specification, the effect of age on the probability of receiving a LS is positive but declining up

until the worker reaches approximately age 35 after which age has a negative effect on accepting

a LS. One possible explanation for this pattern is that older workers are closer to being able to

start a retirement annuity, so experience less discounting due to having to wait to claim the

benefit. It may also reflect a greater confidence by older workers that retirement benefits will

not be reduced for them or greater salience of the need for retirement income among workers

nearer to retirement. Note that adding a quadratic polynomial in age to the regression reduces

the estimated impact of having a larger value of the LS than the PDVA from being positive and

significant to being negative and insignificant.

       The relative size of the LS and PDVA is highly correlated with age, as illustrated in the

simulations reported in Table 1 and shown in Figure 2. The annuity value is discounted back to

the current age, so those who are closer to retirement have less discounting. Meanwhile, the LS

is not a function of age, so older individuals are more likely to have higher PDVA than LS

relative to younger individuals. We see this in the data where, for example, among workers age

45 and older at separation only 11 percent have larger LS’s than PDVA’s, while almost 90

percent of workers less than age 45 have a higher value of their LS than PDVA. It is therefore

difficult to separately identify the effects of age and the relative value of the LS and PDVA.

       In the final column of Table 3, we see that adding a quadratic in years of service leaves

the other estimates basically unchanged. Holding all else constant, including the values of LS,

PDVA, and age, workers are more likely to withdraw with more years of service up to 12 years

of service, at which point longer tenures are associated with a reduction in the probability of

accepting a LS. In general, the observed relationships between both demographic characteristics

                                                   23
and work history and the probability of withdrawing funds conform to expectations. We next

propose several reasons why workers might not be highly responsive to the relative size of the

LS and PDVA.

6.     Potential Explanations for the Observed Distributional Decisions

       We postulate five hypotheses on why the relative size of the lump sum distribution (LS)

and the present discounted value of the annuity (PDVA) might not affect the distributional

choice in the manner initially expected: (1) the potential of subsidized health insurance in

retirement if one selects an annuity, (2) the likelihood of returning to work and continuing to

build years of service, (3) the option value of keeping the account open and earning a 4 percent

return until the option is executed, (4) uncertainty regarding the future benefit and attitudes

towards risk, and (5) inertia, inadequate financial literacy, and the lack of knowledge about the

choices and their relative value. We now consider each of these relationships and their potential

effect on the distributional choices of terminated vested workers. A discussion of how these

factors might influence non-vested workers follows in Section 7.

       The calculation of the PDVA makes a series of assumptions including a personal

discount rate and a life expectancy from an actuarial life table. In addition, we are assuming that

individuals are risk neutral. In this context, risk neutrality is a benign assumption, since

technically a worker could withdraw funds and immediately roll them over into another tax

qualified account. Because workers that request a LS have the option of rolling funds over into

another tax qualified account without paying a penalty, or may withdraw funds but still save for

retirement using other means, attitudes towards risk cannot explain choices in this context. An

individual that has a higher personal discount rate or a lower life expectancy would value the

annuity less than our calculation and would be more likely to take a LS. Similarly, separating

                                                 24
workers that have a bequest motive would be more likely to withdraw funds. These and other

personal characteristics have been proposed in the literature to explain the annuity puzzle25 that

people do not purchase annuities, but do little to explain our results.

6.1.    Access to Subsidized Health Insurance in Retirement.

        The present value of the retirement annuity in the regression analysis was based solely on

the cash benefit one could expect to receive in retirement. However, as described above, vested

employees in the TSERS (teachers and state government workers) system who leave their

pension account open and ultimately receive a retirement benefit are also eligible to participate in

the state health plan (SHP) once they begin receiving the pension. The state will pay 100 percent

of the health insurance premium for these former employees.26 Persons who accepted the lump

sum are not eligible for participation in the state health plan in the future.

        Appendix A provides a calculation of the present discounted value of health insurance

beginning when the retirement annuity starts and ending with death. Health insurance is a

relatively valuable benefit, and according to our calculations described in Section 3, those who

anticipate taking advantage of this benefit would see the PDVA plus the present value of the

health insurance exceed the LS amount regardless of years of service and/or age at hire. To give

a sense of the magnitude of the health insurance benefit relative to the annuity in the data, we

estimate that the present discounted value of health insurance for our sample is between $37,225



25
   Brown (2001) discusses the annuity puzzle in detail in a similar context for private sector workers. He
surveys the empirical work on this issue and develops a concept of annuity equivalent wealth variable to
partially explain decisions to annuitize wealth in defined contribution retirement plans.
26
   In 2011, the North Carolina General Assembly passed legislation that for the first time required a
premium to be paid by active and retired workers for the Standard Plan offered by the state; however,
workers and retirees still had access to the Basic Plan without having to pay a premium (Clark and
Morrill, 2011).


                                                    25
and $47,854, depending on the individuals’ age at separation and sex.27 We find that all but ten

vested separating workers have smaller LS’s when compared to the combined value of the

PDVA and health insurance benefit. When considering the choices of workers covered by

retiree health insurance, it is much less surprising that only 29 percent choose to withdraw funds

within one year of separation.

        Of course, this assessment of the relative value of the distributional options assumes that

the departing worker believes that the benefit will still be provided by the time she retires and

that she intends to claim the health insurance benefit. The cost and liabilities associated with

state retiree health plans have been critically examined since new reporting standards were

required by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (Pew Center on the States, 2011;

Clark and Morrill, 2010). The unfunded liabilities have been widely reported in the popular

press, and many states (including North Carolina) have been modifying the terms of these plans.

Thus, it would not be surprising if public employees doubted that the currently promised benefits

will still be provided in 10 or 20 years. Reflecting this concern, terminated workers may further

discount the value of future health insurance in retirement provided by the state. In addition,

some workers may have access to health insurance through spousal coverage, so they might not

value this benefit as much.



27
   To the extent that some vested workers will start their retirement annuity prior to age 65, the value of
retiree health insurance is underestimated, perhaps by a considerable amount. Individuals who are
receiving a retirement annuity are covered by the state health plan regardless of age or whether the person
is receiving a normal retirement benefit or one reduced due to age and service. For example, a worker
who was hired at 25 and left state employment at age 45 could select to begin a reduced retirement benefit
at age 50, she would also be eligible to participate in the state health plan at no premium. The subsidy for
the health insurance does not vary with age at which the individual retires. As noted earlier, the value of
the pension benefit is actuarially reduced to reflect earlier retirement ages; but as we see here, the present
value of the health insurance would be much higher for those who accept benefits prior to age 65.


                                                     26
6.2.    Potential for Returning to Work and the Distributional Choice.

        If terminated workers anticipate that they may return to public employment in North

Carolina, they may wish to keep their accounts open. Terminated workers who return to public

employment will retain their service based on previous public employment provided they kept

their accounts open and do not take a LS. Thus, an employee who temporarily leaves her job due

to medical or family reasons with the intent of returning to public employment within a few

years may find it convenient and cost-effective to leave her account open. Moreover workers

who accept the LS can “purchase back” their prior years of service at a price specified by the

plan.

        To explore this question, we consider all workers who left the retirement systems in 2007

and 2008 and observe whether they had returned to public employment by the end of 2009.

Surprisingly, a greater proportion of those who returned to public employment had accepted a

LS. Among those that returned to employment, 44 percent of the vested and 48 percent of the

non-vested terminators had selected a LS. In contrast, only about one-third of both vested and

non-vested employees who had not returned to public employment chose a LS. It should be

emphasized that our time period for return to work is only one to two years, so the impact could

be substantially different if we had data over a longer time period.

6.3.    Option Value of Maintaining a Pension Account.

        A terminated worker can request a LS at any time after leaving public employment up

until she actually starts a retirement annuity. For vested individuals, the account balance

continues to increase each year by a plan-specified interest rate of four percent. Thus, a well

informed individual could view this as an investment option. She could request a LS and invest

the money herself, or leave the money with the state plans and earn a guaranteed return of 4

                                                27
percent. Given the uncertainty in the financial markets during this period, a guaranteed return of

4 percent may have been an attractive investment. Data provided by the retirement system

suggests that most LS’s occur relatively close to the date of termination.28 A longer time series

on when terminated workers requested a LS would provide better insight into this issue.29

6.4.     Confidence in the Retirement System.

        Over the past few years, the popular press has included many front page stories about the

financial problems facing public pension plans, including the rising cost of providing these

benefits and low funding ratios. North Carolina has one of the best funded public pension plans

in the U.S. Analyzing 2009 pension data from the Comprehensive Annual Financial Reports of

the states, the Pew Center on the States (2011) ranks North Carolina as the fourth best funded

state retirement plan, with a funding ratio of 97 percent.30 Still, many states have been making

major changes in their retirement plans. In most states changes will apply only to new

employees. However, some states whose plans are facing substantial funding problems have

been altering the benefits for current workers and reducing COLAs for current retirees. In this

environment, terminated workers may question whether their pension plans will remain

28
   In 2010, 12,501 terminated workers accepted a LS. Of these 8,473 individuals received the distribution
within one year of termination, another 1,234 had been gone for between one and two years, and another
1,677 requested a LS between two and five years after leaving the retirement systems. Thus, ninety-one
percent of all LS’s paid in 2010 were to individuals who left public employment within the last five years.
29
   An interesting thought experiment is to consider a hypothetical pension plan with all the characteristics
of the North Carolina plan except that there is no annuity benefit. This simplifies the distributional choice
to taking an immediate LS or leaving the account open and take the LS at some future date with the
account balance increasing by 4 percent per year. If we could observe individuals covered by such a plan,
it would be interesting to know the distribution of when workers accepted a LS. In essence, this becomes
a portfolio choice with the pension serving as a guaranteed value fund with a 4 percent return. Depending
on personal characteristics and the size of the pension account, we would probably observe some
variation in the time since termination that the LS is requested.
30
   While most economists believe that the assumed rates of return in these reports are too high, the relative
ranking of the North Carolina retirement system as one of the best funded retirement plans does not
change when lower rates of return are employed (Novy-Marx and Rauh, 2011).


                                                     28
unchanged for 10, 20 or 30 years. Doubts about the stability of the plans may have led some

separated workers to be more likely to request a LS.

6.5.    Financial Literacy and Plan Knowledge.

        Considerable survey evidence indicates that workers have a low level of financial literacy

and inadequate knowledge about their pension plans and how choices can affect the value of the

retirement account (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007; Clark, Morrill, and Allen, 2012). If workers

who leave the North Carolina retirement system possess the same low levels of knowledge, it

should not be surprising that they do not always select the option that has the greatest present

value. While information about the size of the LS is easily available, separating workers may not

be able to determine the value of the retirement annuity. Further, the retirement system sends all

separated employees who request a LS a personalized form letter (shown in Appendix C),

regardless of their vesting status or the relative size of their benefits. The letter contains a

warning that if the refund is processed the individual will forfeit a future annuity benefit. A

separating worker who is not confident in his/her choice may be swayed by the strong wording in

this letter. We do not know how many individuals first applied but then ultimately chose not to

withdraw funds after having received this letter.

        Recent economic research has also shown that defaults matter in the selection of various

pension options and inertia associated with the acceptance of defaults could also be affecting the

distributional choices (e.g., Madrian and Shea, 2001). Brown, et al. (2008) describe an important

role for framing. If workers accept defaults due to inertia or lack of understanding, or are not

appropriately valuing benefits, then public employers could improve separating workers’ welfare

by providing timely and accessible financial education and information.



                                                  29
7.      Distributional Choices of Non-Vested Workers
        Workers leaving public employment with fewer than five years of service are not vested

according to the rules of both retirement plans (TSERS and LGERS), so they are not eligible for

a retirement annuity based on service at the time of termination. Accordingly, the lump sum

distribution (LS) available to them is the sum of their own pension contributions during their

employment without any interest. Nevertheless, they are not required to immediately request a

LS and the default is to maintain the account with the system. Given the choice of money now

or the same amount of money at some future date, we would expect that all non-vested

terminated workers would request immediate LS’s. Yet, Table 2 shows that only about one-third

of these former public employees requested a LS in the first year following termination.31

        At first glance, this is quite puzzling. Unlike the vested workers, non-vested terminated

employees cannot look forward to a retirement annuity, will not be eligible for state-provided

retiree health insurance, and do not earn interest on the money left with the retirement system.

But workers with short service may have paid very little attention to their pension accounts, and

upon termination, may be unaware of the value of their accounts and the distributional options

available to them. Inertia is often given as an explanation of certain types of behavior and could

also be a factor in lack of immediate LS’s.32

        Still, there may be a fully rational reason for a separating employee to leave the monies in

the system, even if not vested. Employees who leave public employment but who anticipate


31
   Using a longer time series, it would be interesting to discover whether these individuals ever return to
public employment in North Carolina and ultimately become vested in the retirement plan, whether they
ever request a LS, or whether these funds are permanently lost to the individual.
32
   Interestingly, inertia may be overcome by certain events. The state retirement system reports that
requests for lump sum distributions from previously terminated workers often spike just before
Christmas.


                                                     30
returning to a government job may have an economic incentive to leave their pension accounts

open, as returning civil servants who have not closed their pension accounts can count prior

years of service in the determination of future retirement benefits. If this motive explains the

distributional choices of non-vested employees, it would indicate rational decision making based

on considerable knowledge of the pension plan. Family circumstances, such as the birth of a

child or relocation, can also result in individuals quitting current employment and having

temporary periods outside the labor force. The public sector is relatively large and all public

employees are covered by the same system, offering considerable opportunities for future

employment in either TSERS or LGERS. Nevertheless, the analysis of 2007-2008 terminations

described in Section 6.2 does not support the hypothesis that expectations of returning to work is

a cause of keeping one’s account open since a larger proportion of those that returned to work

had accepted a LS than those that had not yet returned to work.

       To further examine the distributional choices of non-vested employees, we estimated a

linear probability model with the dependent variable being an indicator for whether separating

workers chose to withdraw their accounts and accept the LS’s from the retirement plan within

one year of terminating employment. The results of this regression are presented in Table 4. We

first consider how the value of the possible LS (the account balance) influences the choice of

withdrawing funds. This relationship is shown to be quadratic, whereby the probability of

withdrawing is increasing until the value of the account reaches approximately $15,000, at which

point the relationship becomes negative. Since none of these workers is eligible for an annuity, it

is somewhat surprising that we observe this pattern, although it may be due to the possibility of

returning to work in the future.

                                                 [Table 4]

                                                31
        In Table 4, Column (2), we observe that men were more likely to withdraw money. This

could be due to less inertia or more knowledge among men. As was the case for vested

employees, members of TSERS were significantly less likely to accept a LS than those in

LGERS. Again, consistent with the patterns for vested workers, the youngest and oldest non-

vested separating workers were least likely to withdraw funds, with the highest probability of

withdrawing around age 42. As discussed earlier, this might be due to lack of knowledge or

because of a higher likelihood to return to work among the youngest workers. In the final

column of Table 4, we observe that controlling for years of service diminishes the coefficient on

the account balance at separation somewhat. Here the omitted category is 2-2.99 years of service

and we observe that among non-vested workers those with approximately 1-2.99 years of service

are the most likely to withdraw. We observe across the columns of Table 4 that the importance

of the size of the LS is only partially explained by observed work history and demographics, and

the basic pattern suggests that those with the smallest and largest potential LS values are the least

likely to withdraw within one year of separation.

   8.      Cash Distributions or Rollovers

        Terminated employees who have requested a lump sum distribution (LS) have the option

of directly receiving a check or having the funds sent from the retirement system directly to

another tax qualified account, often an IRA. This form of distribution from a defined benefit

plan is typically called a “rollover” of pension funds (see Figure 1). If the funds are rolled over,

the monies are not counted as current income to the taxpayer, nor does the individual incur any

tax penalty associated with the early withdrawal of funds from a retirement account. Thus,

assets rolled over remain part of the individual’s retirement wealth and can be invested through

the new tax qualified plan.

                                                 32
        The impact of the rollover amount on retirement income will depend on the investment

choices made and subsequent returns earned compared to the ultimate annuity that a vested

worker could receive in the future. In our calculations for vested workers, the future annuity is

discounted at a nominal rate of 5.8 percent. Thus, if the vested worker earned returns in excess

of 5.8 percent, she might be able to purchase an annuity at retirement with a benefit that

exceeded the benefit paid by the pension system. But the retail annuity market for an individual

is relatively thin and includes fees, so the worker would likely have to earn a return greater than

5.8 percent in order to be able to purchase a comparable benefit in retirement.33

        When a terminated worker requests that a check be sent directly to her, the distribution is

subject to personal income tax in the year it is received. In addition, because all workers in our

sample are under age 50, they will have to pay a 10 percent tax penalty for an early distribution.

Once received, the payment can be spent on current consumption, used to pay off outstanding

debts, or saved. Of course, if the monies are spent, potential income in retirement is reduced.

Our data identify whether the LS was rolled over or paid as a cash distribution; however, we

have no information on how the funds were subsequently used by terminated workers.

        The possibility that the funds are spent, creating “leakage” from retirement saving, is a

concern to many policy analysts. To investigate this pattern, we estimate a regression model

exploring the determinants of how LS’s are sent to terminated employees. The sample includes

all individuals who left either of the two North Carolina retirement systems in 2007 and 2008,

and who requested the LS. Overwhelmingly, workers who requested the LS opted for a cash


33
  In addition, the retirement annuity from the state plan is approximately a real annuity with benefits
typically being increased each year by the legislature at a rate near the level of inflation. In contrast, the
annuity that one could purchase in the market under these assumptions would be a nominal annuity.


                                                      33
distribution; almost 90 percent of these individuals were sent a check directly from the retirement

system.34 We estimate the decision separately for vested and non-vested workers. Non-vested

workers seeking an annuity do not have the option of maintaining their account and eventually

receiving a retirement annuity from the pension plans. We might therefore expect that among

workers choosing to withdraw funds, the non-vested group would be more likely to rollover than

the vested group, holding all else equal.

        Table 5 reports the estimated coefficients from a linear probability model of the decision

to cash out (versus rollover) benefits among those electing a LS. The estimates cover three

alternative samples: all terminated employees who requested the LS, all vested workers receiving

the LS, and all non-vested individuals that received the LS. Estimated coefficients are similar

across the three data sets used in the analysis. For all groups, larger account balances

significantly increased the probability of rolling the funds over into a tax qualified account. This

may reflect the desire to avoid the higher tax and penalties associated with the cash distribution.

Consistent with expectations given the alternative options for annuitizing, in Column (1) we

observe that, holding all else constant, including the value of the LS, vested employees were 7.4

percentage points more likely to request a cash payment.

                                                   [Table 5]




34
  From October 2007 on, separating workers had the option of taking a partial rollover and requesting the
balance in cash. These are recorded as rollovers in the data, and we cannot distinguish between full or
partial rollovers. Therefore, our estimate of “leakage” may be understated, since some of those rolling
over funds could also be taking out a portion in cash. We also expect that some separating employees do
take cash and deposit it into a tax-qualified account themselves within the allowed 60 day period. We
have no way of knowing how many workers exercise this option, either. Thus, the estimate of 90 percent
leakage is slightly low because of partial rollovers and slightly high because of indirect rollovers not
being observed.


                                                   34
        Across all three samples we see that among those requesting a LS, men are significantly

more likely to cash out rather than directly rollover benefits. In Column (3) of Table 5 we see

that non-vested participants in TSERS were 2.0 percentage points less likely to receive a cash

distribution; however, there were no differences between vested members of TSERS and LGERS

found in Column (2). The pattern of cashing out has an inverted u-shape by age for non-vested

employees, while we do not find an effect for either age or years of service among vested

employees, holding all else equal. For non-vested workers, an additional year of service

increased the probability of accepting a check by 4.7 percentage points. Among separating

workers requesting a LS, those terminating employment in 2008 were over two percentage points

more likely to request cash relative to those separating in 2007.

        The most important finding from this analysis is that almost 90 percent of terminated

workers that requested a LS opted for a cash distribution. Given the economic conditions that

prevailed during this period, one should not necessary conclude that this magnitude of leakage

from retirement saving would prevails under normal situations. Combining these results with

those presented earlier, that roughly one-third of all terminated workers request a LS, we

estimate that approximately 28 percent of all terminated workers close their retirement accounts

and receive a cash distribution within one year of separation.

9.      Key Findings and Conclusions

     Numerous studies have examined the distributional choice of pension participants. For the

most part, these earlier papers focused on the private sector and used survey data that was based

on recollection instead of real time decisions. Much of this literature tries to explain ‘The

Annuity Puzzle’: why such a large proportion of vested terminated workers select lump sum

distributions instead of an available annuity option. Reasons postulated include workers having

                                                 35
very high discount rates and not appreciating the longevity insurance value of the annuity. In

addition, terminating workers may have bequest motives or may be concerned about having

liquid assets in the event of a health shock. Few have studied the public sector.

       Our analysis shows that public employees face very different choices than do private

sectors employees. Whereas private sector plans are constrained by law to offer lump sum

distributions (LS’s) that are greater than or equal to the present value of the future annuity,

public sector pension plans base the LS on employee contributions and credited interest. Hence,

the LS value is not directly linked to the value of the life annuity.

       Using administrative records from North Carolina retirement plans, we provide a detailed

picture of the distribution decisions of workers ages 18 to 49 that separated prior to retirement

from public pension plans in North Carolina between 2007 and 2008. We show that, for younger

workers and those with fewer years of service, the LS typically is larger in value than our

approximation of the present value of the annuity (PDVA), yet only one-third elected the LS.

This fraction does not differ considerably by vesting status or by eligibility for retiree health

insurance. Almost 90 percent of separating workers who request a lump sum withdraw the funds

as cash, rather than rolling over directly to another tax qualified retirement account. This could

reflect a perceived need for cash for current consumption or paying off debts. It might also be

the result of poor understanding of the tax consequences of this choice and the need to save these

funds for retirement. Of course, workers could still deposit the cashed-out benefits into an IRA

themselves. The high rate of cash-outs suggests a sizeable reduction in retirement wealth

accumulation and suggests that there is a considerable amount of “leakage” from the retirement

savings of public sector workers in North Carolina.



                                                  36
       In a related paper, Clark and Morrill (2012) find that among workers who separated from

public employment in 2007-2008 and were eligible for an immediate reduced annuity (age 50

with at least 20 years of service), 90 percent opted to receive an immediate annuity. Of those

who were eligible for an immediate unreduced annuity (30 years of service, age 62 with 25 years

of service, or age 65 with 5 years of service), 99 percent selected some type of immediate

annuity offered by the plan. Thus, for retiring public employees in North Carolina, almost all

select an annuity option and reject the offer of a LS. On the basis of these findings and those in

the current paper, it appears that public sector retirees in North Carolina are not part of annuity

puzzle and instead overwhelming select annuities when they are offered.

       One might expect that all non-vested terminations request a lump sum distribution since

they are not entitled to a future retirement benefit and earn no interest on funds left with the

system. Yet we observe that two thirds of those leaving the systems in 2007 and 2008 left their

accounts open. Given the evidence on financial literacy and inertia in the general population,

one might speculate that non-vested terminated workers are unaware of their ability to access

these funds, do not understand that they have no claim on a future benefit, do not understand that

the funds will not earn any interest, or simply do not take the time to request a LS. Economic

and psychological studies indicate that workers often merely accept default options. In this case,

the default is to leave the account open, thus we may think that workers leaving the system do

not take the time to request a distribution of their pension account. To address this concern, the

plan could change the default to be a LS for non-vested workers. Clark and Morrill (2012) find a

similar result for non-vested workers over the age of 50 with only 36 percent of terminated

workers aged 50 to 59 selecting a LS. While the proportion of those choosing a LS rises



                                                 37
somewhat with advancing age (50 percent of those over age 65 chose the LS), it is hard to

explain why these older non-vested terminating workers would leave their funds with the system.

       We postulate several factors that might explain why terminating workers for the most

part do not appear to respond to the relative size of the PDVA and LS. While we discuss several

reasons why the distribution choice is potentially more complicated than a simple present value

calculation, we do not find empirical evidence pointing to one particular story. On the contrary,

we find that there may be an important role for defaults and workers may not be well informed

about the value of their benefits. Since defined benefit plans are much more prevalent in the

public sector, these findings have significant economic and policy implications.



REFERENCES

Bassett, William, Michael Fleming, and Anthony Rodriguez. 1998. “How Workers Use 401(k)
Plans: The Participation, Contribution, and Withdrawal Decisions,” National Tax Journal, June,
pp. 263-289.

Benartzi, Shlomo, Alessandro Previtero, and Richard Thaler. 2011. “Annuitization Puzzles,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, pp. 143-164.

Brown, Jeffrey R. 2001. “Private Pensions, Mortality Risk, and the Decision to Annuitize,”
Journal of Public Economics, 82, 29-62.

Brown, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Marian V. Wrobel. 2008. “Why
Don’t People Insure Late-Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the Under-
Annuitization Puzzle,” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 98:2, 304-309.

Brown, Jeffrey R. and Scott Weisbenner. 2012. “Why do Individuals Choose Defined
Contribution Plans? Evidence from Participants in a Large Public Plan,” paper presented at
“Retirement Benefits for State and Local Employees: Designing Pension Plans for the Twenty-
First Century” NBER conference, Jackson Wyoming.

Bryant, Victoria, Sarah Holden, and John Sabelhaus. 2011. “Qualified Retirement Plans:
Analysis of Distribution and Rollover Activity,” Pension Research Council Working Paper
WP2011-01.



                                               38
Burman, Leonard, Norma Coe, and William Gale. 1999. “Lump Sum Distributions form
Pension Plans: Recent Evidence Issues for Policy and Research,” National Tax Journal.
September, pp. 553-562.

Butler, Monika and Federica Teppa. 2007. “The Choice Between an Annuity and a Lump Sum:
Results From Swiss Pension Funds,” Journal of Public Economics, pp. 1944-66.

Chalmers, John and Jonathan Reuter. 2009. “How Do Retirees Value Life Annuities? Evidence
from Public Employees.” NBER Working paper 15608.

Chang, Angela. 1996. “Tax Policy, Lump-Sum Pension Distributions, and Household Saving,”
National Tax Journal, June, pp. 235-52.

Clark, Robert, Lee Craig, and John Sabelhaus. 2011. State and Local Retirement Plans in the
United States. Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Clark, Robert and Emma Hanson. 2011. “Distribution Options in State Pension Plans,” NCSU
Working Paper.

Clark, Robert and Melinda Morrill. 2010. Retiree Health Plans in the Public Sector: Is There a
Funding Crisis? Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Clark, Robert and Melinda Morrill. 2011. “Containing Health Insurance Costs for Active and
Retired Public Sector Employees: Lessons from the State of North Carolina,” NCSU Working
Paper.

Clark, Robert and Melinda Morrill. 2012. “Retiring Public Sector Employees Prefer Annuities
to Lump Sum Distribution,” North Carolina State University Working Paper.

Clark, Robert, Melinda Morrill, and Steven Allen. 2012. ‘The Role of Financial Literacy in
Determining Retirement Plans,’ Economic Inquiry, 50 (October), pp. 851-866

Copeland, Craig. 2009. “Lump Sum Distributions at Job Change,” EBRI Notes, January, pp. 2-
10.

Engelhardt, Gary. 2002. “Pre-retirement Lump-sum Pension Distributions and Retirement
Income Security: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study,” National Tax Journal, pp.
553-562.

Hurd, Michael and Constantijn Panis. 2006. “The choice to cash out pension rights at job change
or retirement,” Journal of Public Economics, pp. 2213-2227.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007. “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
54, pp. 205-224.



                                              39
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 1149-1187.

Mitchell, Olivia S., James M. Poterba, Mark J. Warshawsky, and Jeffrey R. Brown. 1999. “New
Evidence on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities,” The American Economic Review,
89(5): 1299-1318.

Moore, James and Leslie Muller. 2002. “An Analysis of Lump-sum Pension Distribution
Recipients,” Monthly Labor Review, May, pp. 29-46.

Novy-Marx, Robert and Joshua Rauh. 2011. “Public Pension Liabilities: how Big Are They and
What Are They Worth?” Journal of Finance, 66(4), 1207-1245.

Papke, Leslie. 2004. “Pension Plan Choice in the Public Sector: The Case of Michigan State
Employees,” National Tax Journal, LVII (2), 329-339.

Pew Center on the States. 2011. The Widening Gap: The Great Recession’s Impact on State
Pension and Retiree Health Cost,
http://www.pewcenteronthestates.org/uploadedFiles/Pew_pensions_retiree_benefits.pdf

Poterba, James, Steven Venti, and David Wise. 1998. “Lump-Sum Distributions from Retirement
Saving Plans: Receipt and Utilization.” In David Wise (ed.), Inquiries into the Economics of
Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 85-105.

Poterba, James, Steven Venti, and David Wise. 2001 “Preretirement Cashouts and Foregone
Retirement Saving: Implications for 401(k) Asset Accumulation,” in David Wise (ed.) Themes in
the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 23-58.

Purcell, Patrick. 2007. “Lump-Sum Distributions Under the Pension Protection Act,” CRS
Report For Congress, Order Code RS22765, December 3.

Purcell, Patrick. 2009. “Pension Issues: Lump-Sum Distributions and Retirement Income
Security,” CRS Report for Congress, January 7.

Sabelhaus, John and David Weiner. 1999. “Disposition of Lump-Sum Pension Distributions:
Evidence from Tax Returns,” National Tax Journal, September, pp. 593-614.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2011. Employee Benefits Survey.
http://bls.gov/ncs/ebs/benefits/2011/benefits_retirement.htm


Warner, John and Saul Pleeter. 2001. “The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from Military
Downsizing Programs,” American Economic Review, pp. 33-53.

Yaari, Menahem E. 1965. “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the
Consumer,” Review of Economic Studies, 32(April): 137-150.


                                              40
Yakoboski, Paul. 1997. “Large Plan Lump Sums: Rollovers and Cashouts,” EBRI Issue Brief,
vol. 188, Washington, DC: EBRI.

Yang, Tongxuan. 2005. “Understanding the Defined Benefit Versus Defined Contribution
Choice,” Pension Research Council WP 2005-4.




                                            41
42
                                     Years of Service: 10
              $35,000



              $25,000

                                                                                        LS
              $15,000
                                                                                        PDVA


               $5,000
                              25           30                 35      40
                                                Age at Hire



                                         Hired at Age 30
              $95,000
              $85,000
              $75,000
              $65,000
              $55,000
              $45,000                                                                   LS
              $35,000
                                                                                        PDVA
              $25,000
              $15,000
               $5,000
                              5            10                 15      20
                                            Years of Service



Notes: The values are calculated for a hypothetical separating employee earning a starting
salary of $30,000 per year with 3 percent wage growth. The top chart indicates the data
points in dollar values calculated for a person with 10 years of service by the age of hire.
The bottom chart indicates the data points in dollar values calculated for a person who was
hired at age 30 by the number of years of service. The present discounted value of the
annuity (PDVA) does not include the value of health insurance. Other simulation results
(shown in Table 1) that vary the age of hire and years of service show a clear pattern that the
lump sum distribution (LS) is greater relative to the PDVA for those hired at younger ages
and with fewer years of service.

  Figure 2: Simulation of relative values of lump sum distribution (LS) versus the present
                         discounted value of the annuity (PDVA)


                                                       43
Table 1: Value of Lump Sum (LS) and Present Discounted Value of Annuity (PDVA) for a
Hypothetical Worker

             Age at      Age at        Years of
                                                           LS                 PDVA
              Hire     Separation      Service
               25           30              5            $10,741              $4,916
               25           35             10            $25,521             $14,858
               25           40             15            $45,485             $33,694
               25           45             20            $72,074             $67,967
               25           50             25           $107,089             $129,212
               30           35              5            $10,741              $6,408
               30           40             10            $25,521             $19,377
               30           45             15            $45,485             $43,972
               30           50             20            $72,074             $89,167
               35           40              5            $10,741              $8,357
               35           45             10            $25,521             $25,287
               35           50             15            $45,485             $57,687
               40           45              5            $10,741             $10,906
               40           50             10            $25,521             $33,174
               45           50              5            $10,741             $14,308
Notes: Values are for a hypothetical worker with a starting salary of $30,000 and wage growth of 3
percent. Calculations of the lump sum distribution value (LS) and present discounted value of the annuity
(PDVA) are described in the text and in detail in Appendix A. The shaded boxes highlight the larger
value between the LS and PDVA.




                                                   44
Table 2: Percent taking a lump sum distribution (LS) by vesting status

                                                            Vested (5+ Yrs)       Not Vested (<5 Yrs)
                                                               N % LS                  N % LS
 Full Sample                                              11,368 32.36%            35,545 35.29%
                         Year: 2007                        5,619 34.95%            17,836 38.34%
 SEPARATION YEAR
                         Year: 2008                        5,749 29.83%            17,709 32.22%
                         Men                               3,948 34.75%            11,822 35.31%
 SEX                     Women                             6,903 26.08%            21,924 30.19%
                         Unreported Gender                   517 98.07%             1,799 97.33%
                         Yrs Service Less Than 1                                   11,839 28.46%
 TOTAL YEARS OF          Yrs Service 1-3                                           16,606 37.84%
 SERVICE                 Yrs Service 4                                              2,753 41.30%
 (REPORTED)              Yrs Service 5-19                 11,039 32.60%
                         Yrs Service 20-39                   280 12.14%
 AGE AT                  Age 18-24                            17 29.41%             5,183 29.89%
 SEPARATION              Age 25-34                         3,256 30.62%            15,297 33.95%
 (CALCULATED)            Age 35-49                         7,055 33.37%            13,257 38.63%
 RETIREMENT              LGERS                             3,644 40.45%            11,023 40.82%
 SYSTEM                  TSERS                             7,724 28.55%            24,522 32.80%
                         Education Professionals
                         (excludes higher ed) (1)          2,798 19.16%             8,690 23.27%
                         Skilled Labor (2)                   772 47.28%             2,982 36.82%
 JOB                     Professional, Government,
 CLASSIFICATION          Admin (3)                         2,076 35.69%             6,148 39.75%
 (October 2007-          University, Extension, and
 December 2008 only)     Community College (4)               184 14.67%               323 35.60%
                         Public Safety (5)                 1,148 45.21%             3,486 43.49%
                         Health and Social Service
                         Professionals (6)                   622 27.01%             2,226 33.38%
 Regression Sample       Regression Sample                10,818 29.30%
 (non-missing salary     LS > PDVA                           7,977 29.55%
 and gender)              LS ≤ PDVA                          2,841 28.62%
Notes: The sample includes all separating employees ages 18-49 who are not eligible to start an
immediate retirement annuity. The sample size varies across worker and plan characteristics due to
missing values for some workers. Note that for the regression sample of vested workers, 550
observations were dropped because the present discounted value of the annuity (PDVA) could not be
determined from the data due to missing gender and/or salary. We report the number of workers and the
percent taking a lump sum distribution (LS) versus maintaining their account.

                                                   45
Table 3: Withdrawal Decisions of Vested Workers
                               Mean/
                                              (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)
                               Percent
Value of the LS (10K)           $2.02      -0.188**      -0.209**   -0.193**     -0.217**    -0.236**
                                            (0.018)       (0.018)    (0.018)      (0.019)     (0.024)
Value of the LS (10K)2                     0.013**       0.014**    0.012**      0.013**      0.017**
                                            (0.002)       (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.003)
PDVA (10K)                      $1.75      0.093**       0.100**    0.108**      0.136**     0.162**
                                            (0.013)       (0.013)    (0.013)      (0.015)     (0.016)
PDVA (10K)2                                -0.005**      -0.005**   -0.005**     -0.006**    -0.007**
                                            (0.001)       (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
LS > PDVA                       73.7%      0.054**       0.050**    0.061**        -0.017      -0.009
                                            (0.015)       (0.015)    (0.015)      (0.018)     (0.018)
Male                            36.4%                    0.101**    0.104**      0.115**     0.119**
                                                          (0.009)    (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)
TSERS                           68.3%                    -0.104**   -0.105**     -0.099**    -0.097**
                                                          (0.009)    (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)
Final Average Salary            $3.36                               -0.027**     -0.045**    -0.053**
(10K)                                                                (0.008)      (0.009)     (0.012)
Final Average Salary                                                  0.001       0.002*      0.001*
(10K)2                                                               (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
Age at Separation               38.47                                            0.082**     0.075**
                                                                                  (0.010)     (0.010)
Age at Separation 2/100                                                          -0.115**    -0.107**
                                                                                  (0.013)     (0.013)
Years of Service                 9.01                                                        0.024**
                                                                                              (0.006)
Years of Service2                                                                            -0.001**
                                                                                             (0.0002)
Separated in 2008               52.9%       0.018*       0.025**    0.026**      0.027**     0.027**
                                           (0.009)       (0.009)    (0.009)       (0.009)     (0.009)
Constant                                   0.418**       0.477**    0.511**      -0.809**    -0.742**
                                           (0.017)       (0.018)    (0.021)       (0.171)     (0.171)
Notes: The sample is all workers ages 18-49 that terminated employment in 2007 and 2008 and who
were vested with valid entries for the above covariates, N = 10,818. For more information on the sample
for this table, see Table 2 and Appendix B. The dependent variable is the decision to withdraw the
account balance and take a lump sum distribution (LS) within one year of separation versus maintaining
the account (leaving it open with the possibility of electing for an annuity once eligible), approximately
29.3 percent of the sample requests a LS. The (LS > PDVA) is an indicator for whether the value of the
LS is greater than the calculated present discounted value of the annuity (PDVA). Coefficients are
estimated from a linear probability model with standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; **
significant at 1%.


                                                    46
Table 4: Withdrawal Decisions of Non-Vested Workers

                                      Mean/Percent           (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
Value of the LS (1K)                     $3.15(K)        0.030**       0.029**      0.028**       0.022**
                                                          (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.002)
Value of the LS (1K)2                                    -0.001**      -0.001**     -0.001**      -0.001**
                                                          (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
Male                                      33.3%                        0.043**      0.045**       0.047**
                                                                        (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)
TSERS                                     69.0%                        -0.062**     -0.061**      -0.064**
                                                                        (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)
Age at Separation                          33.3                                     0.016**       0.017**
                                                                                     (0.003)       (0.003)
Age at Separation2                                                                  -0.019**      -0.019**
                                                                                     (0.004)       (0.004)
0-0.99 Years of Service                   33.3%                                                   -0.053**
                                                                                                   (0.010)
1-1.99 Years of Service                   28.2%                                                     0.009
                                                                                                   (0.008)
3-3.99 Years of Service                   12.2%                                                    -0.019*
                                                                                                   (0.009)
4-4.99 Years of Service                    7.8%                                                    -0.025*
                                                                                                   (0.012)
Separated in 2008                         49.8%          -0.067**        -0.003       -0.003        -0.002
                                                          (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)
Constant                                                  0.311**      0.277**        -0.049        -0.023
                                                          (0.005)      (0.006)       (0.050)       (0.051)
Notes: The sample is all workers ages 18-49 that terminated employment in 2007 and 2008 and who
were not vested (less than five years of membership plus non-contributory service) with valid entries for
the above covariates, N = 35,545. For more information on the sample for this table, see Table 2 and
Appendix B. The dependent variable is the decision to withdraw the account balance and take a lump
sum distribution (LS) within one year of separation; approximately 35.29 percent chose this option. The
omitted category is 2-2.99 years of service. Also included in the specifications in Columns (2)-(4), but
not reported, is a dummy variable for gender unknown (5.1% of the sample). Coefficients are estimated
from a linear probability model with standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at
1%.




                                                    47
Table 5: The Decision to Cash Out versus Rollover Benefits among Vested and Non-Vested
Workers Accepting a Lump Sum Distribution (LS)

                                     Full Sample               Vested                Non-Vested
                                   (88.7% cash out)       (87.3% cash out)        (89.1% cash out)
                                          (1)                   (2)                     (3)
                                   Mean        Coeff.     Mean       Coeff.       Mean       Coeff.
Value of the LS (10K)               0.66    -0.238**       1.75   -0.141**         0.35   -0.487**
                                              (0.013)               (0.036)                 (0.029)
Value of the LS (10K)2                       0.020**                0.007*                 0.075**
                                              (0.002)               (0.003)                 (0.012)
Final Average Salary (10K)                                 3.12      -0.008
                                                                    (0.018)
Final Average Salary (10K)2                                           0.002
                                                                    (0.001)
Vested                             22.7%     0.074**
                                              (0.011)
Male                               34.2% 0.031**          43.3%       0.027*      33.3%     0.033**
                                              (0.005)                 (0.012)               (0.006)
Unreported Gender                  13.9% 0.030**                                  14.0% 0.033**
                                              (0.008)                                       (0.009)
TSERS                              63.2% -0.017**         60.0%      -0.007       64.1% -0.020**
                                              (0.005)               (0.012)                 (0.006)
Age at Separation                   34.9     0.009**       38.4       0.008        34.0     0.010**
                                              (0.003)               (0.012)                 (0.003)
Age at Separation 2/100                       -0.010*                -0.009                 -0.012*
                                              (0.004)               (0.015)                 (0.005)
Years of Service                    3.42     0.024**       8.48       0.014        1.95     0.047**
                                              (0.004)               (0.011)                 (0.010)
Years of Service2                             -0.0004                0.0001                  0.002
                                             (0.0002)              (0.0004)                 (0.002)
Separated in 2008                  45.7% 0.024**          54.0%      0.029*       45.5% 0.026**
                                              (0.005)               (0.012)                 (0.006)
Constant                                     0.744**                0.783**                 0.734**
                                              (0.055)               (0.221)                 (0.060)
Observations                             16,213                 3,167                  12,7537
Notes: The samples include only those separating workers who take a lump sum distribution (LS). For
more information on the sample for this table, see Table 2 and Appendix B. Note that in Column (2) only
workers whose final average salary could be calculated are included in the sample, as in Table 3. The
dependent variable is the decision to cash out the account balance (active termination refund or active
termination refund federal tax) instead of directly rolling over into an IRA within one year of separation.
Coefficients are estimated from a linear probability model with standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                    48
APPENDIX A: Calculations of the Estimated Value of the Distribution Options

A.1. Calculation of the Lump Sum Distribution (LS) Value

        The value of the LS at the time of separation, LST, is the sum of the contributions in each

period (six percent of annual salary) compounded at a four percent annual interest rate (r). In the

equation below, T is equivalent to the years of service at separation. SALt refers to the annual

salary earned by the employee in time period t. If the worker began her career in year 0 and

separated in year T, then we can write

        (A.1)                                                    .

For simplicity, we assume that salary rises at a constant rate, g, per year. Then we can write the

salary at time t as a function of the initial hiring salary, SAL0,

        (A.2)                            .

        Combining equations (A.1) and (A.2) and solving the finite geometric series summation

gives the following formula for calculating a worker’s LS at separation time T:

        (A.3)                                                                     .

The value of the LS increases with salary level, salary growth, and years of service, but it is

independent of sex or age at hire.

A2. Calculation of the Value of the Annuity Benefit

        The initial annual benefit, B, expected during each year of retirement, R, is calculated

using the following formula:


        (A.4)                                ,


where R indexes the age of retirement, T is the number of years of service at separation, and FAS

is the final average salary at separation. The pension multiplier, M, is 0.0182 for workers in

                                                   49
TSERS and 0.0185 for workers in LGERS. We do not have access to a full earnings history for

every separating worker, so we approximate the final average salary used to calculate the annual

benefit. In our calculation, we average the last four full calendar years of earnings, while the

actual benefit formula uses the average of the highest four consecutive years of earnings (this

simplification should have only a minimal impact on the calculation of the FAS).

        We calculate the present discounted value of the annuity by multiplying this annual

benefit by an annuitization factor and a discounting factor. The annuitization factor, AFR, is

specific to the age of retirement, R. The discounting factor, D(h,T), is a function of age at hire, h,

and years of service, T. We write the present discounted value of the annuity (PDVA) for a

worker that separates with T years of service, assuming that benefits are claimed at age R, as:

        (A.5)

        Next, the Annuity Factor, AF, is used to determine the value of retirement benefits from

age R until age at death, TD. The future annuity stream is adjusted to reflect cost of living

increases, inflation, personal discount rates, and age-specific mortality rates according to the

following function:

        (A.6)                                     ,

In the past, retirees have been awarded cost of living increases (COLAs) each year. Over the

past decade, the average annual COLA paid to retirees was 1.8 percent each year,35 so in




35
  Each year the legislature considers whether to award benefit increases to current retirees. Current law
states that benefits can be raised only when the increase does not result in a higher employer contribution.
Historically, benefit increases have been awarded almost every year. Between 2000 and 2009, the average
annual increase in benefits was 1.8 percent. Given the actual and projected asset losses in 2008, future
benefit increases may be less likely and lower for workers separating in the future.


                                                      50
equation (A.6) we set α equal to 0.018.36 The annual benefits are then discounted by the nominal

interest rate, our proxy for the individuals’ personal discount rate. The nominal interest rate, rN,

is assumed to be equal 5.8 percent, which is the real interest rate, 3.0 percent, plus the assumed

inflation rate, 2.8 percent. Finally,                is the age-specific probability of surviving from

age R to age s based on the 2000 life table that was used by the retirement system in its actuarial

reports in 2007 and 2008.37

        When deciding whether to accept a LS at separation, the worker is interested in the

PDVA at the time of job termination. Thus, the present value of the pension annuity at age R

must be discounted back to the age at separation. Since final salary is fixed when the individual

leaves public employment, the benefit at age R is determined in nominal dollars. Therefore, the

present value at age R is discounted by the nominal interest rate of 5.8 percent.

        (A.7)

Recall h is the age at hire and T is the years of service, so T+h is the age at separation, while R is

the age of retirement assumed to be age 65 so that (R-T-h) yields the number of years until

retirement benefits commence. The term Survival indicates the probability of an individual




36
   To determine the real value of future benefits back to age 65, one can adopt the inflation assumption
used by the Chief Actuary of the U.S. Social Security System of 2.8 percent per year. Thus benefits were
increased at approximately 64 percent of the annual rate of inflation.
37
   The analysis does not include any post-retirement death benefits because alternative forms of annuity
options available to retirees are calculated to be actuarially equivalent. Thus, the present value of the
annuity chosen by a retiree includes any continuation of benefits after the worker’s death. In general, the
retirement systems do not provide any pre-retirement death benefits; this is in contrast to private sector
plans that are required to offer certain pre-retirement death benefits.


                                                    51
living until time period R given they have survived until time period T+h. As above, we set rN to

be 5.8 percent.38

A3. The Value of Health Insurance in Retirement

        In order to calculate the present value of access to the health plan, we start with the

claims by age used in the 12/31/2009 valuation as reported in the actuarial statements on Other

Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB). The current actuarial analysis of the retiree health plan

assumes that the medical care cost rate to the system will increase by 5.0 percent per year after

2015.39 We increase claims by age by 5.0 percent per year from the time of separation until

death. Next, we calculate the present value of coverage in the state health plan at age 65 by

discounting the annual value of the health insurance from age 65 to death by the nominal interest

rate of 5.8 percent. Since the implied value of health coverage does not vary with salary, this

value will be the same for all employees at age 65. The present value at age 65 is discounted

back to age of termination by the nominal interest rate of 5.8 percent. The value of health

insurance is also not related to years of service and so is completely determined by the worker’s

sex and age at separation.


APPENDIX B: Data Construction

        The raw data provided by the retirement systems includes all individuals that separated

employment in 2007 or 2008, which was calculated by looking at the date of the last contribution
38
   Note that some law enforcement officers are eligible to retire at earlier ages if their primary duties fall
into certain categories. We will systematically underestimate the PDVA for those workers, but are not
able to identify which workers are eligible. Where we do observe job classifications, approximately 10
percent have a position code that could make them eligible for the special benefit.
39
   While medical costs may increase at a rate greater than 5.0 percent per year, the authors assume, based
on recent experience, that cost increases greater than 5.0 percent will be shifted to the employee in the
form of higher deductibles and co-payments. Thus, the value to the employee should be expected to
increase by 5.0 percent per year.


                                                      52
to the retirement accounts and includes 85,351 observations. Appendix Table B.1 reports the

sample selection criteria used to create the data used in the main analysis.

                                           [Appendix Table B.1]

MULTIPLE SPELLS

       We can observe multiple spells in the data, but do not have access to all past (or future,

obviously) spells. For simplicity and consistency, we delete observations with multiple spells

during our two year period. This removes 2,604 observations.

RETIREMENTS

       Following the advice of the state retirement system’s office, we define direct retirements

as those who claim an annuity within one year of separation. Because our project is concerned

with disposition choice for those separating prior to retirement, we have chosen to remove those

that retire within one year of separation from our sample. This eliminates 728 observations.

TOTAL YEARS OF SERVICE

       An individual’s total years of service are not necessarily equal to his tenure at his

employer. While one could calculate the years of service as the separation date minus the start

date, this will differ from the total reported years of service if an individual has either non-

contributory or purchased service. We therefore rely on the reported years of service.

       There are three types of service reported in the data. First, membership service is the

total years an individual worked and contributed to the retirement system. Second, non-

contributory service includes qualified military service, disability (including maternity leave), or

converted sick-leave. Non-contributory service does not count towards service in the final

annuity calculation. Non-contributory service is “creditable” and does count towards vesting and

eligibility for benefits. Third, purchased service reflects years of service an individual pays for

                                                  53
from an eligible period of service. Examples include withdrawn service (with interest), out-of-

state service, educational leave, temporary or part-time local and state service, worker’s

compensation leave, or local or federal government service. Purchased service is creditable and

qualifies the individual for benefits except vesting.

       We define years of service three ways for the analysis:

       (1)     To be vested, membership and non-contributory service must equal five years.

       (2)     The variable “years of service at separation” used in the tables is meant to reflect

               eligibility for benefits, so is equal to the sum of all three types of service,

               membership, non-contributory, and purchased.

       (3)     To calculate the value of the annuity, we use the sum of membership and

               purchased service.

       To maintain data quality, we restrict the sample to those individuals whose calculated

years of service (date of termination minus date of hire) and membership service are at least 0.08

years (approximately one month) each. This eliminates 677 observations from the sample, but

allows us to remove individuals that did not have any substantive claim on a retirement benefit.

ACCOUNT BALANCE INFORMATION (Value of the LS)

       For active accounts: The current account balance reported in the data includes interest

only if vested. According to the retirement system, missing values in this variable are likely

caused by an employer erroneously reporting someone as meeting the requirements to participate

in the retirement system, but really the person is a contractor or part-time employee. The

employer then corrects that entry, taking back the contributions and leaving no money in the

account. The account is still listed as active because the contributions were reversed, rather than

withdrawn. These observations (99) have been dropped. For active accounts, the interest rate

                                                  54
used is 4% and the account balance must be discounted at 4% to get the account balance at

termination.

       For closed/withdrawn accounts: The actual dollar amount refunded is reported in the

data. If not vested, the refund amount is just the individuals’ contribution without interest. The

account balance at separation is therefore equal to the refund amount for those not vested. For

those who were vested, the account balance at separation is equal to the refund amount

adjusted/discounted by the interest rate. To calculate the account balance at separation for vested

individuals who withdrew their account a year later, the account balance is discounted back

using a standard 4% interest rate.

FINAL AVERAGE SALARY

       Last year’s salary is available on the data set, but appears to be measured with

considerable error. We use records of salaries paid from 2003 to 2007 to impute the average

salary over the last full four calendar years of work. The annuity formula uses the highest four

consecutive years of salary, so our measure will be weakly smaller than the true annuity value.

We do not observe the salary for 33 observations, so must drop these from the analyses that use

the PDVA calculations.




                                                55
Appendix Table B.1: Sample Construction

                    All Separations Reported in 2007 and 2008
                                    N = 85,351
                                                                             Number
Restriction
                                                                             Dropped
Multiple observations in the sample period                                   2,604
Date of birth year is 1900 or 1901                                           716
Age when hired less than 16                                                  43
Age 70+ at date of hire                                                      283
Age 80+ at date of separation                                                17
Age <18 at date of separation                                                5
*Sample selection: Age at separation is 50+                                  31,489
Time until retirement less than -90 days                                     1
*Sample selection: Retired within 1 year of separation                       728
Time until withdrawal less than -90 days                                     110
Retirement system is not TSERS or LGERS                                      4
Missing years of service (total reported)                                    1,613
Zero years of service (total reported)                                       49
Total years of service (total reported) >40                                  0
Membership years of service < 0.08 years (approximately 1 month)             7
Calculated years of service (separation date-hire date) < 0.08 years         670
Account balance is missing (no non-zero account balance)                     99
Full Sample: 46,913 workers, 11,368 vested and 35,545 non-vested
For 11,368 vested, to calculate PDVA two additional restrictions:
Missing gender                                                               517
Missing (calculated) salary                                                  33
Vested Sample for PDVA calculations: N = 10,818
Notes: All restrictions are for data quality concerns, except for the sample selection as indicated
by a * preceding the description. The full sample is used for Tables 2, 4, and 5, while Table 3
requires the sample where the present discounted value of the annuity (PDVA) can be calculated.

                                                56
Appendix C: Retirement System Communications

       Regardless of the number of years of service, any separating employee requesting a lump

sum distribution receives a personalized copy of the following letter which includes the

individual’s years of retirement service credit. We do not have information on how many

individuals first applied but then ultimately chose not to withdraw funds or on the effectiveness

of this intervention in particular. The data we have only reflect the final choice that separating

workers made.


Form 5 Letter:




                                                 57
