                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              VALUE-ADDED EXCHANGE RATES

                                           Rudolfs Bems
                                          Robert C. Johnson

                                         Working Paper 18498
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18498


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2012




This work was partly carried out while Johnson was a Visiting Scholar in the IMF Research Department.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
International Monetary Fund. We thank Sarma Jayanthi, Rhys Mendes, Steven Phillips, and Martin
Schmitz for helpful comments, as well as seminar participants at the IMF and the CEPR/SNB Conference
on Exchange Rates and External Adjustment. An August 2012 version of this paper circulated with
the title: "Value-Added Exchange Rates: measuring competitiveness with vertical specialization in
trade.'' The data for this paper is available on our personal websites. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Rudolfs Bems and Robert C. Johnson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Value-Added Exchange Rates
Rudolfs Bems and Robert C. Johnson
NBER Working Paper No. 18498
October 2012
JEL No. F1,F3,F4

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper updates the conceptual foundations for measuring real effective exchange rates (REERs)
to allow for vertical specialization in trade. We derive a value-added REER describing how demand
for the value added that a country produces changes as the price of its value added changes relative
to competitors. We then compute this index for 42 countries from 1970-2009 using trade measured
in value added terms and GDP deflators. There are substantial differences between value-added and
conventional REERs. For example, China's value-added REER appreciated by 20 percentage points
more than the conventional REER from 2000-2009. These differences are driven mainly by the theory-
motivated shift in prices used to construct the value-added REER, not changes in bilateral weights.


Rudolfs Bems
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC
rbems@imf.org

Robert C. Johnson
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
robert.c.johnson@dartmouth.edu
    Real effective exchange rates (REERs) are a core piece of macroeconomic data. Designed
to gauge the effect of price changes on demand for output originating from each source
country, they have wide application. For example, they are commonly used for assessing
export competitiveness, judging the size of price adjustments necessary to close external
imbalances, and gauging misalignment of nominal exchange rates.1
    Despite their wide application, conventional REERs are not well suited to analyzing
competitiveness when imports are used to produce exports – i.e., with vertical specialization
in trade.2 The problem lies in an outdated interpretation of how countries compete with one
another. The conventional REER rests on theoretical foundations provided by the Armington
(1969) demand system. In that framework, each country’s differentiated ‘product’ competes
against ‘products’ from other countries in destination markets. Conventional REER formulas
define each country’s gross output and exports to be that country’s ‘product,’ implicitly
assuming that these ‘products’ are entirely domestically produced. Given the pervasive use
of imports to produce exports in the modern international economy, this is problematic.
    To fix ideas, consider the production of an iPhone. The conventional Armington approach
classifies the iPhone as China’s ‘product,’ and supposes that China competes against other
suppliers of smart phones in foreign markets. Given this definition, a rise in the price of an
iPhone would imply a loss of competitiveness for China. In reality, China is the final assembly
point for the iPhone, one link in a production chain spread over many countries. Therefore,
China competes directly against other possible assemblers of iPhones, not suppliers of digitial
music players per se. This suggests that what we should be interested in measuring is how
demand for assembly services (Chinese value added) changes following changes in the price
of those services (Chinese wages). Put differently, we should re-define China’s ‘product’ to
be the fragment of iPhone value added produced in China.
    This example points to a general idea: with the spread of global supply chains, countries
increasingly specialize in adding value at a particular stage of production rather than pro-
ducing entire finished products.3 As such, countries compete over supplying value added to
foreign markets, not final goods or even gross exports per se. The time is therefore ripe to
update the theoretical foundations of the REER to reflect this new reality.
    In this paper, we extend the benchmark Armington framework to include cross-border
input linkages on the supply side.4 We assume that gross output is produced by combining
   1
     For an overview of applications, see Chinn (2006).
   2
     See Hummels, Ishii, and Yi (2001) or Yi (2003) for discussion of vertical specialization.
   3
     For many OECD countries and emerging markets, the ratio of value added to gross trade (or domestic
content of exports) is now on the order of 60-70% and falling. See Hummels, Ishii, and Yi (2001) or Johnson
and Noguera (2012a, 2012b).
   4
     In developing this new framework, we draw on a rapidly growing body of work on the construction
and use of global bilateral input-output accounting frameworks, including our own previous work in Bems,


                                                    2
domestic value added with both domestic and imported inputs. Further, gross output from
each source country is allocated to final and intermediate use in all countries, so gross trade
includes both final goods and intermediate inputs. On the demand side, consumer preferences
are defined over final goods.
    We use this extended framework to derive a formula that links changes in demand for
real value added to changes in prices of real value added. Using this formula, we define a real
effective exchange rate for trade in value added. The value-added REER differs from the
conventional REER both in the data used to construct weights to aggregate bilateral price
changes and in the measure of price changes themselves. Our formula uses trade measured
in value added terms to construct bilateral weights, whereas the conventional formula uses
gross trade flows. To construct these weights, we use global input-output tables assembled
by Johnson and Noguera (2012b). Further, we use prices of real value added (GDP deflators)
to measure price changes, whereas the conventional formula uses changes in consumer prices
as a proxy for gross output prices.
    Despite these differences, the formula we derive ‘looks like’ conventional Armington-based
REER formulas. This may seem initially surprising given that we derive the formula from a
model with both input and demand linkages across borders. The key insight is that, under
several parametric assumptions, the gross model collapses to a model in which consumers
have preferences defined directly over value added. That is, we can interpret our value-
added REER as if it were derived from an Armington-style framework in which countries
produce differentiated value added and consumers purchase value added directly from each
source country. We emphasize that this result depends on several key assumptions, including
having equal elasticities of substitution in production and demand. After presenting the main
results, we examine how REER formulas change as we relax these elasticity assumptions and
document that our main conclusions are robust to alternative elasticity assumptions.5
    Our empirical analysis produces these new value-added REERs for 42 countries from 1970
to 2009 and compares them to conventional REERs. We find significant differences between
alternative indexes, and these differences appear informative about external adjustment (or
lack thereof) in salient examples. For example, we find that the US value-added REER
has depreciated more than the conventional REER since 2000, whereas Chinese value-added
REER has appreciated more than the conventional REER. Within Europe, we find that the
German value-added REER has appreciated more than the conventional REER since 1995,
while the opposite is true in Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain.
Johnson, and Yi (2010, 2011), Johnson (2012), Johnson and Noguera (2012a, 2012b).
   5
     As we relax assumptions, we generate alternative formulas and empirical weights for constructing REERs
that do not use value added trade flows directly, but use data on global input-output linkages instead.



                                                    3
    To get insight into these differences, we decompose the gaps into components due to
differences between gross and value-added trade weights versus differences between CPIs
and value-added prices. We show that gaps are driven mostly by our theory-motivated shift
from CPIs to value-added prices. Changes in weights, while sizable and intuitively consistent
with anecdotes about the expansion of global supply chains, do not play a large role.6 The
reason is that changes in weights are weakly correlated with price changes vis-à-vis bilateral
partners. The corollary is that even substantial deepening of global supply chains may
have small additional effects on gaps between conventional and value-added REERs if future
changes are proportional to past changes across partners.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1 we outline the basic framework underlying
construction of value added REERs. In Section 2, we discuss the intuition lying behind the
value added formulas and link our indexes to existing practice. Section 3 then describes
the data, and Section 4 presents results on similarities and differences between our indexes
and conventional REERs. We present extensions of our approach under relaxed parametric
assumptions in Section 5, and Section 6 concludes the paper.


1       Deriving the Real Effective Exchange Rate
This section presents a framework for computing real effective exchange rates with traded
intermediate inputs. The framework includes many countries, each of which produces an
aggregate Armington differentiated good that is used as a final good and an intermediate
input in production. This Armington framework is chosen explicitly to facilitate comparisons
to existing theory and practice for constructing REERs.7
    In Section 1.1, we describe the basic economic environment and construct linear approx-
imations of the key equations needed to derive real exchange rate formulas. In Section 1.2,
we focus a restricted case of the framework in which elasticities of substitution are equal
in preferences and production functions.8 With this restriction, we derive a formula that
links demand for value added to prices of value added through a system of value-added
trade weights. In doing so, we rely heavily on methods for working with global input-output
frameworks developed in Bems, Johnson, and Yi (2010, 2011), Johnson (2012), and Johnson
and Noguera (2012a, 2012b). We translate these results into a formula for the value-added
REER in Section 1.3.
    6
     For example, weights attached to Canada and Mexico for the United States value-added REER fall
relative to gross weights. More generally, declines in weights are larger for nearby countries and countries
that have signed regional trade agreements.
   7
     We discuss the relationship between our approach and existing practice further in Section 2.3.
   8
     We discuss the consequences of relaxing these elasticity restrictions in Section 5.



                                                     4
1.1     Framework
We consider a partial equilibrium environment. We take changes in the price of value added
from each source country and real final expenditure in each destination as given. As is
standard, we then take price changes from data and set changes in final expenditure to zero
in computing the model-based real effective exchange rate. This approach requires us to
specify only three basic components of the economic environment: (1) preferences over final
goods, (2) production functions for gross output, and (3) market clearing conditions for gross
output.

1.1.1    Economic Environment

Suppose there are many countries indexed by i, j, k ∈ {1, . . . , N }. Each country is endowed
with a production function for an aggregate Armington differentiated good, which is used
both as a final good and intermediate input. Gross output in country i, denoted Qi , is
produced by combining domestic real value added, denoted Vi , with a composite intermediate
input, denoted Xi . This composite input is a bundle of domestic and imported inputs, where
inputs purchased by country i from country j are denoted Xji .
    We assume that the production structure takes the nested constant elasticity of subsitu-
tion (CES) form:
                                                                       γ/(γ−1)
                                          (γ−1)/γ               (γ−1)/γ
                         Qi = (ωiv )1/γ Vi        + (ωix )1/γ Xi                                      (1)
                                                                     !ρ/(ρ−1)
                                          X  ωji x 1/ρ
                                                             (ρ−1)/ρ
                          with Xi =                       Xji                 ,                       (2)
                                            j
                                                 ωix

where the ω’s are aggregation weights, γ is the elasticity of substitution between real value
added and the composite input, and ρ is the elasticity of substitution among inputs.
   We assume that agents in each country have CES preferences defined of over final goods.9
Denoting the quantity of final goods purchased by country i from country j as Fji , preferences
take the form:                                            !σ/(σ−1)
                                    X f           (σ−1)/σ
                             Fi =      (ωji )1/σ Fji               ,                        (3)
                                          j

where ω’s here denote preference weights and σ is the elasticity of substitution among final
goods.
   9
    Final goods are defined as in the national accounts, including consumption, investment, and govern-
ment spending. Therefore, though we call the final goods aggregator ‘preferences’ throughout the paper, it
might more accurately be described an aggregator that forms a composite final good that can be used for
consumption, investment, and government spending.

                                                    5
    Our choice of CES preferences and technologies here follows the vast majority of papers
in international macroeconomics.10 As written above, we allow the elasticity of substitution
to differ between preferences and production, and within nests in the production structure.
We impose additional restrictions on these elasticities in Section 1.2, and analyze this general
case in Section 5.
    Given these preferences and technology, the standard first order conditions for consumers
and competitive firms are:
                                                          −σ
                                                   f   pj
                                          Fji =   ωji          Fi                                           (4)
                                                       Pi
                                                      v −γ
                                                  v   pi
                                           V i = ωi           Qi                                            (5)
                                                      pi
                                                      x −γ
                                                   x  pi
                                          X i = ωi             Qi                                           (6)
                                                       pi
                                                      −ρ
                                                  x    pj
                                          Xji = ωji            Xi ,                                         (7)
                                                       pxi

where pj is the price of gross output from j, pvi is the price of the composite factor, pxi =
P           1/(1−ρ)                                               P          1/(1−σ)
       x 1−ρ                                                              f 1−σ
    j ωji pj          is the price of the composite input, and Pi =    j ωji pj          is the
final goods price level. In the background, we implicitly assume that all prices are converted
into a common currency so that we do not have to carry around the nominal exchange rate.
    Recalling that gross output can be used as both a final good and intermediate input, the
market clearing condition for gross output is:

                                                 N
                                                 X
                                          Qj =          [Fjk + Xjk ] .                                      (8)
                                                  k=1


Finally, using the gross production function and prices defined above, we can write the prices
                                                       1/(1−γ)
of gross output as: pj = wjv (pvj )1−γ + wjx (pxj )1−γ          .

1.1.2    Linear Approximation

To derive the real exchange rate formula, we linearize the first order conditions, price indexes,
production functions, and market clearing conditions. We present the linearization here in
  10
     A subtle point worth mentioning is that our derivation proceeds under the assumption that productivity
raises output of real value added, but does not directly increase the efficiency with which real value added and
inputs are combined. This assumption allows us to derive a formula for the real exchange rate that depends
only on observed prices of real value added. Neutral technological change would imply that competitiveness
depends on price changes and technology shocks separately.



                                                        6
‘stacked’ form that facilitates manipulation of the many country system.11
     The final goods first order conditionand  final goods price index can be linearized as:
                                        P pj Fji
F̂ji = −σ(p̂j − P̂i ) + F̂i , with P̂i = j Pi Fi p̂j . We then define a vector F to be a N 2
                                                                                                              0
dimensional vector that records final goods shipments: F̂ = [F̂11 , F̂12 , . . . , F̂1N , F̂21 , F̂22 , . . .] .
This allows us to rewrite the first order conditions and price index as:

                                      F̂ = −σM1 p̂ + σM2 P̂ + M2 F̂                                         (9)
                                             with P̂ = Wf p̂,                                              (10)

where M1 ≡ IN ×N ⊗ 1N ×1 and M2 ≡ 1N ×1 ⊗ IN ×N . The weighting matrix Wf is an N × N
                             p F
matrix with ij elements Pji Fjii equal to country i’s expenditure on final goods from country j
as a share of total final goods expenditure in country i.
    Turning to production, the first order conditions for intermediates linearize as: X̂i =
−γ(p̂xi − p̂i ) + Q̂i and X̂ji = −ρ(p̂j − p̂xi ) + X̂i .12 These can be stacked in a similar way:

                                           X̂ = −γ p̂x + γ p̂ + Q̂                                         (11)
                                     X̂ = −ρM1 p̂ + ρM2 p̂x + M2 X̂                                        (12)
                                             with p̂x = Wx p̂,                                             (13)

                                                      0
where X̂ = [X̂11 , X̂12 , . . . , X̂1N , X̂21 , X̂22 , . . .] is the N 2 dimensional vector of intermediate
goods shipments.
    These first order conditions describe how demand for final and intermediate goods shipped
from country i depends on the prices of gross output (p̂) from each source, as well as the
‘level of demand’ in the destination. For intermediate goods, the level of demand depends
on total gross output produced in the destination (Q̂), while real final goods absorption (F̂ )
influences the level of demand for final goods.
    The market clearing conditions can be linearized as:

                                             Q̂ = SF F̂ + SX X̂.                                           (14)

The SF and SX matrices collect shares of final and intermediate goods sold to each destination
  11
    Johnson (2012) uses a similar stacked notation in the analysis of a many country IRBC model.
  12
    We do not explicitly linearize the first order condition for real value added (Vi ) here because we do not
use it in the derivation.




                                                          7
as a share of total gross output in the source country:
                                                                                                
                             sf 0             ···                    sx 0                    ···
                            1     f                               1     x
                                                                                                   
                            0 s2
                      SF ≡                   · · ·                0 s2
                                                          and SX ≡                          · · ·
                              ..                                      ..
                                                                                                  
                                              ..                                             ..
                               . ···              .                    . ···                     .
                                                                                  pi Fij
                               with sfi = [sfi1 , · · · , sfiN ],       sfij =           ,
                                                                                  pi Qi
                                                                            pi Xij
                                   sxi = [sxi1 , · · · , sxiN ],   sxij =          .
                                                                            pi Q i

   Finally, we linearize components of the production function and the gross output price
index as:

                                    Q̂ = [diag(svi )]V̂ + [diag(sxi )]X̂                               (15)
                                                    X̂ = WX X̂                                         (16)
                                    p̂ = [diag(svi )]p̂v + [diag(sxi )]p̂x ,                           (17)

              pv V               px X
where svi ≡ piiQii and sxi ≡ pii Qii are the cost shares of real value added and the composite
input in gross output. And WX = [diag(w1x ), diag(w2x ), . . .] with wix = [wi1x            x
                                                                                 , · · · , wiN ] and
  x   pi Xij
wij ≡ px Xj are shares of individual intermediates in the composite intermediate.
        j




1.2     Demand for Real Value Added
Equations (9)-(17) are nine equations that describe how demand for value added produced
by each country depends on prices of value added p̂v and final demand F̂ in all countries.
To derive an intuitive formula for demand, we impose one additional restriction here. We
assume that elasticities are equal in preferences and production functions: σ = γ = ρ and
we therefore define a new common elasticity parameter η.13
    The derivation then proceeds in two steps. First, we use the first order conditions and
price index to write the change in demand for gross output from country i as a function of
price changes of gross output. Second, we convert demand for gross output as a function
of gross output prices into the corresponding demand for real value added as a function of
prices of real value added.
    In Appendix A, we show that Equations (9)-(17) plus the common elasticity assumption
  13
    The assumption that the elasticity of substitution is the same in aggregation of final and intermediate
inputs is common in the trade literature. The assumption that elasticity for aggregation of factors and the
composite input – i.e., Vi and Xi – is the same as the elasticity among inputs themselves is less standard.
We discuss relaxation of both assumptions in Section 5.



                                                           8
imply that demand for real value added is given by:

       V̂ = −η p̂v + η[diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 Wf [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]p̂v
                                                                                                      (18)
            + [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 F̂ ,

                                                                                            pX
where Ω is a global bilateral input-output matrix with ij elements pij Qijj equal to the share
of intermediate inputs from country i in gross output in country j. Equation (18) describes
how demand for value added from each source country depends on prices and the level of
demand for final goods in all countries.


1.3       The Value-Added Real Effective Exchange Rate
Two additional steps turn Equation (18) into a real effective exchange rate formula. First,
following standard practice, we set changes in real final demand F̂ to zero. This means that
the real exchange rate measures the influence of price changes on demand, holding levels of
final demand constant. Second, we adopt a country-specific normalization so that weights
on price changes sum to one.14 This normalization ensures that the real effective exchange
rate depreciates by x% when all foreign prices increase by x% relative to the domestic price.
We discuss intuition for this type of normalization in Section 2.2.1.
    To perform the normalization, we split the weighting matrix attached to price changes
into the product of a weight matrix, with weights that sum to one, and second matrix
containing country-specific normalizations. To keep the notation simple, we define a short-
hand notation for the weighting matrix:

             T ≡ I − [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 Wf [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )].      (19)

Then the change in demand for real value added induced by a change in prices is:
                                                          X Tij
                                           V̂i = −η T̄i             p̂vj ,                            (20)
                                                          j
                                                              T̄i

                                         P
where Tij is the ij element and T̄i ≡      j Tij is the row sum of T . We then define the
value-added real effective exchange rate as:
                                                               X Tij
                                     ∆ log(V AREERi ) ≡                            p̂vj .             (21)
                                                                    j
                                                                             T̄i
  14
   This follows standard practice laid out in McGuirk (1987) and Bayoumi, Jayanthi, and Lee (2006),
among others.



                                                      9
The parameters T̄i and η translate changes in the VAREER into changes in demand for real
                                    T
value added. The bilateral weights T̄iji capture the effects on bilateral relative price changes
on demand in all markets, including the domestic market, partner country’s market, and
third markets.


2       Interpreting Demand for Value Added
The key to interpreting the VAREER formula is understanding how demand for value added
depends on price changes, as encoded in Equation (18). We approach this from two comple-
mentary directions. First, we provide a general interpretation emphasizing that demand for
value added takes the CES form under the assumptions above, as if preferences were defined
directly over consumption of value added. Second, we discuss variations of Equation (18)
in two special cases. We then close this section by describing how the value-added REER
formulas we present differ from current practice.


2.1       CES Demand for Value Added
Equation (18) says that each country faces a single CES demand schedule for the value added
it produces, as if each country sells value added to a single world market.15 To see this, let
us rewrite Equation (18) as:
                        
       V̂ = −η p̂v − P̂ w + F̂ w

       with P̂ w ≡ [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 Wf [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]p̂v   (22)
       and F̂ w ≡ [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 F̂ .

The vectors P̂ w and F̂ w contain the aggregate price levels and final demand levels for each
country in exporting to the hypothetical world market. We note here that the hypothetical
world market is different for each source country, and elaborate below.
    Demand for value added from country i falls when the price of its own value added rises,
all else constant, with an elasticity of η. How much demand falls given this price change
depends on how each country’s own price change compares to the change in the aggregate
price level of value added on the hypothetical world market. The change in the aggregate
price level as perceived by country i is the ith element of P̂ w , which is a source-specific
weighted average of price changes for value added originating from all countries.
 15
      Our interpretation here mimics logic in Anderson and Yotov (2010).




                                                    10
    The weighting scheme for mapping from p̂v to P̂ w has two components. The first compo-
nent is: Wf [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]. Using the price indices for gross output and the composite
input, one can show that p̂ = [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]p̂v .16 So then the term [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]
converts prices of value added into prices for gross output. Combining this with final expen-
diture share weights Wf yields the price level for final demand in each destination market as
weighted average   of prices of value added from all sources. The weighting scheme takes the
            P  pvk Vkj  v
form: P̂j = k Pj Fj p̂k , where Vkj is the amount of real value added from k embodied in
final goods absorbed in j.17
    The second component is: [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 . Each ij element
records the share of gross output from each source country i used directly or indirectly to
produce final goods absorbed in destination j. These weights are equal to the share of value
                                                                               pv V
added from source i absorbed embodied in final goods in destination j: piv Viji . That is, they
                                                                                 i
are export shares measured in value added terms. These shares measure the importance of
destination j in demand for value added from source i. The level of perceived demand (F̂ w )
is also computed using these value-added export shares.18
    Combining these elements, we can re-write Equation (22) in summation notation as:
                                        
                     V̂i = −η p̂vi − P̂iw + F̂iw
                                   X  pv Vij                             X pv Vkj
                             w              i                                    k
                     with P̂i =              v
                                                    P̂j    where P̂j =                   p̂vk ,
                                      j
                                          p  i V i
                                                                            k
                                                                                Pj F j                     (23)
                                   X  pv Vij 
                                          i
                     and F̂iw =                    F̂j .
                                    j
                                         pvi Vi

Setting F̂j = 0 for all j, this can be manipulated to write the definition of the VAREER in
  16
     This uses Equations (13) and (17), along with the fact that diag(sxi )WX = Ω0 .
  17
               P pv V
     Note that k Pkj Fkjj = 1, since final goods are 100% value added attributable to some source country.
  18
     This weighting scheme is identical to the final demand weights in Bems, Johnson, and Yi (2010). In
that paper, we assumed that technology and preferences were both Leontief (i.e., η = 0). Hence demand
for value added depended on value-added exports weighted changes in final demand, but was independent
of price changes in that paper. An alternative way to interpret Bems et al. is that we assumed that price
changes were zero (i.e., p̂ = 0). Equation (18) generalizes this result by dropping this restrictive assumption.




                                                      11
a form that mimics commonly used formulas:
                                  "                            v          !                  #
                                           1 X pvi Vik              pj Vjk
                                      X            
                                                                                 p̂vi − p̂j
                                                                                          v
                                                                                            
                     V̂i = −η T̄i                        v
                                    j6=i
                                          T̄i k        p i Vi       P k Fk
                                  |                            {z                               }
                                                   ∆ log(V AREERi )                                     (24)
                                         X  pv Vik   pv Vik 
                                                i              i
                     with T̄i = 1 −              v
                                                                        ,
                                         k
                                              p  i V i        P k Fk


                                           P P  pvi Vik   pvj Vjk 
where we have used the fact that              j    k   pvi Vi   Pk Fk
                                                                         = 1 to define T̄i .19 Thus, the
VAREER captures a normalized version of the relative price change P̂ w − p̂v .
    One final point is that this CES-demand interpretation suggests an alternative way to
derive the main REER result. Specifically, the same formulas can be derived from pref-
erences specified directly over value added coming from different countries, as in Fi =
P                     η/(η−1)
         v 1/η (η−1)/η                   v
    j (ω ji ) V ji              , where ωji is now a value-added preference weight. These prefer-
ences generate a CES demand system that can be combined with market clearing conditions
for value added to yield Equation (23). Thus, one can in the end re-interpret the VAREER
formula as derived from an Armington demand system for value added.20


2.2     Interpretation in Two Special Cases
To aid in understanding the value-added REER formula, we discuss variations on Equations
(18) and (23) in two special cases. The first case has no intermediate inputs in production,
which facilitates interpretation of the weighting of price changes in REER formulas. The
second case allows for input trade, but assumes imports are used to produce exports for
only one bilateral pair. This case allows us to discuss how vertical specialization influences
computation of REERs in a simple concrete case.
  19
     We follow convention here and write the real exchange rate index so that increases mean appreciation
and decreases mean depreciation.
  20
     We have chosen to take the more general approach of specifying the framework in gross terms for two
reasons. First, in the abstract, it is difficult to motivate the assumption that consumers have preferences
defined directly over value added from particular sources. One contribution of our derivation is then to show
that in fact these direct preferences over value added emerge from a gross model under certain assumptions.
Second, CES preferences over value added emerge from the framework only under the assumption that the
elasticity of substitution is the same in production and preferences. The full gross framework allows us to
explore the robustness of our value-added approach to relaxation of this assumption, as in Section 5.




                                                       12
2.2.1    Case I: no intermediate inputs

Suppose that we apply Equation (18) in a model with no intermediates, so that Ω is a matrix
of zeros. In this example, value added is equal to gross output, so Qi = Vi and hence pi = pvi .
Further, exports consist entirely of final goods, which are themselves produced entirely out
                                P
of domestic value added: Vi = j Fij .
    Demand for value added is given by: V̂ = −η [I − SF M2 Wf ] p̂v + SF M2 F̂ . Setting F̂ to
zero and re-writing this in summation notation, we get:

                                             X  pv Fij                       X  pv Fkj 
                                                   i                                 k
                  V̂i =       −η p̂vi   +η                  P̂j   with P̂j =                  p̂vk   (25)
                                              j
                                                  pvi Vi                        k
                                                                                    P j Fj

And note that we could replace pvi Fij with gross exports EXij or pvi Vi with pi Qi in the
formula because the model makes no distinction between final goods, gross output, or value
                          EX
added.21 Essentially, pv Viji is the share of value-added exports in total value added in this
                           i
case.
    To see how the weighting system works, let us suppose that only the price of output in
country i changes: p̂vi 6= 0 and p̂vk = 0 ∀k 6= i. In this event, the amount by which aggregate
                                               pv F
prices rise in each destination is P̂j = Pij Fijj p̂vi . Note that the increase in the destination
market price is larger when i has a large market share in j. A large destination market
share softens the extent to which country i loses market share in the destination, because it
is essentially competing against itself. When competition is stiff and country i has only a
small share of the destination, then any change in its price leads to a large decline in demand
in the destination. To aggregate individual changes in competitiveness across markets, each
market is weighted according to how much country i sells to the destination.
    This basic weighting scheme underlies construction of REERs. However, REERs do not
use these weights directly, but rather use a modified version of these weights that sum to
one. To illustrate the purpose of this normalization, consider a different experiment. Suppose
that all foreign   prices double   (p̂vk = 1 ∀ k 6= i), but price in country i is unchanged. Then
        P  pvi Fij  h     v i
                             p F                                           P pv F
V̂i = η j pv Vi        1 − Pij Fijj , where we have used the fact that k Pkj Fkjj = 1. Then the
               i
effective relative price change is less than one.22 Thus, a doubling of foreign prices does not
lead to a doubling of the effective relative price. The conventional normalization introduced
in Section 1.3 eliminates this problem.
  21
     As written, Equation (25) also holds in a case with domestic inputs, but no trade in inputs. In that
alternative case, pvi Fij
                       =    EX
                               hij continues  to hold, but pvi Vi 6= pi Qi .
                           v
                                       v i
  22
                  P       p F           p F
     To be clear: j piv Viji      1 − Pij Fijj   < 1.
                          i




                                                             13
2.2.2     Case II: restricted input trade

We now turn to a case in which there are no domestic intermediates, but there is restricted
trade in inputs. We assume that country 1 exports inputs to country 2, and no other country
exports or imports inputs. Put differently, Ω12 > 0 is the only non-zero element of Ω. In
this event, Equation (23) is the correct formula for demand, so we focus on interpreting it
in this special case.
    Starting with destination price indexes (P̂j ), computing Wf [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )] yields the
weights to attach to value added prices. These can be written in the form:
                                                                                                 X  pk Fkj 
                        p1 F1j + p2 F2j Ω12                       p2 F2j (1 − Ω12 )
            P̂j =                                  p̂v1   +                                p̂v2   +               p̂vk .   (26)
                               Pj F j                                   Pj F j                      k6=1,2
                                                                                                           Pj Fj

Here the weight on p̂v1 is adjusted upwards and the weight on p̂2 is adjusted downward
relative to the share of final goods imported from each country by j. This reflects the fact
that country 1 ships inputs to country 2 that are embodied in final goods shipments F2j .
Therefore, the fraction Ω12 of F2j is value added originating in country 1.23
    These price indexes get weighted by [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 in con-
structing the hypothetical world price index. For country 1, demand for real value added
can be written as:
                                           X  p1 F1j + Ω12 p2 F2j 
                                     v
                          V̂1 = −η p̂1 + η                           P̂j ,                (27)
                                           j
                                                      p 1 Q 1


where P̂j is given by Equation (26).
    How do we interpret the destination weights? Note that p1 Q1 = pv1 V1 and p1 F1j +
Ω12 p2 F2j = pv1 V1j for country 1, so these destination weights are simply equal to the share of
                                                            pv V
value added from country 1 consumed in country j (i.e., p1v V1j1 ). Some of the value added from
                                                             1
country 1 (pv1 V1j ) is consumed directly in final goods shipped from country 1 (p1 F1 j), and
some of it is consumed indirectly embodied in final goods shipped from country 2 (Ω12 p2 F2j ).
    Turning to country 2, demand for real value added can be written as:

                                                          X  p2 F2j 
                                 V̂2 =   −η p̂v2   +η                          P̂j ,
                                                              j
                                                                      p2 Q 2
                                                          X  (1 − Ω12 )p2 F2j                                            (28)
                                     =   −η p̂v2   +η                                             P̂j .
                                                              j
                                                                      (1 − Ω12 )p2 Q2

From the first to the second line, we simply multiply and divide the destination weight by
  23
    Linking this back to notation in Equation (23), p1 V1j = p1 F1j + p2 F2j Ω12 , p2 V2j = p2 F2j (1 − Ω12 ), and
Vkj = pk Fkj for k 6= 1, 2.


                                                                   14
                                                  p F                                  pv V
1 − Ω12 to convert the gross output share p22 Q2j2 into a value added share p2v V2j2 . So these
                                                                               2
weights also equal the share of value added from country 2 consumed in j.
    In both cases, destinations are weighted by value-added trade shares, which means that
these shares tell us how important destination j is as a source of demand for country i.
Further, the share of value added from i in final spending in j captures how important price
changes in i are in determining the price level in j. The takeaway from this example is trade
measured in value added terms captures how production linkages influence evaluations of
competitiveness. When inputs are traded, neither final goods shipments nor gross exports
suffice to evaluate competitiveness.


2.3     Conventional Real Effective Exchange Rates
Stepping back, we pause to discuss current approaches to construction of real exchange
rate indexes.24 Constructing the REER requires making choices about (a) how to measure
relative price changes, and (b) what weights to attach to those price changes.
    Starting with prices, there is wide agreement among data providers: the Federal Re-
serve, OECD, ECB, BIS and IMF all construct their main index using aggregate consumer
price indexes (CPIs).25 This choice is typically motivated by pragmatism, not theory. The
motivation for constructing REERs – i.e., measuring competitiveness (with or without inter-
mediates) – suggests that one would like to measure the price of output supplied by a country
to world markets. Since the CPI includes the price both of what a country produces as well
as what it consumes through imports, it seems ill-suited to this purpose.26 In contrast, we
use value-added prices, as proxied by GDP deflators, which are more consistent with the
underlying theory.
    There is much less agreement among data providers about what weights to use in con-
struction of the REER index. Most use weights intended to capture the implications of
price changes for competitiveness (i.e., demand) as we do. However, details regarding how
weights are constructed and how/whether different sectors are included differ substantially.
  24
     On methods used, see Loretan (2005) for the Federal Reserve, De Clercq, Fidora, Lauro, Pinheiro, and
Schmitz (2012) for the ECB, and Durand, Simon, and Webb (1992) for the OECD. References for the IMF
are included below.
  25
     Some use unit labor costs, producer prices or GDP deflators in supplemental indexes. For example,
the ECB publishes a ‘Harmonised Competitiveness Indicators based on GDP deflators’ in addition to its
CPI-based index. In contrast to our method that emphasizes that one should combine value added trade
weights with GDP deflators, the ECB uses gross trade weights to construct both its CPI and GDP deflator
indexes.
  26
     Using our input-output framework, one could in principle convert demand-side prices into supply-side
prices. This would then allow one to use measured demand-side prices in constructing the REER. Impor-
tantly, the reduced form weights attached to demand-side price changes would not equal the value added
weights that we use.


                                                   15
One point of common ground is that all data providers use gross trade data to construct the
weights.
    The REER index that most closely matches the approach we take is provided by the
IMF.27 The IMF constructs weights using an analog to Equation (24) for manufactures and
a subset of services.28 In the language of Section 2, the IMF constructs both destination
weights and market shares using data on gross sales. Gross sales for country i to country j
is measured using gross export data (i.e., Salesij ≡ EXij ), and gross sales for country i to
                                                                                  P
itself is constructed as gross output minus total gross exports (Salesii = pi Qi − j6=i EXij ).
Using these gross sales and CPIs, we can define an IMF-style analog to Equation (24):
                                                            ! 
                           X       1 X Salesik      Salesjk                                 
       ∆ log(REERi ) =                             P                p̂cpi
                                                                      i   − Ê i/j − p̂ cpi
                                                                                        j
                           j6=i
                                  T̃i k   pi Qi      l Saleslk
                                                                                                         (29)
                      X  Salesik   Salesik 
       with T̃i = 1 −                P          ,
                      k
                           p i Qi     l Saleslk


where Ei/j is the nominal exchange rate that converts CPIs into a common currency. Hence-
forth we refer to REERi as the ‘conventional REER.’
    Given discussion in previous sections, the natural question here is: what does this con-
ventional REER measure? Under the assumption that consumers have preferences defined
over gross output, plus the counter-factual assumptions that changes in gross output prices
equal changes in value added prices and that trade in value added equals gross trade, then
Equation (29) could be interpreted as a measure of competitiveness for gross output. Our
framework does not impose these restrictions, and therefore does not lead to this interpre-
tation. Furthermore, our framework does not yield the REER formula in Equation (29) to
describe demand for value added under any assumptions about input use. The discussion
above demonstrates that Equation (29) does not emerge under either the assumption that
there are no inputs used in production, or the assumption that both domestic and foreign
inputs are used in production. We show in Appendix B that it also does not emerge if only
domestic inputs are used in production. Further, as we discuss below, the use of consumer
prices in place of gross output prices is not an innocuous substitution.
  27
     The theory underlying the IMF index is described in McGuirk (1987), Desruelle and Zanello (1997), and
Bayoumi, Jayanthi, and Lee (2005).
  28
     The IMF treats commodities and tourism differently. The index assumes that commodities are homoge-
neous and adjusts weights accordingly, and it uses information on tourist arrivals to construct tourism trade
shares. It then aggregates weights for manufactures/services, commodities, and tourism based on shares in
total trade. Finally, it is worth noting that the IMF does not directly use data for the bulk of trade in ser-
vices. Rather it calculates bilateral weights for manufactures, and applies these shares to both manufactures
and services.



                                                     16
3      Data
To compute the conventional and value-added REERs, we need two main pieces of data.
First, we need trade measured in both gross and value-added terms. For this, we rely on a
new dataset tracking trade in value added over the 1970-2009 period developed in Johnson
and Noguera (2012b). Second, we need data on price changes, which we take from standard
sources. We describe both pieces of data in turn.


3.1     Trade and Input-Output Data
Johnson and Noguera (2012b) assembles an annual sequence of global input-output tables
covering 42 countries and a composite rest-of-the-world region from 1970 to 2009.29 We
briefly summarize their data sources and general approach here, and refer the interested
reader to that paper for details.
    Raw data on production, trade, demand, and input-output linkages comes from several
sources, including the OECD Input-Output Database, the UN National Statistics Database,
the NBER-UN Trade Database, and the CEPII BACI Database. Johnson and Noguera
harmonize these sources at the four-sector level to create a sequence of internally consis-
tent annual national input-output tables and bilateral trade datasets.30 In each year, they
then link the national input-output tables together using the bilateral trade data to form a
synthetic global input-output table.31 This global table tracks shipments of both final and
intermediate goods between countries.
    The resulting framework contains all the non-price information needed to parameterize
the model in Section 1.1 and calculate trade in value added and weighting matrices at an
annual frequency. This allows us to construct REERs with time-varying weights. Following
the approach used by the Federal Reserve Board, described in Lorentan (2005), we aggregate
relative price changes in each period using a weight matrix based on trade flows for that
period.
  29
     The 42 countries include the OECD plus major emerging markets (including Brazil, China, India, Mexico,
and Russia). Remaining countries are aggregated into a composite rest-of-the-world. Because they do not
have input-output data for these countries, they assume that all exports from the 42 countries to the rest-of-
the-world are absorbed there. Further, data for the Czech Republic, Estonia, Russia, Slovakia, and Slovenia
only becomes available from the early 1990’s. These countries are included in the rest-of-the-world composite
during the first two decades. Overall, the rest-of-the-world region accounts for about 10-15% of world trade
and GDP in most years.
  30
     The four composite sectors include agriculture and natural resources, non-manufacturing industrial pro-
duction, manufacturing, and services.
  31
     To do this, Johnson and Noguera make two proportionality assumptions within each sector. First, they
split imports from each source country between final and intermediate use by applying the average split
across all sources for that destination. Second, they split those imported intermediates across purchasing
sectors by applying shares of total imported intermediate use in the destination.


                                                     17
3.2     Price Data
We take price data from several sources. Value-added (GDP) deflators, consumer price in-
dexes, and nominal exchange rates are from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook database.
All data are annual and expressed as period averages. These are available for each sample
country. Because there is no price data for the rest-of-the-world region, this region is ex-
cluded from the REER computations. In doing so, we follow the standard practice in the
construction of narrow indexes and renormalize the weights for the remaining countries to
add to 1. Finally, in one figure below we use data on price indexes for gross output, which
we obtain from the EU KLEMS database.


4      Computing the Value-Added REER
To recap, our VAREER differs from the conventional REER in two ways: the weights at-
tached to bilateral relative price changes, and the measure of prices changes themselves.
We open this section by comparing data on weights and prices directly. We then combine
these data to compute both conventional and value-added REERs and decompose differences
between them.


4.1     Differences in Weights
We compute weights attached to bilateral price changes as in Equation (24) for the VAREER
and Equation (29) for the conventional REER. These weights are a normalized combination
of destination weights and market share weights. Because we are interested in comparing
the two approaches, we focus on differences in the weights in this section. In Table 1, we
report differences between the VAREER weights and the conventional REER weights across
alternative destinations for each source country in 2005.32 Because weights for both the
VAREER and REER are normalized to sum to one, the rows of the table sum to zero. Thus,
this table captures reallocation in weights across bilateral partners.
    Bilateral weights generally move in intuitive directions, falling among partners for which
the ratio of value-added to gross bilateral trade is relatively low.33 Consider a few examples.
For the United States, the weight attached to Canada and Mexico falls by 5.6 percentage
points and rises correspondingly across other partners. For France, the weight on Eurozone
  32
     We report results for a few large countries separately and group remaining countries into composite
regions.
  33
     See Johnson and Noguera (2012a, 2012b, 2012c) for extensive analysis of the ratio of value-added to gross
trade. The results we document below regarding how VAREER versus REER weights adjust within/outside
regions, for pairs with RTAs, and with distance all echo those results.


                                                     18
partners falls by 7 percentage points, with the largest increase in weight on the United
States. Similar patterns hold for other European countries. Asian countries (e.g., Japan and
Korea) see declines in weights attached to China. In all these cases, gross trade flows and
conventional REER weights are inflated relative to value added weights due to production
sharing.
    Flipping perspective in the table, destinations systematically differ in whether they re-
ceive larger or smaller weights. Weights attached to the United States systematically rise,
consistent with the idea that the U.S. is downstream in the production chain. Weights
attached to the Eurozone systematically fall for both Eurozone and Other EU source coun-
tries, reflecting the tight integration of the European production structure and hence double-
counting in gross cross-border flows. Weights attached to China sometimes rise and some-
times fall, with declines concentrated among Asian source countries.
    One message that emerges from this discussion is that adjustments appear to be larger
within regions than across them. We document this result explicitly in Table 2. For each
country, we compute weights attached to broad regions (Asia, EU, NAFTA, and Other) by
summing across partners within those regions, and then we compute the mean weight across
source countries within each region. Results indicate that the typical Asian country sees a
decline in weights attached to other Asian countries of 5.7 percentage points. The declines
for EU and NAFTA countries with intra-regional trade partners is similar, at 6.4 and 5.5
percentage points respectively.
    There are several reasons why geography matters for adjustment of weights. First, re-
gional trade agreements (RTAs) are associated with increased production sharing, lower
value-added to export ratios, and hence declines in weights. In our data, the typical country
has a VAREER weight between 4-5 percentage points lower for countries with which it has
an RTA relative to countries with whom it has no RTA.34 Second, distance tends to be an
impediment to development of cross-border supply chains. Distance to trade partners is
positively correlated with the difference between VAREER and conventional REER weights.
That is, partners that are nearby tend to have the largest declines in VAREER relative to
REER weights, mostly driven by large negative adjustments among relatively close partners
with population-weighted distances of less than 5000km.
    Looking through time, the reassignment of weights is more important now than in the
past. To document this, we compute the ‘city-block distance’ between trade weights mea-
 34
   We use data on trade agreements assembled by Scott Baier and Jeffrey Bergstrand: http://www.nd.
edu/~jbergstr/. We define an RTA to be a free trade agreement or stronger.




                                               19
sured in gross and value added terms for each year and each country as:
                                                    X            g
                                                           v
                                           dit =          wij − wij ,
                                                      j

                 P  pv V   pvj Vjk        g        P  Salesik   Salesjk 
        v
where wij  = T̄1i k piv Viki  Pk Fk
                                        and w ij =  1
                                                        k   p i Qi
                                                                      P           .
                       i                           T̃i                  l Saleslk
   Figure 1 plots this measure over time for the Germany, Japan, and the United States along
with the cross-country median in each year. The extent of reassignment increased slowly
during the 1970-1990 period and then rose rapidly over the last two decades, coincident with
sharp changes in the value added of trade during this later period [Johnson and Noguera
(2012b)].35 This increase implies that to the extent that changing weights matters, we would
expect this to be more important in recent data.


4.2       Differences in Prices
Turning from weights to prices, we compare value-added deflators (used in the VA REER
index) and consumer price indexes (used in the conventional REER index). In Figure 2,
we plot the proportional difference between the aggregate GDP deflator and CPI for several
representative countries from 1990-2009. For each country, we normalize the relative price
of value added to consumer prices to be one in 2000, so the axis should be read as the
cumulative percentage change in value added relative to consumer prices from 2000 levels.
    As is evident, there are large and persistent differences in the alternative price measures.
In Japan and the United States, the price of value added falls relative to consumer prices
over the period, though relative prices level off for the United States after 2000. Spain and
the United Kingdom see rising prices of value added relative to consumer prices. Finally,
Korea sees value added prices first rise then fall relative to consumer prices. Suffice it to
say that these differences imply that switching to prices of value added is likely to generate
differences between the VAREER and conventional REER.
    To interpret differences between CPI and GDP deflator, it is instructive to decompose
the difference into (a) differences between value added versus gross output prices (p̂v − p̂),
and (b) differences between gross output and consumer prices (p̂ − pbcpi ):

                                 p̂v − p̂cpi =       p̂v − p̂        + p̂ − pbcpi .        (30)
                                                     | {z }            | {z }
                                                 VA terms of trade     approximation


    The first component (p̂v − p̂) captures differences between gross output and value added
prices. These differences grow out of the gross versus value added distinction in our frame-
 35
      The increase in reassignment is robust to using alternative distance metrics.

                                                          20
work. Gross output prices are a weighted average of the prices of value added in all countries,
with weights that correspond to cost shares for inputs used directly or indirectly to produce
gross output from different source countries.36 For example, if the value added price (e.g.,
wage) in country i increases, the price of gross output in i will increase less than proportion-
ally since that country uses imported inputs in production. This logic implies that p̂v − p̂
captures changes in the value added terms of trade.
    The second component p̂ − pbcpi captures differences between each country’s gross output
price and its consumer prices. As mentioned above, conventional REER calculations use
consumer prices rather than gross output prices for pragmatic reasons. Therefore, we think
of this price gap as simply reflecting an approximation error that arises when the consumer
price changes are a bad proxy for gross output price changes. There are several reasons why
we might expect this approximation to be imperfect. First, the terms of trade factor in here
as well. Consumer prices are weighted averages of gross output prices from all countries (i.e.,
P̂ = Wf p̂), so changes in the gross output terms of trade drive a wedge consumer prices and
a country’s own gross output price.37 Second, the CPI measures consumer prices rather than
supply-side prices. So, further deviations can be attributed to differences in weights that
the CPI assigns to components of total demand. For example, CPI assigns zero weight to
expenditures on nonresidential investment.
    To illustrate how the gap between value added and consumer prices breaks down in
practice, we plot the components of Equation (30) in Figure 3, focusing on the same six
countries depicted in Figure 2. Both components are important in explaining differences
between value added and consumer prices, though the relative importance of each component
differs across figures. For example, gross output and value added prices track each other
closely in Germany, but growth in consumer prices persistently outstrips growth in either
prices for value added or output over this period. The opposite is true in the United Kingdom.
Other countries like Spain see the exact opposite pattern, where gross output and CPI prices
track each other, and the gap between value added and gross output prices is large.
    Overall, this evidence points to both the distinction between gross output and value
added, as well as the approximation of output prices with consumer prices, as important
in understanding gaps between value added and consumer prices. Explaining differences in
price measures in detail for individual countries lies outside the scope of this paper.
  36
     To be precise, we noted above that p̂ = [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]p̂v . See also the appendix.
  37
     Note that the first component was affected by terms of trade in value added prices, while here the
relevant variable is terms of trade in gross prices.




                                                  21
4.3    Differences in REER Indexes
Combining data on weights and prices, we compute the VAREER and conventional REER
indexes. To focus our discussion, we plot results for some important and much-discussed
exchange rates over the 1995-2009 period: the United States and China in Figure 4 and
selected Eurozone countries in Figures 5 and 6. We plot REER series for all countries in the
Appendix C.
    For each country, we create two figures to emphasize different aspects of the data. One
figure plots the level of the log real exchange rate index over time, with the level of each
series normalized to zero in 1995. This figure is useful for gauging the cumulative effect
of deviations between REER and VAREER growth over time. The second figure plots the
actual annual growth rates in the indexes (i.e., log changes in indexes), along with the
difference in growth rates. In reading these figures, it is helpful to recall that an increase in
the index represents an appreciation of the real exchange rate.
    Starting with Figure 4, we compare real exchange rates for China and the United States.
For China, there are sizable fluctuations in the conventional REER, but no obvious trend.
Since the late 1990s or early 2000s, the REER depreciated then appreciated, but only back
to its initial 2000 level. In contrast, the VAREER registers a significant appreciation of
the Chinese real exchange rate during the 2000s (on the order of 15-20 percentage points)
because it depreciates less sharply during the early 2000s and appreciates more sharply
thereafter. Put differently, there is a persistent gap between changes in the VAREER and
REER for China, as depicted in the right panel. The United States is a mirror reflection
of these relative price movements. Like China, the US VAREER and REER diverge after
2000, but the United States sees a larger depreciation in the VAREER than is picked up by
the conventional REER (on the order of 5-10 percentage points since 2000).
    Turning to Figures 5 and 6 for Europe, we also see significant divergences between VA-
REERs and REERs. Starting with Germany, the VAREER depreciates more strongly over
the post-1995 period than does the conventional REER. At the same time, the VAREER
tends to appreciate more strongly than the VAREER in the Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece,
and Spain (i.e., the PIIGS) over the post-1995 period. The details of these adjustments
naturally vary across countries. For example, the divergence in VAREER vs. REER lev-
els for Ireland can be traced to the late 1990’s, a period in which the REER appreciates
while the VAREER actually depreciates in our data. In contrast, for Spain, the divergence
materializes during the early 2000s, during which the pace of appreciation of the VAREER
outstrips the appreciation as measured by the REER.
    The VAREER diverges from the conventional REER in these important external adjust-
ment episodes. For the US and China, the VAREER moves more strongly in directions that

                                               22
are consistent with rebalancing. For Europe, in contrast, the VAREER moves more strongly
in directions that are consistent with the build-up of imbalances prior to the onset of the
debt crisis. At face value, it thus appears that the VAREER contains useful information on
price developments above and beyond that contained in the conventional REER.
    To summarize the remainder of the data succinctly, we plot changes in VAREERs versus
REERs in Figure 7 over two time horizons (1970-2009 and 1990-2009). Consistent with
the previous figures, VAREER changes are correlated with changes in the REER, but there
are substantial deviations from the 45-degree line. Over the long time horizon (1970-2009),
changes in the VAREER tend to be slightly smaller than changes in the REER, with points
clustered above the 45-degree line in the lower left quadrant and above in the upper right
quadrant. This pattern is weaker in the post-1990 data, however.


4.4     Decomposing Differences in REER Indexes
Digging below the surface of these results, we turn to an examination of the comparative roles
that changing weights versus changing prices play in explaining deviations         in the VAREER  
                                                                          v      v               v
                                                                  P
from the conventional REER. Using ∆ log(V AREERi ) =                    w
                                                                    j6=i ij   p̂ i − Ê i/j − p̂ j   and
                                                
                         g
                             p̂cpi           cpi
                 P
∆ log(REERi ) = j6=i wij       i − Êi/j − p̂j     , we can write the difference as:

                                               X
                                                        v    g
                                                                                               
  ∆ log(V AREERi )−∆ log(REERi ) =                     wij −wij            p̂vi − Êi/j − p̂vj
                                               j6=i
                                               |                       {z                        }
                                                                  weight effect
                                               X            h                                               i     (31)
                                                       g
                                           +          wij        p̂vi − Êi/j − p̂vj − p̂cpi
                                                                                         i   − Ê i/j − p̂ cpi
                                                                                                           j      .
                                               j6=i
                                               |                                  {z                            }
                                                                             price effect


    We plot the levels of these two terms along with the overall difference between the VA-
REER and REER in Figure 8 for the eight countries in previous figures. In all cases, the
price effect clearly is the dominant force driving differences between the VAREER and the
REER. Thus, the shift from using consumer prices to value added prices, not the shift from
gross to value-added trade weights, explains the bulk of the differences.
    To understand why shifting weights does not have a large effect on the real exchange rate,
we highlight two features of the calculation. First, note that the reassignment of weights is
                                         g
                            P      v
                                           
a zero sum exercise, i.e., j6=i wij  − wij   = 0. Therefore, price changes that are uniform
across partners do not have any differential effect on gross versus value-added REERs. For
example, if the nominal exchange rate depreciates against all partners by the same amount,
this has the same effect on gross and value-added REERs. Second, even if price changes


                                                       23
are not identical across destinations, there must be systematic variation between weight
reassignments and changes in relative prices for the reassignment to matter.38 In the data,
this correlation is small for nearly all countries, roughly in range (−0.2, .1) over the 1980-
2009 period. Much larger correlations would be needed to generate significant effects from
shifting weights alone.
    This line of reasoning implies that even considerably larger cross-country reassignments of
trade weights, as in continued expansion of global supply chains, may not have big additional
effects. For example, if future weight changes are proportional to historical changes, then
                                                                   g
                                                             v
                                                                     
this simply re-scales the weight effect, as in multiplying wij − wij   by a constant. If changes
are not proportional to historical changes, then they must be systematically biased in a way
that strengthens the correlation between weight reassignment and bilateral relative price
changes. In other words, our finding that reassignment of trade weights generates small
changes in REERs is likely to continue to hold even as vertical specialization deepens.


4.5      Mapping Price Changes to Demand for Value Added
In both the conventional and value-added REER formulas, we have normalized the weights
to sum to one. Measuring changes in demand for value added then requires us to multiply
the value-added REER by a country-specific normalization term and an elasticity:39

                                       V̂i = −η T̄i ∆ log(V AREERi ).

   To facilitate this computation, we present the normalization terms for 2007 for the VA-
REER and REER in Figure 9. One obvious stylized fact is that normalization terms for the
VAREER are uniformly larger than the normalization terms for the conventional REER.
The reason is that the ratio of value-added to gross sales is lower for domestic relative to
cross-border transactions. The large magnitude of the VAREER normalization term implies
that a one percentage point change in the VAREER has a larger effect on competitiveness
than would be implied by a similar change interpreted via the conventional REER formula.
Another point to note is that these normalization terms vary widely across markets, with
more open economies exhibiting larger T̄i ’s. This means that a given relative price change
has a bigger effect on demand for more open countries.
   Early applications of the conventional REER framework assumed that the trade-based
                                                       
  38                   v       g                                             g 
                                     p̂vi − Êi/j − p̂vj 6= 0 requires wij
                                                                        v
              P
     That is, j6=i wij   − wij                                             − wij  to be positively/negatively corre-
                             
lated with p̂vi − Êi/j − p̂vj .
  39
     Indexes for changes in demand for value added, as implied by the VAREER and conventional REER,
are not reported in the paper, but included in an accompanying data file.


                                                        24
weighting matrix does not vary over time, so that the normalization term, T̄i , is a country-
specific constant. More recently, data providers have shifted toward using time-varying
weights. Time variation in trade weights implies that the country-specific normalization
is time-varying as well. In Figure 10, we plot changes in the normalization terms for the
VAREER and the conventional REER from 1980 to 2007.40 Two results from the figure
are noteworthy. First, there is a significant increase over time in both normalization terms,
reflecting increasing openness and diminishing home bias in final demand. These increases
imply that the impact of a given price change on demand has increased significantly over
the last three decades. Second, the VAREER normalization terms have tended to rise faster
than the conventional REER normalization terms over time. Consequently, the difference in
the impact of a given price change on demand between conventional and value-added REERs
has increased as well.


5      Heterogeneous Elasticities
To derive the value-added real exchange rate formula, we assumed that the elasticity of
substitution is the same in final demand and production. This assumption yields a formula
with weights that depend on value-added trade flows. Relaxing these elasticity assumptions
yields a more general real exchange rate formula, where bilateral weights are a function of
both relative elasticities and trade flows. In this section, we present this general formula and
provide some evidence on the consequences of relaxing the common elasticity assumption.
    The derivation of weights proceeds as before from the linear approximation presented
in Section 1.1.2. After successive substitutions, the system reduces down to the following
formula for demand for value added:

                    V̂ = −η T̃ p̂v + [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 F̂ .                   (32)

The matrix T̃ is the analog to the formula in Equation (19) in this more general case. It is
  40
    We omit the years 2008-2009 in computing these changes because the large, temporary collapse of
international trade during the global recession distorts the long run trend in the data. Results are attenuated,
but essentially unchanged, if those years are included in this figure.




                                                      25
given by:

               σ
       T̃ = − [I − SX M2 ]−1 SF (M1 − M2 Wf ) [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]                               (33)
               η
                                                                    
                         −1     ρ                γ
          − [I − SX M2 ] SX       (M1 − M2 Wx ) + (M2 Wx − M2 ) [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]
                                η                η
                                                                   
                                ρ                γ
                   x v
          + [diag(si /si )]WX     (M1 − M2 Wx ) + (M2 Wx − M2 ) [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]             (34)
                                η                η

where [I − SX M2 ]−1 = [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]. We divide each elasticity by
the ‘aggregate elasticity’ η so as to present the formula in a similar form as in Equations
(18)-(20).41
   Following Section 1.3, we then define the real exchange rate as:

                                                           X T̃ij
                                   ∆ log(IOREERi ) ≡           ¯  p̂vj ,                             (35)
                                                             jT̃  i



where T̃ij is the ij element and T̃¯i ≡ j T̃ij is the row sum of T̃ . We refer to this modified
                                        P

REER as the IOREER to distinguish it from the VAREER. Two aspects of this IOREER
formula are worth noting.
    First, the IOREER formula collapses to the VAREER when there is a common elasticity,
as in η ≡ σ = ρ = γ. In contrast, when elasticities are allowed to differ, the weighting matrix
cannot be computed directly from value added trade flows. Rather, one must use use the
individual components of the global input-output framework (e.g., final goods trade flows,
the global input-output matrix, etc.) separately to compute the bilateral weights, hence our
use of IO (as in input-output) in the name of the index.
    Second, when elasticities are allowed to differ, the bilateral weights depend on the relative
magnitude of relative magnitudes of the elasticities in production and demand. As the
elasticity between final goods rises, more weight is attached to the part of the framework
that captures substitution across final goods in assessing competitiveness, which is intuitive
since small changes in final goods prices lead to large changes in quantities demanded. In
the opposite case, higher elasticities in production raise the weight attached to parts of the
framework describing substitution between value added and intermediate inputs, and among
intermediates themselves. In extreme cases, the formula attaches no weight to substitution in
production if the production function takes the Leontief form (γ = ρ = 0), while it attaches
  41
    The elasticity parameter η here is a model construct, describing the aggregate response of demand for
value added to price changes measured by the real exchange rate. In the special case where σ = γ = ρ,
then the aggregate elasticity equals that common value. For reference below, in the alternative case where
γ = ρ = 0, then η = σ. Similarly, when σ = 0 and γ = ρ, then η = γ = ρ.


                                                   26
no weight to substitution across final goods if preferences are Leontief (σ = 0).
    To compute the IOREER, we need to estimate or make assumptions regarding elasticities
in preferences and production. Our reading of the literature is that there are no off-the-shelf
estimates of these elasticity parameters that we can readily use. Therefore, we focus on
characterizing the measured real exchange in two extreme cases. First, we examine a case
with Leontief production functions: ρ = γ = 0. In this case, the only remaining elasticity
is σ > 0. Bilateral weights in Equation (33) are invariant to the value of this elasticity due
to the normalization that we adopt, so we do not need to specify a particular value of this
remaining elasticity. Second, we examine a case with Leontief preferences: σ = 0. Similar
to the previous case, we do not need to specify the remaining elasticities if we assume that
ρ = γ > 0. An important feature of this strategy is that, under the restriction ρ = γ,
all other elasticity parameterizations are linear combinations of these two extreme cases.
Therefore, these two cases put bounds on possible deviations from the value-added REER.
    In Table 3, we present average differences between IOREER weights and VAREER
weights across regions. We present the case with σ > 0 and ρ = γ = 0 in Panel A. A
typical country attaches less weight to partners in its own region under this parameteriza-
tion. The reason is that this parameterization puts weight only on substitution across final
goods, which are more intensively traded with countries outside each country’s own region.
We present the case with σ = 0 and ρ = γ > 0 in Panel B. A typical country attaches
more weight to partners in its own region in this case. Consistent with the logic above,
this reflects the fact that intermediate inputs are traded most intensively within regions,
and this parameterization attaches weight only to possibilities for substitution across input
suppliers. In both these cases, differences between IOREER and VAREER weights are large,
comparable or larger in absolute value than differences in weights between the VAREER and
conventional REER.
    Surprisingly, these large changes in weights for the IOREER do not lead to large dif-
ferences between the IOREER and VAREER. In Figure 11, we plot changes in IOREER’s
over the 1995-2009 period. As is evident, these cumulative changes are nearly identical. The
reason is that changes in weights are not systematically correlated with changes in bilateral
relative prices. Since these two alternative IOREERs put bounds on the VAREER under
a wide range of elasticity estimates, we conclude that the VAREER indexes presented in
Section 4 are robust to relaxing the assumption of common elasticities in production and
demand.




                                              27
6      Conclusion
With the rise of global production chains, academics and policymakers have become aware
that there are important gaps between cross-border shipments of goods and the implicit value
added content of those shipments. This paper draws out the implications of shifting from
a ‘gross view’ to a ‘value-added view’ of the production process for measuring international
relative prices. Starting from a model of gross production and trade flows with cross-border
input linkages, we derived a real exchange rate formula that uses value-added data alone.
Comparing this value-added REER to the conventional REER, we found important differ-
ences. We hope that this initial work stimulates further efforts to integrate this approach
into official statistics.
    While our paper has focused on developing the methodology for computing value-added
REERs, work comparing how the VAREER versus REER perform in applications is an
important next step. For example, we expect the VAREER to be helpful in thinking about
rebalancing, since the aggregate trade balance is essentially a net (i.e., value-added, not gross)
concept.42 We also believe the VAREER, and our value-added approach more generally, will
be useful in calibrating macroeconomic models. For example, international business cycle
models are typically written down as if they are models of value added, specifying production
functions for value added and hence implicitly defining preferences over value added.43 Yet,
they are usually calibrated using a mixture of gross and value added data. Differences
between value-added and conventional REERs indicate that it is important to treat value-
added and gross flows in a consistent manner in data and models. We are therefore working
on a project that revisits the calibration of macro-models using value added data.




  42
     As discussed in Johnson and Noguera (2012a), the aggregate gross trade balance for a country is equal
to that country’s aggregate value-added trade balance. At the bilateral level, gross and value-added trade
balances do diverge, however.
  43
     See Bems (2012) and Johnson (2012) for further discussion.


                                                   28
References
Anderson, James E., and Yoto V. Yotov. 2010. “The Changing Incidence of Gravity.”
   American Economic Review, 100(5): 2157–2186.

Armington, Paul S. 1969. “A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of
   Production.” IMF Staff Papers, 16(1): 159–178.

Bayoumi, Tamim, Sarma Jayanthi, and Jaewoo Lee. 2006. “New Rates from New
   Weights.” IMF Staff Papers, 53(2): 272–305.

Bems, Rudolfs. 2012. “Intermediate Inputs, External Rebalancing, and Relative Price
   Adjustment.” Unpublished Manuscript, International Monetary Fund.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2010. “Demand Spillovers and
   the Collapse of Trade in the Global Recession.” IMF Economic Review, 58(2): 295–326.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2011. “Vertical Linkages and
   the Collapse of Global Trade.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings,
   101(3): 308–312.

Bennett, Herman Z., and Ziga Zarnic. 2009. “International Competitiveness of the
   Mediterranean Quartet: A Heterogeneous-Product Approach.” IMF Staff Papers,
   56(4): 919–957.

Chinn, Menzie. 2006. “A Primer on Real Effective Exchange Rates: Determinants,
    Overvaluation, Trade Flows and Competitive Devaluation.” Open Economies Review,
    17: 115–143.

De Clercq, Maarten, Michael Fidora, Bernadette Lauro, Christina Pinheiro, and
   Martin Schmitz. 2012. “Revisting the Effective Exchange Rates of the Euro.” ECB
   Occasional Paper Series No. 134.

Desruelle, Dominique, and Alessandro Zanello. 1997. “A Primer on the IMF’s Infor-
    mation Notice System.” IMF Working Paper 97/71.

Durand, Martine, Jacques Simon, and Colin Webb. 1992. “OECD’s Indicators of
   International Trade and Competitiveness.” OECD Economics Department Working Pa-
   pers No. 120.

Erumban, Abdul Azeez, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, Marcel Timmer, and
   Gaaitzen de Vries. 2011. “Slicing Up Global Value Chains: The Role of China.”
   Unpublished Manuscript, University of Groningen.

Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2001. “The Nature and Growth of Vertical
   Specialization in World Trade.” Journal of International Economics, 54: 75–96.

Johnson, Robert C. 2012. “Trade in Intermediate Inputs and Business Cycle Comove-
   ment.” NBER Working Paper No. 18240.

                                          29
Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012a. “Accounting for Intermediates:
   Production Sharing and Trade in Value Added.” Journal of International Economics,
   82(2): 224–236.

Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012b. “Fragmentation and Trade in
   Value Added over Four Decades.” NBER Working Paper No. 18186.

Johnson, Robert C., and Guillermo Noguera. 2012c. “Proximity and Production Frag-
   mentation.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 102(3): 407–411.

Lorentan, Mico. 2005. “Indexes of the Foreign Exchange Value of the Dollar.” Federal
    Reserve Bulletin, 91: 1–8.

McGuirk, Anne. 1987. “Measuring Price Competitiveness for Industrial Country Trade in
   Manufactures.” IMF Working Paper No. 87/34.

Spilimbergo, Antonio, and Athanasios Vamvakidis. 2003. “Real Effective Exchange
     Rate and the Constant Elasticity of Substitution Assumption.” Journal of International
     Economics, 60(2): 337–354.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?”
    Journal of Political Economy, 111: 52–102.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2010. “Can Multi-Stage Production Explain the Home Bias in Trade?” Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 100(1): 364–393.




                                            30
                       Table 1: Difference in Trade Weights in 2005
                                               Partner Country or Region
                   United   Canada                                                   Other
 Source Country    States   Mexico Eurozone       Other EU   China   India   Japan   Asia Other
 Argentina            2.2      0.3       0.6           1.2    -0.7     0.1    1.4    -0.3   -4.7
 Australia           2.7       0.5       1.6           0.6    -2.0    -0.2    0.0    -3.4    0.4
 Austria             3.0      0.4       -7.0          -0.4    0.7      0.3   1.2      0.2   1.6
 Belgium             3.2      0.5       -8.7          0.6      0.7    0.4    1.1      0.4    1.8
 Brazil              1.4       0.0      -0.6           1.1    -0.8     0.1    1.0    -0.6   -1.5
 Canada              -5.6      0.3       2.1           0.6     0.1     0.2   1.1      0.2    1.1
 Switzerland         2.7       0.4      -7.6           1.4    0.7      0.1   1.0      0.0   1.3
 Chile               2.3      -0.4       0.1          1.2     -1.9     0.2   0.8     -1.2   -1.1
 China               2.2       0.1       0.3           0.8            0.0    -0.5    -3.6    0.7
 Czech Rep.          3.3       0.5      -8.2          -0.2     0.6     0.3   1.0      0.4    2.4
 Germany             3.1       0.5      -5.1          -1.5     0.2     0.3    1.2     0.1    1.1
 Denmark             3.1      0.4       -3.1          -3.5     0.4     0.2   1.1      0.1   1.2
 Spain               2.6       0.2      -6.5           0.4     0.5     0.2   1.0      0.1    1.6
 Estonia             2.8      0.5       -3.0          -2.5    0.4      0.3   1.0      0.3   0.4
 Finland             3.0       0.4      -1.4          -2.8     0.2     0.3    1.1     0.1   -0.8
 France              2.6       0.5      -7.0           0.4     0.4     0.3   1.1      0.1    1.6
 United Kingdom       2.7      0.3      -5.5          -0.4     0.4     0.1   1.1      0.0   1.2
 Greece              1.7       0.5      -4.3           0.1     0.4     0.1   1.0     -0.5    1.0
 Hungary             2.9       0.5      -7.1          -0.5     0.6     0.3    1.0     0.3    2.2
 Indonesia           3.2       0.6       1.5           1.1    -1.7    -0.1   -0.8    -4.7    1.0
 India               1.4       0.4       0.1           0.1    -1.5           1.2     -1.5   -0.2
 Ireland             1.1       0.6      -1.9          -3.4     0.6     0.4    1.0     0.2    1.4
 Israel              -0.6      0.6      -1.5           0.4     0.3    -0.1   1.1     -0.4    0.1
 Italy               2.6      0.4       -5.7          0.1      0.4    0.2    1.1      0.0    0.8
 Japan               2.5      0.4       1.8            1.1    -3.4    0.3            -3.7    1.1
 Korea               2.4      0.4       1.3            1.0    -4.9    0.1     0.0    -1.0   0.8
 Mexico              -5.8      0.3       1.6           1.1     0.3     0.2    1.0     0.1    1.2
 Netherlands         2.8       0.5      -5.4          -0.1     0.3     0.3    1.1     0.0    0.5
 Norway               4.5     -0.5      -2.3          -6.6     0.6     0.4    1.1     0.3    2.3
 New Zealand         1.7      0.3       0.7            0.4    -0.7     0.2    0.5    -1.3   -1.8
 Poland              3.0      0.5       -5.0          -1.6    0.5      0.3    1.1     0.2   0.9
 Portugal            2.3      0.4       -8.1          0.8      0.9    0.2    1.0     0.4    2.1
 Romania             2.6      0.4       -4.6          -1.0    0.5      0.2    1.1     0.2   0.6
 Russia              3.3       0.6      -3.9          -0.7    -0.7     0.2    1.1    -0.5    0.7
 Slovakia             3.1      0.5      -1.3          -6.6     0.9     0.3    1.2     0.2    1.7
 Slovenia             2.8      0.5      -7.8          -0.2     0.9     0.2    1.1     0.3    2.1
 Sweden              2.8      0.4       -3.2          -2.4    0.6      0.3    1.1     0.1   0.2
 Thailand            1.7      0.5       1.0            0.7    -1.8    0.0    -0.8    -1.7    0.4
 Turkey              2.1       0.5      -3.3          -0.6     0.2     0.1    1.1    -0.3    0.3
 United States                -5.6       1.6           1.3    -0.2     0.2    1.5    -0.6    1.8
 Vietnam             2.2       0.6       1.0           0.8    -1.9     0.2    0.3    -3.9    0.7
 South Africa        2.3      0.5       -1.3          -0.8    -0.7    -0.3    0.5    -0.7   0.4

Note: Each entry records the difference in VAREER Weights minus REER Weights for source country
to alternative destinations. Changes in weights are expressed in percentage points. Columns do not
sum to zero for some countries due to rounding.



                                                 31
          Table 2: Difference in Trade Weights in 2005, by Region
                                            Partner Region
                Source Region       Asia    EU     NAFTA        Other
                Asia                -5.7     2.1       2.8        0.8
                EU                  1.8     -6.4       3.2        1.5
                NAFTA               1.2      2.7      -5.5        1.6
                Other               -0.5    -1.5      2.3        -0.3

              Note: Each entry records the total change in trade weights
              (VAREER weights minus REER weights) for partners in
              each destination region, averaged across source countries
              within each region. Changes in weights are expressed in
              percentage points. Columns do not sum to zero due to
              rounding.




Table 3: Difference Between IOREER and VAREER Weights in 2005, by Region
                         Panel A: σ > 0 and γ = ρ = 0
                                            Partner Region
                Source Region       Asia     EU     NAFTA       Other
                Asia                -13.2 8.9          3.7       0.6
                EU                    3.5 -7.8         3.9        0.4
                NAFTA                 1.1  3.3        -5.9        1.4
                Other                -0.3 -1.4         1.9       -0.1

                          Panel B: σ = 0 and γ = ρ > 0
                                            Partner Region
                Source Region       Asia     EU     NAFTA       Other
                Asia                 6.1    -4.1      -1.5       -0.4
                EU                  -1.7    3.8       -1.8       -0.2
                NAFTA               -0.5    -1.7       2.9       -0.7
                Other               0.4      0.5      -1.1       0.2

              Note: Each entry records the total change in trade weights
              (IOREER weights minus VAREER weights) for partners
              in each destination region, averaged across source countries
              within each region. Changes in weights are expressed in
              percentage points. Columns do not sum to zero due to
              rounding.




                                           32
                                                        Figure 1: Reassignment of Trade Weights over Time
                                                  0.2


                                                 0.18          Cross−Country Median
      Distance Between VAREER and REER Weights                 Germany
                                                               United States
                                                 0.16          Japan


                                                 0.14


                                                 0.12


                                                  0.1


                                                 0.08


                                                 0.06


                                                 0.04
                                                    1970    1975    1980     1985      1990          1995     2000   2005         2010

                                                                                                                     P        v      g
 Note: Distances are measured using the city-block metric: dit =                                                         j   wijt − wijt .



Figure 2: Difference Between GDP and CPI Price Deflators (1990-2009)
                                                  0.08


                                                  0.06


                                                  0.04


                                                  0.02
   ln(PGDP / PCPI )




                                                        0


                                                 −0.02


                                                 −0.04

                                                                                           Germany
                                                 −0.06                                     Spain
                                                                                           United Kingdom
                                                 −0.08                                     Japan
                                                                                           South Korea
                                                                                           United States
                                                  −0.1
                                                    1990    1992   1994    1996     1998      2000     2002   2004   2006       2008


                                                 Note: Log relative price of GDP to CPI is normalized to zero in 2000.



                                                                                      33
         Figure 3: Decomposition of Differences Between GDP and CPI Price Deflators
                         (a) Germany                                                           (b) Spain
   0.1                                                                       0.1

 0.08                                                                     0.08

 0.06                                                                     0.06

 0.04                                                                     0.04

 0.02                                                                     0.02

    0                                                                         0

−0.02                                                                    −0.02

−0.04                                                                    −0.04

−0.06                                                                    −0.06

−0.08                                            ln(PVA/PGO) in DATA     −0.08                                      ln(PVA/PGO) in DATA
                                                 ln(PGO/PCPI) in DATA                                               ln(PGO/PCPI) in DATA
 −0.1                                                               −0.1
   1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007   1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007


                    (c) United Kingdom                                                        (d) Japan
   0.1                                                                       0.1

 0.08                                                                     0.08

 0.06                                                                     0.06

 0.04                                                                     0.04

 0.02                                                                     0.02

    0                                                                         0

−0.02                                                                    −0.02

−0.04                                                                    −0.04

−0.06                                                                    −0.06

−0.08                                            ln(PVA/PGO) in DATA     −0.08                                      ln(PVA/PGO) in DATA
                                                 ln(PGO/PCPI) in DATA                                               ln(PGO/PCPI) in DATA
 −0.1                                                               −0.1
   1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007   1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007


                      (e) South Korea                                                    (f) United States
  0.1                                                                     0.1

 0.08                                                                    0.08

 0.06                                                                    0.06

 0.04                                                                    0.04

 0.02                                                                    0.02

   0                                                                         0

−0.02                                                                   −0.02

−0.04                                                                   −0.04

−0.06                                                                   −0.06

−0.08                                           ln(PVA/PGO) in DATA     −0.08                                      ln(PVA/PGO) in DATA
                                                ln(PGO/PCPI) in DATA                                               ln(PGO/PCPI) in DATA
 −0.1                                                               −0.1
   1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007   1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007



                              Note: Log relative prices are normalized to zero in 2000.




                                                                        34
            Figure 4: Real Effective Exchange Rates for United States and China
                     (a) China: Levels                                    (b) China: Log Changes
  0.4                                                       0.15
            REER
                                                                                           REER
 0.35       VAREER
                                                                                           VAREER
                                                              0.1                          REER minus VAREER
  0.3


 0.25
                                                            0.05

  0.2

                                                               0
 0.15


  0.1
                                                           −0.05

 0.05


   0                                                        −0.1
   1995              2000           2005            2010      1995              2000       2005                2010


               (c) United States: Levels                             (d) United States: Log Changes
 0.25                                                       0.08
                                           REER
  0.2                                      VAREER           0.06


                                                            0.04
 0.15

                                                            0.02
  0.1

                                                              0
 0.05
                                                           −0.02
                                                                     REER
    0                                                                VAREER
                                                           −0.04
                                                                     REER minus VAREER
−0.05
                                                           −0.06

 −0.1                                                      −0.08


−0.15                                                       −0.1
    1995             2000          2005             2010      1995              2000      2005                 2010



           Note: The level of the log(VAREER) and log(REER) are normalized to zero in 1995.




                                                       35
  Figure 5: Real Effective Exchange Rates for Selected European Countries, in Levels
                      (a) Germany                                                         (b) Spain
    0                                                           0.25
                                               REER                       REER
                                               VAREER                     VAREER
−0.05                                                             0.2



 −0.1                                                           0.15



−0.15                                                             0.1



 −0.2                                                           0.05



−0.25                                                              0



 −0.3                                                          −0.05



−0.35                                                           −0.1
    1995           2000                 2005            2010      1995             2000               2005            2010


                          (c) Ireland                                                     (d) Italy
   0.3                                                           0.2

                                                                0.18
 0.25

                                                                0.16
   0.2
                                                                0.14

 0.15
                                                                0.12

   0.1                                                           0.1

                                                                                                             REER
                                                                0.08                                         VAREER
 0.05

                                                                0.06
    0                                          REER
                                               VAREER
                                                                0.04

−0.05
                                                                0.02

 −0.1                                                             0
   1995            2000                 2005            2010      1995             2000               2005            2010


                          (e) Greece                                                  (f) Portugal
 0.15                                                            0.1


                                                                0.08

  0.1
                                                                0.06


                                                                0.04
 0.05

                                                                0.02

                                               REER                                                          REER
   0                                           VAREER                                                        VAREER
                                                                   0


                                                               −0.02
−0.05

                                                               −0.04


 −0.1                                                          −0.06
   1995            2000                 2005            2010       1995            2000               2005            2010



           Note: The level of the log(VAREER) and log(REER) are normalized to zero in 1995.




                                                           36
Figure 6: Real Effective Exchange Rates for Selected European Countries, Log Changes
                         (a) Germany                                                     (b) Spain
  0.06                                                                  0.08


  0.04
                                                                        0.06

  0.02
                                                                        0.04
     0


 −0.02                                                                  0.02


 −0.04                                                                     0

 −0.06
                                                                       −0.02
 −0.08
                                            REER                                                     REER
                                                                       −0.04
  −0.1                                      VAREER                                                   VAREER
                                            REER minus VAREER                                        REER minus VAREER
 −0.12                                                                 −0.06
     1995              2000                  2005               2010       1995   2000                2005               2010


                              (c) Ireland                                                (d) Italy
   0.1                                                                  0.12

            REER                                                          0.1
  0.08      VAREER
            REER minus VAREER                                           0.08
  0.06
                                                                        0.06

  0.04
                                                                        0.04

  0.02                                                                  0.02

                                                                           0
     0

                                                                       −0.02
 −0.02
                                                                       −0.04
                                                                                                     REER
 −0.04                                                                                               VAREER
                                                                       −0.06
                                                                                                     REER minus VAREER
 −0.06                                                                 −0.08
     1995              2000                  2005               2010       1995   2000                2005               2010


                             (e) Greece                                              (f) Portugal
 0.08                                                                   0.05


 0.06                                                                   0.04


 0.04                                                                   0.03


 0.02                                                                   0.02


    0                                                                   0.01


−0.02                                                                      0


−0.04                                                                  −0.01


−0.06                                                                  −0.02
                                            REER                                                     REER
−0.08                                       VAREER                     −0.03                         VAREER
                                            REER minus VAREER                                        REER minus VAREER
 −0.1                                                                  −0.04
   1995               2000                  2005                2010       1995   2000               2005                2010




                                                                   37
                                      Figure 7: Changes in Real Effective Exchange Rates
                                                         (a) Log Changes from 1970-2009
                                1




                              0.5                                                                         CHE
                                                                                                    IRL ESP
                                                                                                   BRA           JPN
     Log VAREER Difference




                                                                                            ITA NORAUT   HUN
                                                                                                  NLD
                                                                                                  DNK
                                                                PRT           GRC             NZL
                                                                                              DEU
                                0                                                       GBR
                                                                                        MEX
                                                                                        CAN FIN
                                                                                        AUS FRA
                                                                                              BEL
                                                        ISR
                                                                     KOR
                                IDN                             ZAF SWE
                             −0.5 CHL                                                                     POL
                                                                THA                USATUR
                                                                                  ARG

                                    CHN
                               −1                      IND




                             −1.5
                               −1.5               −1                    −0.5             0                 0.5          1
                                                                        Log REER Difference

                                                        (b) Log Changes from 1990-2009
                               1

                              0.8

                                                                                              ROU                POL
                              0.6
                                                                                                          HUN
                              0.4
Log VAREER Difference




                              0.2                                                MEXCHL
                                                                                 CHN    PRT
                                                                                         GRC
                                                                              NOR    IRL
                                                                      IDN   BRA
                               0                                               ESPNLD
                                                                                  DNK
                                                                                AUS
                                                                               NZL
                                                                               DEU
                                                                                 BEL
                                                                                CHE
                                                                     ZAF     ISR
                                                                            CANFRA
                                                                           ITAAUT
                                                                                USA        TUR
                                                                       GBR
                                                                         THA JPN
                             −0.2
                                                                            IND
                             −0.4                             SWEFIN
                                                               KOR

                                                                     ARG
                             −0.6

                             −0.8

                              −1
                               −1         −0.8   −0.6         −0.4     −0.2    0       0.2          0.4    0.6    0.8   1
                                                                       Log REER Difference


                                          Note: The solid line in both figures is the 45-degree line.



                                                                                  38
Figure 8: Decomposing Differences Between Value-Added and Conventional REERs
                           (a) United States                                                            (b) China
          0.04                                                                    0.2

                                                                                           log(VAREER)−log(REER)
          0.02                                                                             weight effect
                                                                                           price effect
                                                                                 0.15

             0


                                                                                  0.1
         −0.02



         −0.04
                                                                                 0.05


         −0.06

                      log(VAREER)−log(REER)                                         0
         −0.08        weight effect
                      price effect


          −0.1                                                                  −0.05
            1995                 2000          2005                     2010        1995              2000              2005                      2010



                                (c) Germany                                                              (d) Spain
          0.02                                                                   0.07

                                                                                           log(VAREER)−log(REER)
             0                                                                   0.06
                                                                                           weight effect
                                                                                           price effect
                                                                                 0.05
         −0.02

                                                                                 0.04
         −0.04

                                                                                 0.03
         −0.06
                                                                                 0.02

         −0.08
                                                                                 0.01

          −0.1
                                                                                    0
                       log(VAREER)−log(REER)
         −0.12         weight effect
                                                                                −0.01
                       price effect

         −0.14                                                                  −0.02
             1995                2000          2005                     2010        1995              2000              2005                      2010



                                  (e) Ireland                                                               (f) Italy
          0.16                                                                   0.05
                    log(VAREER)−log(REER)
                    weight effect
          0.14
                    price effect                                                 0.04

          0.12
                                                                                 0.03
           0.1


          0.08                                                                   0.02


          0.06                                                                   0.01

          0.04
                                                                                    0
          0.02

                                                                                −0.01                                     log(VAREER)−log(REER)
             0                                                                                                            weight effect
                                                                                                                          price effect
         −0.02                                                                  −0.02
             1995                2000          2005                     2010        1995              2000              2005                      2010



                                  (g) Greece                                                         (h) Portugal
         0.07                                                                   0.06


         0.06
                                                                                0.05

         0.05
                                                                                0.04

         0.04
                                                                                0.03
         0.03
                                                                                0.02
         0.02

                                                                                0.01
         0.01

                                                                                   0
            0
                                                log(VAREER)−log(REER)                                                    log(VAREER)−log(REER)
                                                weight effect                  −0.01                                     weight effect
        −0.01
                                                price effect                                                             price effect

        −0.02                                                                  −0.02
            1995                2000           2005                     2010       1995              2000               2005                     2010




                                                                           39
                    Figure 9: Normalization Terms for Real Effective Exchange Rates in 2007
                                                                    Normalization term for conventional REER           Normalization term for VAREER

        ZAF
       VNM
       USA
       TUR
       THA
       SWE
       SVN
       SVK
       RUS
       ROU
       PRT
       POL
        NZL
       NOR
       NLD
       MEX
       KOR
        JPN
         ITA
        ISR
         IRL
        IND
        IDN
       HUN
       GRC
       GBR
       FRA
         FIN
       EST
       ESP
       DNK
       DEU
       CZE
       CHN
       CHL
       CHE
       CAN
       BRA
        BEL
       AUT
       AUS
       ARG
                                                 0            0.1           0.2              0.3               0.4            0.5              0.6      0.7



Figure 10: Difference in Normalization Terms for Real Effective Exchange Rates, 1980-2007

                                                                                                                 CHN

                                                                                                                       TUR                THA
                                                                                                                         ARG
                                                      0.2
       Difference in Value−Added Normalization




                                                                                                                  CHL    POL
                                                                                                                         DEU
                                                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                            DNK ROU SWE
                                                                                                                    CHE
                                                                                                             ESP
                                                     0.15                                             IND            MEX
                                                                                                          NLD FIN
                                                                                                                        BEL
                                                                                                         PRT
                                                                                                           IRL
                                                      0.1
                                                                                    ITA
                                                                                     FRA
                                                                              KOR
                                                                              AUSBRA GRC
                                                                                 NOR
                                                     0.05                   GBR   JPN CAN
                                                                               USA
                                                                                   ISR

                                                                        NZL
                                                       0
                                                              ZAF
                                                            IDN


                                                 −0.05
                                                   −0.05            0              0.05          0.1         0.15                           0.2        0.25
                                                                              Difference in Gross Output Normalization


                                                                                                    40
Figure 11: Changes in Real Effective Exchange Rates with Alternative Elasticity Assump-
tions from 1995-2009
                                              1

                                             0.8
                                                                                                                   ROU

                                             0.6                                                            EST
       Log IOREER Difference (σ=0, γ=ρ>0)




                                                                                                          CZE
                                                                                                          RUS
                                                                                                            SVK
                                             0.4                                                   CHN
                                                                                                 VNMHUN
                                                                                                NOR
                                                                                                 MEX
                                             0.2                                            AUS
                                                                                              IRL
                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                         IDN
                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                             POL
                                                                                           TUR
                                                                                          GRC
                                                                                        PRT
                                                                                      BRA
                                                                                  CHL SVN
                                                                                    DNK
                                                                                    IND
                                              0                                    GBR
                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                   NZL
                                                                                  USA
                                                                                BEL
                                                                                FRA
                                                                             ZAF
                                                                              ISR
                                                                              CHE
                                                                             AUT
                                                                          THA FIN
                                            −0.2                           SWE
                                                                         DEU

                                            −0.4
                                                                  KOR
                                                                 JPN
                                            −0.6
                                                          ARG

                                            −0.8

                                             −1
                                              −1   −0.8   −0.6     −0.4   −0.2      0      0.2     0.4       0.6   0.8   1
                                                                    Log IOREER Difference (σ>0, γ=ρ=0)


                                                     Note: The solid line in both figures is the 45-degree line.




                                                                                 41
A      VAREER Derivation Appendix
In this appendix, we discuss the two main steps in moving from Equations (9)-(17) to
Equation (18). As noted in the text, there are two steps. First, we compute demand for
gross output. Second, we convert demand for gross output into demand for value added,
and replace prices of gross output with value-added prices.

A.1     Demand for Gross Output
To compute the total change in demand for gross output, we combine the market clearing
conditions in Equation (14) with the final and intermediate inputs first order conditions in
Equations (9)-(12). This yields:

                              Q̂ = SF [−ηM1 p̂ + ηM2 Wf p̂ + M2 F̂ ]
                                        h                         i                            (36)
                                   + SX −η(M1 − M2 )p̂ + M2 Q̂ ,

   An important feature of these market clearing conditions is that the change in gross out-
put Q̂ shows up on both sides of the equation. This is obviously because intermediate input
demand depends on gross output itself, a standard feature of an input-output accounting
framework. We want to purge the demand for gross output of this circularity, so we isolate
gross output on one side of the equation:

            [I − SX M2 ]Q̂ = ηSF M2 Wf p̂ − ηSF M1 p̂ − ηSX (M1 − M2 )p̂ + SF M2 F̂            (37)

    Then note that: [I − SX M2 ] = [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω][diag(pi Qi )], where Ω is the global bi-
lateral input-output matrix (defined in the main text). Using this observation, and collecting
terms on the right hand side yields:

            Q̂ = η[diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 Wf p̂
                 − η[diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )][SF M1 + SX (M1 − M2 )]p̂         (38)
                                 −1        −1
                 + [diag(pi Qi )] [I − Ω] [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 F̂ .

    This is the analog to a standard demand CES equation for gross output in our context.
Here demand for total gross output depends on prices for gross output p̂, mediated by the
elasticity of substitution and trade shares, as well as changes in final demand in all countries,
recorded in F̂ . We are not primarily interested in demand for gross output, however. We
want to understand how demand for real value added produced by each country depends on
prices and demand. With traded intermediate inputs, demand for real value added behaves
differently than demand for gross output. We thus turn to explaining this difference.

A.2     From Gross Output to Real Value Added
To convert demand for gross output into demand for real value added, we use the production
side of the framework. We need to examine the production function because agents can
substitute between using real value added and inputs to produce of gross output in response

                                                42
to relative prices changes. Moreover, we need to link prices for gross output to prices for
value added.
    Starting with the production function, note that we can substitute out for the composite
input in Equation (15)to get: Q̂ = [diag(svi )]Vb + [diag(sxi )]WX X. Then we substitute out for
X using Equations (11)-(13) to get:

              [I − diag(sxi )WX M2 ]Q̂ = [diag(svi )]Vb − ηdiag(sxi )WX (M1 − M2 )p̂.           (39)

   then note that [I − diag(sxi )WX M2 ] reduces to a very simple matrix with elements
We P
        x
1 − j wji = svi along the diagonal. Then, we can re-write this expression as:

                       Q̂ = Vb − η[diag(svi )]−1 [diag(sxi )]WX (M1 − M2 )p̂.                   (40)

    As for prices, we note that p̂ = diag(svi )p̂vi + diag(sxi )WX p̂, and diag(sxi )WX = Ω0 . There-
fore, gross output prices can be written as the following weighted average of prices of value
added:
                                   p̂ = [I − Ω0 ]−1 [diag(svi )]p̂v .                            (41)
   We then substitute Equations (40) and (41) into Equation (38) to write demand for
value added as a function of prices of value added. The resulting expression initially looks
daunting, but it simplifies to the more manageable expression:
             h                                                      0 −1
                                                                                  i
                                −1        −1
    V̂ = −η I − [diag(pi Qi )] [I − Ω] [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 Wf [I − Ω ] [diag(si )] p̂v
                                                                              v
                                                                                        (42)
         + [diag(pi Qi )]−1 [I − Ω]−1 [diag(pi Qi )]SF M2 F̂ .

This is Equation (18) in the main text.


B      Special Case: domestic inputs only
In this appendix, we examine the framework in Section 1.1 under the assumption that
domestic inputs are used in production, but there is no input trade. In this case, Ω is
a diagonal matrix with elements ωii equal to the share of domestic intermediates in gross
output in each country.
    With this assumption, it is straightforward to show that p̂i = p̂v . Since all intermediates
are drawn from domestic gross output, the gross output price simply tracks the value added
price one-for-one. Holding final demand constant, the formula for demand for value added
yields:
                                          X  (1 − ωii )−1 pi Fij 
                                    v
                         V̂i = −η p̂ + η                            P̂j
                                           j
                                                     pi Qi
                                       X  pk Fkj                                          (43)
                                                      v
                         with P̂j =                 p̂k .
                                        k
                                             P j Fj


    The basic interpretation here is similar to the case above without intermediates, with


                                                 43
minor modifications. The weights attached to foreign price levels equal the share of value
added exports to the destination in total value added. These weights look superficially
different because gross output is not equal to value added here.
    In this example,
             P pi Fij gross output equals     final goods plus domestic intermediates, which
                                         −1
implies that j pi Qi < 1. The (1 − ωii ) adjustment in the formula above takes final goods
and converts them into the amount of gross output needed to produce those final goods.
Then the weights on individual destination markets records the amount of gross output
needed to produce final goods shipped to a given destination (1 − ωii )−1 pi Fij as a share of
gross output pi Qi . Noting that the ratio of value added to gross output is 1 − ωii , then these
can be interpreted simply as the ratio of value added exports – equal in this case to gross
shipments of final goods pi Fij to total value added (1 − ωii )pi Qi . For destinations i 6= j,
then pi Fij = Salesij . However, the weight on the domestic market is not equal to Salesii ,
but rather simply final goods shipments pi Fij .
    It can be further shown that demand for gross output is proportional to demand for
real value added in this case: Q̂i = V̂i . One way to see this is to work through Equation
(38) when Ω is diagonal. A more straightforward way to see this is to look directly at the
production side of the economy. Starting with the first order conditions in Equation (4),
note that the demand for domestic inputs (hence all inputs) is proportional to gross output
under the maintained assumption that γ = ρ, so X̂i = X̂ii = Q̂i . Then substituting into the
production function in Equation (15) yields Q̂i = V̂i .


C        Data Appendix
This appendix presents the VAREER and conventional REER series for all 42 sample coun-
tries over the 1995-2009 period in our data.44 We also present several supplemental results
that were omitted from the main text for brevity. We first show that our conventional REER
closely matches the IMF’s CPI-based REER. We then examine subcomponents of the aggre-
gate VAREER index. We break down the aggregate VAREER index into separate export
and import indexes, and then into separate goods and services indexes.

C.1        VAREER and Conventional REER for Full Sample
Figure 12 plots VAREER and conventional REER for all sample counties for the 1995-2009
period. To facilitate comparison of results across countries, results are presented separately
for low and high volatility countries, where the scale on the y-axis is held constant within
the two groups. Similar to results discussed in the main text, there are persistent deviations
between VAREER and REER for many countries. To mention a few examples, India’s
VAREER has depreciated over the past decade, while its conventional REER remained
roughly constant. Argentina’s VAREER has appreciated since 2002, while its REER has
depreciated. There are also large and persistent deviations for some countries in Emerging
Europe (see Romania, Slovakia, Turkey, and Poland), although there is not an obvious region-
wide pattern to these deviations. Not surprisingly, resource exporting countries exhibit more
 44
      Data for the full 1970-2009 sample is available on our websites.



                                                      44
pronounced appreciations in terms of VAREER, when compared to REER.45

C.2      Conventional REER and IMF CPI-based REER
In Figure 13, we compare the conventional REER that we have constructed to the IMF’s
CPI-based REER index, which is published as part of the IMF’s International Financial
Statistics database.46 To summarize the data, we plot changes in these two indexes over
the 1995-2009 period. Because the methods and data used to construct our index are not
identical to those used by the IMF, it is possible for the two indexes to differ. For example,
the IMF CPI-based REER index uses semi-fixed weights rather than annual time-varying
weights as we do. The IMF REER index also focuses on the manufacturing sector and
selected service sectors, rather than covering total GDP as we do. Also, the IMF REER
index treats the commodity sector differently than we do, assuming perfect substitutability
among commodity producers. Despite these differences, our benchmark REER index very
closely tracks the IMF’s REER index for nearly all countries.

C.3      Components of VAREER
Armington-style REER indexes of the sort used in this paper can be decomposed into various
sub-indexes. For example, one can split the index by destination to focus on competition
by market (e.g., head-to-head competition in import, export, and 3rd markets).47 One can
also split the index into components describing competition in individual sectors (e.g., goods
versus services).48 Though we do not focus on these types of decompositions in this paper,
we report several decompositions for completeness here.
    First, we decompose the VAREER index into separate export and import indexes, which
are commonly used as explanatory variables in export and import regressions. The export
index measures changes in demand in foreign markets, while the import index captures
changes in demand in the domestic market. The aggregate VAREER is a weighted average
of these two sub-indexes, where the weights correspond to foreign and domestic sales of
value added. We plot changes in the export and import components of the VAREER over
the 1995-2009 period in Figure 14. We find that changes in the two indexes are very similar,
with all observations close to the 45-degree line.49 Because the aggregate VAREER is just
a weighted average of these sub-indexes, they also track that aggregate index closely. These
results suggest that the aggregate VAREER index is a good proxy for studying the effect of
relative price changes on the external balance, since changes in the external balance depend
on export and import prices directly.
    Second, we decompose the VAREER index into separate goods and services indexes.50
These sub-indexes are constructed following the same steps as those used to build the ag-
  45
     The implications of changes in commodity prices for competitiveness should be interpreted with care.
  46
     We include data on IMF CPI-based exchange rates in the dataset on our websites for reference.
  47
     See Annex 2 in Bayoumi, Lee and Jayanthi (2005) for description of this breakdown.
  48
     See Bennett and Zarnic (2009).
  49
     Export and import sub-indexes of the conventional REER (not reported here) also track each other
closely.
  50
     Goods include industrial production plus agriculture, while Services cover the remainder of the economy.



                                                     45
gregate VAREER index, where we substitute sector-level trade in value added for aggregate
trade in constructing weights and use sector-level GDP deflators to measure price changes.51
We plot changes in the VAREER indexes for goods and services over the 1995-2009 period in
Figure 15. Unlike the export and import sub-indexes, changes in the sector sub-indexes are
different in most countries. For example, most commodity exporting countries (i.e., NOR,
AUS, CAN, CHL) have strong appreciations in their goods producing sectors relative to their
service sectors, as one might expect based on commodity price developments. In contrast,
appreciation in services-based REER has been more important in Emerging Europe and
China. Differences between the goods and services indexes plotted in Figure 15 are driven
predominantly by differences in value-added price dynamics for goods versus services, rather
than differences in trade weights.




  51
     We turn to the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database for data on sector-level GDP
deflators.


                                                46
                   Figure 12: Conventional REER and VAREER, 1995-2009
                   AUS                                 AUT                                   BEL
                                   0.2                                       0.2
0.2
                                   0.1                                       0.1
0.1
                                    0                                          0
  0
                                  -0.1                                       -0.1
-0.1
                                  -0.2                                       -0.2
  1995      2000         2005       1995        2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                   CAN                                 CHE                                   CHL


                                   0.1                                       0.1
0.2

                                    0                                          0
0.1

                                  -0.1                                       -0.1
  0

                                  -0.2                                       -0.2
-0.1
  1995      2000         2005       1995        2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                   CHN                                 DEU                                   DNK
0.4
                                   0.1
0.3                                                                          0.2
                                    0
0.2                                                                          0.1
                                  -0.1
0.1                                                                            0
                                  -0.2
  0                                                                          -0.1
                                  -0.3
  1995      2000         2005       1995        2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                   ESP                                 FIN                                   FRA
                                   0.2
0.3                                                                          0.2
                                   0.1
0.2                                                                          0.1
                                    0
0.1                                                                            0
                                  -0.1
  0                                                                          -0.1
                                  -0.2
  1995      2000         2005       1995        2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                   GBR                              GRC                                      IND
0.3                                0.3
                                                                             0.3
0.2                                0.2
                                                                             0.2
0.1                                0.1
                                                                             0.1
  0                                 0
                                                                               0
-0.1                              -0.1
  1995      2000         2005       1995        2000         2005              1995   2000         2005


                                         Conventional REER          VAREER



         Note: The level of the log(VAREER) and log(REER) are normalized to zero in 1995.



                                                   47
          Figure 12: Conventional REER and VAREER, 1995-2009 (continued)
                    IRL                                ISR                                   ITA
0.3                                                                          0.4

0.2                                0.1                                       0.3

0.1                                  0                                       0.2

  0                                -0.1                                      0.1

-0.1                               -0.2                                        0
  1995       2000         2005       1995       2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                    NLD                                NZL                                   POL
                                                                             0.4
0.2                                0.1
                                                                             0.3
0.1                                  0
                                                                             0.2
  0                                -0.1
                                                                             0.1
-0.1                               -0.2
                                                                               0
  1995       2000         2005       1995       2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                    PRT                                SVN                               SWE

0.3                                0.3
                                                                             0.1
0.2                                0.2
                                                                               0
0.1                                0.1
                                                                             -0.1
  0                                  0
                                                                             -0.2
  1995       2000         2005       1995       2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                    THA                                USA                               VNM

  0                                                                          0.3
                                   0.2
-0.1                                                                         0.2
                                   0.1
-0.2                                                                         0.1
                                     0
-0.3                                                                           0
                                   -0.1
  1995       2000         2005       1995       2000         2005              1995   2000         2005


                                          Conventional REER         VAREER



         Note: The level of the log(VAREER) and log(REER) are normalized to zero in 1995.




                                                   48
          Figure 12: Conventional REER and VAREER, 1995-2009 (continued)
                    ARG                                 BRA                                   CZE
                                    0.4                                         1
  0                                 0.2                                       0.8
-0.2                                 0                                        0.6
-0.4                               -0.2                                       0.4
-0.6                               -0.4                                       0.2
-0.8                               -0.6                                         0
  1995       2000         2005       1995        2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                    EST                              HUN                                      IDN
  1                                                                           0.2
0.8                                 0.8                                         0
0.6                                 0.6                                       -0.2
0.4                                 0.4                                       -0.4
0.2                                 0.2                                       -0.6
  0                                  0                                        -0.8
  1995       2000         2005       1995        2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                    JPN                              KOR                                      MEX
                                    0.5                                         1
0.2
                                                                              0.8
  0
                                                                              0.6
-0.2                                 0
                                                                              0.4
-0.4
                                                                              0.2
-0.6
                                   -0.5                                         0
  1995       2000         2005       1995        2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                 NOR                                 ROU                                      RUS
                                    0.8                                       0.6
0.8
                                    0.6                                       0.4
0.6
                                    0.4                                       0.2
0.4
                                    0.2                                         0
0.2
                                     0                                        -0.2
  0
  1995       2000         2005       1995        2000         2005              1995   2000         2005

                    SVK                                 TUR                                   ZAF
                                                                              0.5
                                    0.8
0.8
                                    0.6
0.6
                                    0.4                                         0
0.4
                                    0.2
0.2
                                     0
  0                                                                           -0.5
  1995       2000         2005       1995        2000         2005              1995   2000         2005


                                          Conventional REER          VAREER



         Note: The level of the log(VAREER) and log(REER) are normalized to zero in 1995.



                                                   49
Figure 13: Comparison of conventional REER with IMF CPI-based REER, 1995-2009
                                            1

                                           0.8
                                                                                                                   SVK
                                           0.6
                                                                                                        EST CZE
                                                                                                        ROU
                                                                                                      RUSTUR
                                           0.4
                                                                                                      HUN
     Log REER Difference




                                           0.2                                               MEXPOL
                                                                                               CHN
                                                                                 VNM       IND
                                                                                            IRL
                                                                                           AUS
                                                                                           ITA
                                                                                         CAN
                                                                                         ESP
                                                                                         GRC
                                                                                       PRT
                                                                                      DNK
                                            0                                         USA
                                                                                     NOR
                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                  CHL
                                                                                   NZL
                                                                                   BEL
                                                                                  FRA
                                                                                  BRAGBR
                                                                                 AUT
                                                                                ISR
                                                                                 FIN
                                                                               CHE
                                          −0.2                           SWEDEUTHA
                                                                            IDN
                                                                        ZAF
                                                                       KOR
                                                                       JPN
                                          −0.4

                                          −0.6

                                          −0.8     ARG

                                           −1
                                            −1   −0.8    −0.6      −0.4  −0.2     0      0.2     0.4         0.6    0.8   1
                                                                 IMF−INS CPI−based Log REER Difference


Figure 14: Comparison of export and domestic components of the VAREER, 1995-2009
                                            1

                                           0.8
                                                                                                                    ROU

                                           0.6
     Import−based Log VAREER Difference




                                                                                                             EST
                                                                                                          RUS
                                                                                                          CZE
                                                                                                           SVK
                                           0.4                                                   CHN
                                                                                                HUN
                                                                                              VNM
                                                                                              MEX
                                                                                             NOR
                                           0.2                                            ITA
                                                                                          AUS
                                                                                           IRL
                                                                                        ESP
                                                                                       IDN
                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                         POL
                                                                                       TUR
                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                   BRA
                                                                                     PRT
                                                                                 CHL
                                                                                   SVN
                                                                                  DNK
                                            0                                    IND
                                                                                  GBR
                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                USA
                                                                              BEL
                                                                               FRA
                                                                            CHE
                                                                         THAAUT
                                                                             ZAF
                                                                             ISR
                                                                            FIN
                                          −0.2                           SWE
                                                                        DEU

                                          −0.4                  KOR
                                                                JPN
                                          −0.6
                                                         ARG
                                          −0.8

                                           −1
                                            −1   −0.8    −0.6     −0.4   −0.2      0    0.2      0.4         0.6    0.8   1
                                                                  Export−based Log VAREER Difference


                                                                                50
Figure 15: Comparison of goods and services components of the VAREER, 1995-2009
                                              1
                                                                                        SVK

                                             0.8
                                                                                                      EST
     Services−based log VAREER Difference




                                             0.6                                                  CZE
                                                                                         TUR   CHN
                                                                                        HUN         RUS
                                             0.4
                                                                              IRL POL                           MEX
                                             0.2                                          ITA     VNM
                                                                                         ESP    AUS
                                                                                 PRT
                                                                                SVNGRC        CANCHL             NOR
                                              0                  FIN      USA   GBRDNK IND          IDN
                                                                        BEL
                                                                         FRA     NLD
                                                                                  NZL
                                                                                      BRA
                                                                 SWE       CHE
                                                                            AUT
                                                                              ISR
                                            −0.2          KOR               THAZAF
                                                                        DEU
                                            −0.4
                                                          JPN
                                            −0.6

                                                                 ARG
                                            −0.8

                                             −1
                                              −1   −0.8   −0.6   −0.4   −0.2      0    0.2      0.4       0.6     0.8   1
                                                                  Goods−based log VAREER Difference




                                                                               51
